CODE OF ORDINANCES OF MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Published in 2005 in book form by authority of the Mayor and the 
City Council of the City of Mascoutah, St. Clair County, Illinois 
this 3rd day of September, 1996. 
____________ 
Republished by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Gerald Daugherty 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ben Grodeon 
Paul Schorr 
Jack Weyant 
Pat McMahan 
Council Members 
____________ 
Cody Hawkins 
City Manager 
____________ 
Alvin Paulson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kari Haas 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Gerald Daugherty 
Mayor 
____________ 
Judith Dietz 
Woody Gray 
Benjamin Grodeon 
Jack Weyant 
Council Members 
____________ 
Terry Draper 
City Manager 
____________ 
Alvin Paulson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kari Haas 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mascoutah. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the published Code of September 3, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
Each section number consists of three parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the article number and the third figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the article. Thus, the second section of chapter 1, article 2 is numbered 1-2-2, and the first section of chapter 6, article 2 is 6-2-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and article, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-2-1 and 6-2-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-2-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
APPENDIX A 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice President, Supplement Department, and Peggy Lamar, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Kari Haas, City Clerk for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 2005. 
ORDINANCE NO. 96-131 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MASCOUTAH, ST. CLAIR COUNTY, ILLINOIS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MASCOUTAH, ST. CLAIR COUNTY, ILLINOIS, THAT: 
SECTION 1: The following exhibit shall be "The Revised Code of Ordinances" of the City of Mascoutah, St. Clair County, Illinois" and shall be as follows: 
SEE EXHIBIT "A" FOLLOWING 
Passed this 3rd day of September, 1996 by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Mascoutah, St. Clair County, Illinois, and deposited and filed in the office of the City Clerk in said City on that date. 
	/s/ /s/ Kathleen M. Schuetz 
      KATHLEEN M. SCHUETZ 
      CITY CLERK 
      MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
 	 
Name 	AYE 	NAY 	ABSTAIN 	ABSENT 	CONFLICT OF 
INTEREST 
Vivian Haas 	X 				
John Biekert 	X 				
Ray Kueker 	X 				
Terry Twenhafel 	X 				
Clyde Lemke 	X 				
 
Approved by the Mayor of the City of Mascoutah, St. Clair County, Illinois, this 3rd day of September, 1996. 
	/s/ /s/ Vivian M. Haas 
      VIVIAN M. HAAS 
      MAYOR 
      MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ /s/ Kathleen M. Schuetz 
      KATHLEEN M. SCHUETZ 
      CITY CLERK 
      MASCOUTAH, LLINOIS 	
 	 
(SEAL) 
CITY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS 	) 		
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR 	) 	ss. 	CITY CLERK'S OFFICE 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 	) 		
 
I, Kathleen M. Schuetz, City Clerk of the City of Mascoutah, do hereby certify that the following Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mascoutah, St. Clair County, Illinois, published by authority of the City Council was duly passed by the City Council of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, approved by the Mayor, and published in book form according to law on this date, and that these ordinances are true and perfect copies of the ordinances, as passed, approved, and now of record and on file in my office as provided by law. 
In witness whereof, I have set and affixed the Corporate Seal of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, this 3rd day of September, 1996. 
	/s/ /s/ Kathleen M. Schuetz 
      KATHLEEN M. SCHUETZ 
      CITY CLERK 
      MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
 	 
(SEAL)  
Chapter 1 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - TITLE 
 
Sec. 1-1-1. - Title. 
Upon the adoption by the city council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official "Revised Code of Ordinances of the City." The Revised Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the "City Code", and it is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be kept up-to-date as provided in section 1-1-3 under the direction of the city attorney, acting for said city council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and article heading and to the general penalty clause relating thereto as well as to the section itself when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal document. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2-3.  
Sec. 1-1-2. - Acceptance. 
The City Code as hereby presented in printed form shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-1-8. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2-6.  
Sec. 1-1-3. - Amendments. 
Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth the article, chapter, and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the City Code on an annual basis. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2-3.  
Sec. 1-1-4. - Code alteration. 
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way, any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the city council. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. 
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the clerk upon termination of office or separation of duties.  
Sec. 1-1-5. - Jurisdiction. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, this Code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the city. Provisions of this Code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law, where the law confers power on the city to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.  
Secs. 1-1-6, 1-1-7. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SAVING CLAUSE 
 
Sec. 1-1-8. - Repeal of general ordinances. 
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force or are, by necessary implication, herein reserved from repeal [subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections], from which are excluded the following ordinances, which are not hereby repealed: 
Tax levy ordinances; Appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances.  
Sec. 1-1-9. - Public utility ordinances. 
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.  
Sec. 1-1-10. - Court proceedings. 
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any claim arising under the former ordinance or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. 
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-1-11. - Severability of provisions. 
Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this Code is severable, and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this Code, nor any part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.  
Sec. 1-1-12. - City clerk's certificate. 
The city clerk's certificate shall be substantially in the following form: 
CITY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS 	) 		
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR 	) 	ss. 	CITY CLERK'S OFFICE 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 	) 		
 
I, Kathleen M. Schuetz, City Clerk of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, do hereby certify that the following Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois of 1996, published by authority of the city council were duly passed by the city council of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, approved by the mayor and published in book form according to law on this date, and that these ordinances are true and perfect copies of the ordinances, as passed, approved and now of record and on file in my office as provided by law. 
In witness whereof, I have set my hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, this _______ day of ________, 1996. 
	/s/ KATHLEEN M. SCHUETZ 
      CITY CLERK 
 	 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
(SEAL)  
Sec. 1-1-13, 1-1-14. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1-15. - Construction of words. 
Whenever any word in any section of this Code, importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. 
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.  
Sec. 1-1-16. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto: 
Agent as used in this Code shall mean a person acting on behalf of another. 
City shall mean the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
City manager or manager" shall mean the person appointed by the city council pursuant to the statutes to manage and direct the city government of this city. 
Code or this Code shall mean the "Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois". 
Corporate authorities" shall mean the mayor and the city council. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-1-2. 
Council unless otherwise indicated shall mean the mayor and city council of this city. 
County shall mean the County of St. Clair. 
Employees shall mean the following: Whenever reference is in this Code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city". 
Fee or fees as used in this Code shall mean a sum of money charged by the city for carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
Fiscal year. The "fiscal year" for the city shall begin on May 1 st of each year and end on April 30 th of the following year. (65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-1-2[5]) 
Knowingly imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission. 
Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois, the ordinances of the city and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
Legal holiday shall mean the holidays as authorized and recognized by the city council in the employee agreement. 
License as used in this Code shall mean the permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
May. The word "may" is permissive. 
Mayor as used in this Code shall mean the mayor of this city. 
Misdemeanor as used in this Code shall mean any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this Code which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law. 
Neglect, negligence, negligent and negligently import a want of such attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act of omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern. 
Nuisance shall mean anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city or any act or thing repugnant to or creating a hazard to or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community. 
Occupant as applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
Offense shall mean any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code. 
Officers and employees. Whenever reference is made in this Code to a city officer or employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city" and shall be taken to mean the officer or employee of this city having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated. 
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such a fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
Official time. Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the transaction of city business, except during applicable Daylight Savings Time set by national or state standards when the official time shall be advanced one hour. All clocks and other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises maintained by or at the expense of the city shall be set and run at the official time prescribed by this paragraph. 
Operator as used in this Code shall mean the person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession. 
Owner as applied to a building or land shall include any part-owner, joint-owner, tenant-in-common, joint-tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person shall mean any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, or corporation in his or its own capacity as administrator, conservator, executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or any such word as applied to corporations, it shall include the officers, agents, or employees thereof who are responsible for any violation of said section. 
Personal property shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein. 
Retailer as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
State or this state unless otherwise indicated shall mean the "State of Illinois". 
Street shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks. 
Tenant as applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Wholesaler and wholesale dealer as used in this Code unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale. 
Willfully when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage. 
Written and in writing may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-1-2.  
Sec. 1-1-17. - Catchlines. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Secs. 1-1-18, 1-1-19. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL PENALTY 
 
Sec. 1-1-20. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code shall be fined not less than $75.00 nor more than $750.00 for any one offense. 
(b)  Any minor or person designated a juvenile by this state convicted of a violation of any section of this Code shall be fined not less than $75.00 nor more than $750.00 for any one offense, but may not be confined except by provisions of the Juvenile Court Act of the State of Illinois. 
(c)  Whoever commits an offense against the city or aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces or procures its commission is punishable as a principal. 
(d)  Whoever willfully causes an act to be done which, if directly performed by him or another would be an offense against the city, is punishable as a principal. 
(e)  All municipal ordinance offenses may be satisfied without a court appearance by written plea of guilty and payment of the minimum fine, plus court costs, unless a court appearance is required by the ordinance violated. 
(f)  Community service. A penalty imposed for violation of an ordinance may include, or consist of, a requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public service work such as but not limited to the picking up of litter in parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2-1 and 5/1-2-7.  
Sec. 1-1-21. - Minor violations penalty. 
(a)  Any person accused of a violation of any section of this Code except chapter 24 entitled "motor vehicles" may settle and compromise the claim by paying to the city the sum of $25.00 within ten days from the time such alleged offense was committed or by paying to the city clerk the sum of $50.00 subsequent to said ten-day period and prior to such person being issued a complaint or notice to appear. 
(b)  The tickets issued under this section shall be as a courtesy in lieu of arrest. If the person accused of this violation does not settle the claim, a complaint or notice to appear will be issued for that violation and the person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-1-20 of this Code.  
Sec. 1-1-22. - Service by certified mail. 
In all actions for violation of any municipal ordinance where the fine should not be in excess of $750.00 and no jail term could be imposed, service of summons may be made by the chief of police by certified mail, return receipt requested, whether service is to be within or without the state. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2-9.1.  
Sec. 1-1-23. - Application. 
(a)  The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this City Code, the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this City Code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this City Code. 
(b)  In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this City Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
(c)  Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this City Code, and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this Code shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues.  
Sec. 1-1-24. - Liability of officers. 
The failure of any officer or employee to perform any official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided for.  
Sec. 1-1-25. - License. 
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code, any license previously issued to him by the city may be revoked by the court or by the city council.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY OFFICIALS  
DIVISION 1. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 1-2-1. - City council. 
The city council shall consist of the mayor and four councilmen, and their term of office shall be for four years and until their successors are elected and have qualified. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/5-2-12.  
Sec. 1-2-2. - Regular meetings. 
The regular stated meetings of the city council shall be held in the City Hall Building on the first and third Monday each month at 7:00 p.m. When said meeting date falls upon a city holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next secular day at the same hour. Adjourned meetings may be held at such times as may be determined by the council. Public notice of regular meetings shall be given in accordance with the Meetings of Public Agencies Act of the State of Illinois, Illinois Compiled Statutes, Ch. 5, Sections 120/1 through 120/5. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-25. 
(Ord. No. 663, 11-17-75) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-25.  
Sec. 1-2-3. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the city council may be called by the mayor or any three councilmen by giving at least 48 hours notice thereof by delivering to them personally written or printed notices of the time of such meeting at the residences of the councilmen; such notices shall be served by mail, by the chief of police, city clerk or their designated representative. Said notices shall specify the purpose of said special meeting and the business to be taken up at that time and place. Such notice shall be posted at the City Hall and shall be provided to any local newspaper of general circulation or any local radio or television station that has filed an annual request for such notice. The notice shall be provided to such news media in the same manner as said notice is given to the mayor and members of the city council, provided such news media has given the city an address within the city at which such notice may be given. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-25 and 5 ILCS Sec. 120/2.02 and 120/2.03.  
Sec. 1-2-4. - Vacancy. 
When a vacancy occurs, the mayor shall appoint an interim qualified person subject to the advice and consent of the council. When the vacancy occurs with more than 130 days before the next scheduled municipal election under law and with more than 28 months remaining in the term, the council appointee shall serve until the next municipal general election for council, at which time the council position will be up for election for a two-year term. When the vacancy occurs with less than 130 days before the next scheduled municipal election under law or with less than 28 months remaining in the term, the council appointee shall serve the remainder of the four-year term. 
(Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 10-18-10) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-5, 5/5-2-12.  
Sec. 1-2-5. - Special committees. 
Special committees may be appointed by the mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the councilmen, as may be needed from time to time.  
Sec. 1-2-6. - Quorum. 
At all meetings of the city council, a majority of the corporate authorities shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and if no such quorum attends such meeting of the council, the councilmen may adjourn from day to day until a quorum is present; and shall have power to compel the attendance of absent members, except when such members are physically unable to attend such meetings. 
Editor's note— When the council has a mayor and four councilmen, a quorum is three, which may consist of the mayor and two councilmen, or three councilmen. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-20.  
Sec. 1-2-7. - Compelling attendance. 
It shall be the duty of each and all councilmen to attend all regular meetings of the city council and all special meetings when each has been duly notified of the date and place of such meeting. If, at any special meeting duly called, a quorum is not present, the councilmen in attendance may adjourn the same to some stated time. Any councilman duly notified in writing by the city clerk of the time and place of such adjourned meeting and any councilman who may have been present when such adjournment was had who fails to attend the same shall be fined $15.00 for each of such adjourned meetings as he failed to attend; provided that the foregoing shall not apply when any councilman is absent from such meeting or meetings because of sickness or unavoidable accident. 
Editor's note— No procedure is set forth in the statutes for determining that a vacancy exists. Where a true question exists as to the presence of a vacancy, a hearing should be held before the vacancy is declared. A certificate of mailing letter should be sent to the last known address of the person whose office is in question. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-20.  
Secs. 1-2-8—1-2-10. - Reserved.  
Division 2. - RULES OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 1-2-11. - Rules of the council. 
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations and meetings of the city council. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-15) 
(a)  Order of business. The order of business shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order by presiding officer. 
(2)  Roll call. 
(3)  The reading of the journal of the proceedings of the last preceding meeting or meetings, and correction and approval of the same, unless dispensed with by the councilmen and correction of the journal of the proceedings of previous meetings. 
(4)  Reports and communications from the mayor and other city officers. 
(5)  Visitors. 
(6)  Reports of city manager. 
(7)  Reports of special committees. 
(8)  Presentation of communications, petitions, resolutions, orders, and ordinances by the councilmen. 
(9)  Unfinished business. 
(10)  Miscellaneous business. 
All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by the chair without debate, subject to appeal. 
(b)  Duties of presiding officer. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other Councilmen, and shall decide all question of order, subject to appeal. 
In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the presiding officer shall have the power to require that the chamber be cleared. 
(c)  Duties of members. While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member shall walk across or out of the council chamber. 
Every member, previous to his speaking, making a motion or seconding the same shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the chair. He shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other member's argument or vote. 
(d)  Visitors. No person other than a member of the council shall address that body, except with the consent of the majority of the members present. 
(e)  Presentation of new business. When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order, resolution, ordinance or other original matter, he shall send it to the desk of the clerk who shall read such matter when reached in its proper order. 
(f)  Debate. No member shall speak more than once on the same question, except by consent of the presiding officer or unless three-fourths of the corporate authorities agree that one's right to debate should be limited to speak only once and then not until every other councilman desiring to speak shall have had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent of the matter under consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and close debate. 
The city council, by motion, may limit debate. The presiding officer shall have the right to participate in debate. While a member is speaking, no councilman shall hold any private discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the chair. 
(g)  Call of councilmen to order. A member, when called to order by the chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his seat and the order or ruling of the chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right to appeal. 
(h)  Appeals from decision of the chair. Any member may appeal to the council for a ruling of the chair, and if the appeal is seconded, the councilman making the appeal may briefly state his reason for the same, and the chair may briefly explain his ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other person shall participate in the discussion. The presiding officer shall have the right to participate in debate. 
The chair shall then put the question, "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?". If a majority of the councilmen present vote "No", the decision of the chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained. 
(i)  Question of personal privilege. The right of a member to address the Council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his integrity, character, or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned. 
(j)  Voting. Every member who shall be present when a question is stated from the chair shall vote thereon, unless he is personally interested in the question, in which case, he shall take whatever steps are necessary to insure that his vote is not taken. 
(k)  Special order of business. Any matter before the city council may be set down as a special order of business at a time certain if two-thirds of the councilmen present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise. 
(l)  Seconding of notions required; written motions. No motion shall be put or debated in the meeting or in committee unless it be seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate, and every motion in the council, except motions of procedure, shall be reduced to writing if required by a member, and the proposer of the motion shall be entitled to the floor. 
(m)  Withdrawal of motions. After a motion or resolution is stated by the presiding officer, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the councilmen, but it may be withdrawn at any time before decision, by consent of the councilmen. 
(n)  Division of questions. If any question under consideration contains several distinct propositions, the councilmen, by a majority vote of the councilmen present may divide such question. 
(o)  Record of motions. In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the journal, the name of the councilmen moving the same shall be entered also. 
(p)  Taking and entering the votes; explanations of votes not permitted. If any member required it, the "yeas" and "nays" upon any question shall be taken and entered in the journal; but the yeas and nays shall not be taken unless called for prior to any vote on the question. 
When the clerk has commenced to call the roll of the members for the taking of a vote by yeas and nays, all debate on the question before the city council shall be deemed concluded, and during the taking of the vote, no member shall be permitted to explain his vote, but shall respond to the calling of his name by the clerk, by answering yea or nay, as the case may be. 
(q)  Announcement and changes of vote. The result of all votes by yeas and nays shall not be announced by the clerk, but shall be handed by him to the chairman for announcement, and no vote shall be changed after the tally list has passed from the hands of the clerk. 
(r)  Precedence of motions. When a question is under debate, the following motions shall be in order and shall have precedence over each other in order, as listed: 
(1)  To adjourn to a day certain. 
(2)  To adjourn. 
(3)  To take a recess. 
(4)  To lay on the table. 
(5)  The previous question. 
(6)  To refer. 
(7)  To amend. 
(8)  To defer or postpone to a time certain. 
(9)  To defer or postpone (without reference to time.) 
(10)  To defer or postpone indefinitely. 
Numbers (2), (4), and (5) to be decided without debate. 
(s)  Motions to adjourn. A motion to adjourn the city council shall always be in order, except: 
(1)  When a councilman is in possession of the floor. 
(2)  While the yeas and nays are being called. 
(3)  When the members are voting. 
(4)  When adjournment was the last preceding motion. 
(5)  When it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken. 
A motion simply to adjourn shall not be subject to amendment or debate, but a motion to adjourn to a time certain shall be. 
The city council may, at any time, adjourn over one or more regular meetings on a vote of a majority of all the councilmen authorized by law to be elected. 
(t)  Previous question. When the previous question is moved on the main question and seconded, it shall be put on this form: "Shall the main question now be put?". If such motion be carried, all further amendments and all further motions and debate shall be excluded, and the question put without delay upon the pending amendment in proper order and then upon the main question. 
(u)  Motions to lay on the table and to take from the table. A motion to lay the question on the table shall not be debatable, but a motion to lay on the table and publish, or with any other condition shall be subject to amendment and debate. 
A motion to take any motion or other proposition from the table may be proposed at the same meeting at which such motion or proposition was laid upon the table, provided two-thirds of the councilmen vote therefor. 
A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on the table shall apply to that motion or proposition only. An amendment to the main question or other pending question may be laid on the table and neither the main question nor such other pending question shall be affected thereby. 
(v)  Indefinite postponement; motion to defer or postpone without any reference to time. When consideration of a motion or other proposition is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up at the same meeting. 
A motion to postpone indefinitely shall not open the main question to debate. 
A motion to defer or postpone without any reference to time shall not be construed as a motion to postpone indefinitely, but shall be considered to be of the same general nature and to possess the same general attributes so far as applicable under these rules, as a motion to postpone indefinitely or to a time certain. 
(w)  Motion to refer. A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee. 
(x)  Motion to amend. A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained. 
An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order; but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order. 
On an amendment to "strike out and insert", the paragraph to be amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be stricken out, then those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will stand if so amended shall be read. 
An amendment to the main question or other pending questions may be referred to a committee and neither the main question nor such other pending question shall be affected thereby. 
(y)  Filling of blanks. When a blank is to be filled and different sums or times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or the longest time. 
(z)  Motion to substitute. A substitute for any original proposition under debate or for any pending amendment or such proposition may be entertained notwithstanding that at such time, further amendment is admissible; and if accepted by the councilmen by a vote shall entirely supersede such original proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all amendments appertaining thereto. 
(aa)  Reconsideration. A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for reconsideration having been once made and decided in the negative shall not be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered. 
A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by councilmen who voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case, a motion to reconsider may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such question to be reconsidered. 
(bb)  Adoption of Robert's "Rules of Order Revised". The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition of Robert's "Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the council in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of the council. 
(cc)  Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules. These rules may be temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the councilmen entitled by law to be elected and shall not be repealed, altered or amended, unless by concurrence of two-thirds of all the councilmen entitled by law to be elected. 
(dd)  Censure of councilmen; expulsion of councilmen. Any councilman acting or appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene and insulting language to or about any member of the council, or who does not obey the order of the chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the members present, or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all councilmen elected. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-15.  
Sec. 1-2-12. - Agenda. 
An itemized agenda, along with all necessary supporting documentation shall be furnished to each member of the council by normal mail delivery or personal delivery not later than Friday preceding the regular council meeting. Members of the public, city officials, and employees shall notify the city clerk before the close of business on the Tuesday preceding the regular council meeting of items for placement on the council agenda. In the case of emergency matters, which could not have been reasonably foreseen in sufficient time to comply with this section, a revised agenda will be furnished to each member of the council and publicly posted before the opening of the council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 02-107, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 12-4-06) 
State Law reference— See 5 ILCS Sec. 120/2.02.  
Sec. 1-2-13. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 1-2-14. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Attorney. It shall be the duty of the city attorney to prepare such ordinances as may be required by the city council. 
(b)  Introduction and reading of ordinances. All ordinances shall be read two (2) times, once each at two successive meetings before passage. The first reading shall be without formal debate. After the first reading, and until the second reading, a member of the council shall, under the order of "council business", be permitted to speak on the proposed ordinance. The second reading shall be a title reading with debate. However, the second reading may be waived by a unanimous vote of the city council, if they so elect. 
(c)  Vote required; yeas and nays record. The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any resolution or motion (1) to create any liability against a city or (2) for the expenditure or budgeting of its money, shall require the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the city council, including the mayor, unless otherwise expressly provided by the Code or any other act governing the passage of any ordinance, resolution, or motion; provided that, where the council consists of an odd number of councilmen, the vote of the majority of the councilmen shall be sufficient to pass an ordinance. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the designated ordinances, resolutions, or motions and recorded in the journal of the city council. In addition, the city council at any meeting may by unanimous consent to take a single vote by yeas or nays on the several questions of the passage on any two or more of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group. The single vote shall be entered separately in the journal under the designation "omnibus vote", and in such event the clerk may enter the words "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal in each case in lieu of entering names of the members of city council voting "yea" and of those voting "nay" on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions and motions included in such omnibus group or consent agenda. The taking of such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance with the requirements of this section to all intents and purposes and with like effect as if the vote in each case had been separately by yeas and nays on the question of the passage of each ordinance, order, resolution and motion included in such omnibus group, and separately recorded in the journal. Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of any other resolution or motion at the request of any councilman and shall be recorded in the journal. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-40-40) 
(d)  Ordinances; approval. All resolutions and motions (1) which create any liability against a city, or (2) that provide for the expenditure or budgeting of its money, or (3) to sell any city property, and all ordinances, passed by the city council shall be deposited with the city clerk. If the council approves of them, the mayor shall sign them. 
(Ord. No. 04-20, § 2, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 05-12, § 2, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, 6-21-08) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/5-3-1.  
Sec. 1-2-15. - No vote to be reconsidered at special meeting. 
No vote of the city council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless there are present at the special meeting at least as many councilmen as were present when the vote was taken. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/5-3-4.  
Secs. 1-2-16—1-2-18. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-2-19. - Corporate seal. 
(a)  Design of seal. The seal of this city shall be circular in form with the words, **"Seal of the City of Mascoutah** Illinois"** in the exterior circle and the figure of a plow and a sheaf of grain in the center. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/2-2-12) 
(b)  The corporate seal shall be used as such seal in all cases provided for by law or by the ordinances of the city and in all other cases in which, by law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the corporation to use a seal. The seal shall be and remain with the city clerk who shall be the legal custodian. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-90.  
Sec. 1-2-20. - Elections. 
(a)  Election procedure. The provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 10 and Chapter 65, Section 5/3.1-10-10 concerning municipal elections shall govern the conduct of the city elections. 
(b)  Inauguration. The inauguration of newly elected city officials shall occur at the first regular or special meeting in May of the City Council after receipt of the official election results from the St. Clair County Clerk of the regular municipal election at which the city officials were elected. 
(Ord. No. 887, 2-01-93; Ord. No. 06-24, § 1, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 3-16-09) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-15.  
Sec. 1-2-21. - Appointment of elected officials. 
No councilman of this city, during the term of office for which he is elected, may accept or be appointed to or hold any office appointed by the mayor except if such councilman is granted a leave of absence from such office. However, such councilman may serve as a volunteer fireman and receive compensation for such service. Any appointment in violation of this section is void. 
One member may serve on the library board. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-15-15; See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1 and 50 ILCS Sec. 105/2.  
Sec. 1-2-22. - Municipal officers—Regulations. 
(a)  Effect. The provisions of this division shall apply alike to all officers and employees of the city regardless of the time of creation of the office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee. 
(b)  Qualifications; appointive office. 
(1)  No person shall be eligible for any appointive municipal office unless that person is a qualified elector of the municipality or otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  The residency requirements do not apply, however, to municipal engineers, health officers, attorneys, or other officers who require technical training or knowledge, to appointed city treasurers, or to appointed city collectors (unless the city has designated by ordinance that the city clerk shall also hold the office of collector). (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-6) 
(c)  Bond. Every officer and employee shall, if required by the city council upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office or position. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-30) 
(d)  Books delivered to successor. Every officer shall, upon going out of office, deliver to his successor, all books, papers, furniture, and other things appertaining to such office, and which are the property of the city. Within five days after notification and request, any person who has been an officer of a municipality is required to deliver to his successor in office, all property, books and effects in his possession belonging to the municipality, or pertaining to the office he has held. Upon his refusal to do so, he shall be liable for all damages caused thereby, and shall, upon conviction, be penalized according to the provisions of section 1-1-20 of this Code. He shall not receive his final check until his City Code Book and keys are turned over to the city clerk. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-35) 
(e)  Books open to inspection. Every officer shall, at all times when required, submit the books and papers of his office to the inspection of the mayor or any member of the city council. 
(f)  Fees; report of fees. No officer of the municipality shall be entitled to charge or receive any fees as against the city. All officers of the city entitled to receive fees shall keep a correct account thereof, and make a report thereof under oath to the city council prior to the regular meeting of each month. In the report, they shall specify from whom such fees were received, for what service, and when received. All fees received shall be paid over into the city treasury. 
(g)  Other rules and regulations. Every officer of the city shall perform such other duties and be subject to such other rules and regulations as the city council may provide by law. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-40) 
(h)  Conservators of peace. 
(1)  The mayor, councilmen and policemen in municipalities shall be conservators of the peace. Those persons and others authorized by ordinance shall have power: 
a.  To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal ordinance or any criminal law of the State, 
b.  To commit arrested persons for examination, 
c.  If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody over night or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper court, and 
d.  To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace prescribed by the corporate authorities. 
(2)  All warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances or the state criminal law, directed to any person, may be served and executed within the limits of a municipality by any policeman of the municipality. For that purpose, policemen have all the common law and statutory powers of sheriffs. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-15-25) 
(i)  Oath. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all municipal officers, whether elected or appointed shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of _______ according to the best of my ability." 
The mayor and the clerk shall have the power to administer this oath or affirmation upon all lawful occasions. 
Cross reference— Administration of oaths, § 1-2-82. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-15-20.  
Sec. 1-2-23. - Resignation of appointed officials. 
Any officer of the city may resign from office. If such officer resigns he shall continue in office until his successor has been chosen and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a city officer, or the person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the office shall continue in office until his successor has been chosen and has qualified. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-50.  
Sec. 1-2-24. - Qualifications; elective office. 
(a)  A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office unless that person is a qualified elector of the municipality and has resided in the municipality at least one year next preceding the election. 
(b)  A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office if that person is in arrears in the payment of a tax or other indebtedness due to the municipality or has been convicted in any court located in the United States of any infamous crime, bribery, perjury, or other felony. 
(c)  A person is not eligible for the office of councilman unless that person has resided in the municipality, as the case may be, at least one year next preceding the election or appointment. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-5.  
Sec. 1-2-25. - Bonds of city officers. 
(a)  Amount. Bonds of city officers required under Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 65, Section 5/3.1-10-30 shall be executed in the following penal sums: 
(1)  Mayor and councilmen ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  City treasurer ..... 100,000.00 
(3)  City clerk ..... 14,000.00 
(4)  City collector ..... 14,000.00 
(5)  City manager ..... 14,000.00 
(b)  Premium payment by city. The surety bonds required by law shall be paid by the city. (See 5 ILCS Sec. 270/1) 
(c)  Surety. The city council shall not receive or approve any bond or security whereon the name of the city council, any one of the councilmen or any elected or appointed officer of the city appear as bondsman or security. If, by mistake, a bond containing the name of any such officer is approved by the city council or if any bondsman, after becoming such is elected or appointed to any city office, this section shall not act as a release of any such obligation incurred.  
Sec. 1-2-26. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Purchase of. The city council shall have the power to purchase liability insurance covering and insuring all municipal officers, employees and elected officials; said insurance to cover incidents occurring while in the performance of their duties, which insurance may insure, cover and protect any liability which the municipal corporation, officer, employee or elected official may incur. When the insurance has been purchased, the city shall be responsible for all premiums and deductible charges called for by any valid liability insurance policy covering the municipal corporation, officer, employee or elected official. 
(b)  Indemnification. If the city council elects not to purchase liability insurance covering and insuring municipal officers, elected officials and employees as provided in this section, then the city shall indemnify and cause to defend municipal officers, elected officials and employees from any claim filed by an individual, partnership or corporation when the claim is founded on any act or omission of the municipal officers, elected officials or employees while in the performance of their official duties, except the city shall not indemnify, but shall defend any municipal officer, elected official or employee from any claim made by an individual, partnership or corporation wherein the claim alleges that the municipal officer, elected official or employee acted intentionally, maliciously or wantonly and further, shall not indemnify or cause to defend the officials or employees where the claim is directly or indirectly related to the negligent care or use of a vehicle as defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the city shall not indemnify any municipal officer, elected official or employee from any claim made by a municipal officer, elected official or employee. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the city shall not indemnify or cause to defend any municipal officers, elected officials or employees if the municipal officers, elected officials or employees have liability insurance insuring the municipal officers, elected officials or employees from the alleged claim; however, the city shall indemnify the municipal officer, elected official or employee the personal deductible limits of his personal policy. 
State Law reference— See 745 ILCS Sec. 10/2-201 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2-27. - Bidding and contract procedures. 
(a)  Competitive bidding required. Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials, and services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever possible on competitive bids. 
(b)  Formal contract procedure. All work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases, orders or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services except as otherwise provided here, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $25,000.00, shall be purchased from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by a vote of two-thirds of the councilmen then holding office. 
(c)  Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper with general circulation within the city. The city shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the city's website. 
(d)  Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
(e)  Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the city council, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of the contract by the city manager. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required by the city council upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award. 
(f)  Bid opening procedure. 
(1)  Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the city and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
(2)  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. 
(3)  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the city manager or by a city employee, in which event, a tabulation of the bids shall be furnished to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(g)  Rejection of bids. The city shall have the authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(h)  Bidders in default to city. The city shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city. 
(i)  Award of contract. 
(1)  Authority in city. The city council shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this section. 
(2)  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the city to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the city council shall consider: 
a.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract to provide the service required; 
b.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
c.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
d.  The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services; 
e.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
f.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
g.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
h.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
i.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(3)  Performance bonds. The city manager shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. 
(j)  Open market procedure. All work and purchases of supplies, materials and services of less than the estimated value of $20,000.00 shall be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts. 
(k)  Professional services exempt from bidding requirements. All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers and architects and any other profession whose ethical code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by the city without observing the bidding procedures prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts. 
(l)  Emergency purchases. In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate work or purchase of supplies materials or services, the city manager shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or services regardless of the amount of the expenditure. 
(m)  Cooperative purchasing. The city shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 06-19, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 15-18, § 1, 9-21-15; Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 9-5-17) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/2-2-12, 8-9-1 and 8-9-2.  
Sec. 1-2-28. - Pecuniary interest in contracts—Prohibition. 
(a)  No municipal officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in his own name or in the name of any other person, association, trust or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the municipality, or in the sale of any article, whenever the expense, price and consideration of the contract, work business or sale is paid either from the treasury or by any assessment levied by any statute or ordinance. No municipal officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property which: 
(1)  Belongs to the municipality; 
(2)  Is sold for taxes or assessments; or 
(3)  Is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the municipality. 
(b)  However, any elected or appointed member of the governing body and any person serving on a municipal advisory panel or commission may provide materials, merchandise, property, services or labor, if: 
(1)  The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or cooperative association in which such interested member of the governing body of the municipality or advisory panel or commission member has less than a seven and one-half percent share in the ownership; 
(2)  In the case of an elected or appointed member of the governing body, such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest prior to or during deliberations concerning the proposed award of the contract; 
(3)  In the case of an elected or appointed member of the governing body, such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered present for the purposes of establishing a quorum; 
(4)  Such contract is approved by a majority vote of those members presently holding office; 
(5)  the contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest responsible bidder if the amount of the contract exceeds $1,500.00, but the contract may be awarded without bidding if the amount is less than $1,500.00; and 
(6)  the award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount, of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed $25,000.00. 
(c)  In addition to the above exemption, any elected or appointed member of the governing body and any person serving on a municipal advisory panel or commission may provide materials, merchandise, property, services or labor if: 
(1)  The award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of the governing body of the municipality provided that, in the case of an elected or appointed member of the governing body, any such interested member shall abstain from voting; and 
(2)  The amount of the contract does not exceed $2,000.00; and 
(3)  The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed $4,000.00; and 
(4)  In the case of an elected or appointed member of the governing body, such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest prior to or during deliberations concerning present for the purposes of establishing a quorum. 
(d)  A contract for the procurement of public utility services by a municipality with a public utility company is not barred by this section by one or more members of the governing body being an officer or employee of the public utility company or holding interest if no more than seven and one-half percent in the public utility company, or holding an ownership interest of any size if the municipality has a population of less than 7,500 and the public utility's rates are approved by the Illinois Commerce Commission. An elected or appointed member of the governing body having such an interest shall be deemed not to have a prohibited interest under this section. 
(e)  Any officer who violates this section is guilty of a violation of this Code and in addition thereto any office held by such person so convicted shall become vacant and shall be so declared as part of the judgment of the court. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section, including the restrictions set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d), shall preclude a contract or deposit of monies, loans or other financial services by a municipality with a local bank or local savings and loan association, regardless of whether a member or members of the governing body of the municipality are interested in such bank or savings and loan association as an officer or employee or as a holder of less than seven and one-half percent of the total ownership interest. A member or members holding such an interest in such a contract shall not be deemed to be holding a prohibited interest for purposes of this Act. Such interested member or members of the governing body must publicly state the nature and extent of their interest during deliberations concerning the proposed award of such a contract, but shall not participate in any further deliberations concerning the proposed award. Such interested member or members shall not vote on such a proposed award. Any member or members abstaining from participation in deliberations and voting under this section may be considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum. Award of such a contract shall require approval by a majority vote of those members presently holding office. Consideration and award of any such contract in which a member or members are interested may only be made at a regularly scheduled public meeting of the governing body of the municipality. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-55-10.  
Sec. 1-2-29. - Salaries regulation. 
(a)  Elected. No salary or compensation of any elected municipal officer who is elected for a definite term of office shall be increased or diminished during such term. 
(b)  Appointed. No salary or compensation of any appointed official who is appointed for a definite term of office shall be decreased during such term, but may be increased. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07) 
Editor's note— The salary of appointed officials and employees may be established in the annual budget ordinance. The salary of elected officials must be established in an ordinance other than the budget ordinance at least 180 days before the beginning of the terms of the officers whose compensation is to be fined. (See 50 ILCS Sec. 145/2) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-50-5 and 5/3.1-50-6.  
Sec. 1-2-30. - Claims presentation. 
(a)  Presentation. All claims against the city for goods purchased, damaged, or originating in any other way, except for claims for salaries and other allowances that are fixed by ordinance, must be presented on or before the 20th day of each month to the city clerk. All such claims must be in writing and items shall be specified. 
(b)  Exception. This does not prohibit the city council from passing on any claims not previously presented to the city clerk if, in the opinion of the council, justice to the claimant requires it.  
Sec. 1-2-31. - Municipal year. 
The municipal year of the city shall begin on May 1 of each year and shall end on April 30 of the following year. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-1-2.  
Sec. 1-2-32. - Expenses—Reimbursement. 
Each member of the corporate authorities may receive reimbursement from the municipality for expenses incurred by the member in attending committee meetings of the corporate authorities or for other expenses incurred by the member in the course of performing official duties. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-50-15(B).  
Sec. 1-2-33. - Official records. 
All official records, including the corporate seal, shall be kept in the City Hall.  
Sec. 1-2-34. - Federal old age and survivor's insurance system. 
(a)  Eligible employees shall mean all employees of the city, eligible under the Federal Act, except persons elected to office by popular election and also the city treasurer and city attorney. 
(b)  Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose provided in sections hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid quarterly.  
Sec. 1-2-35. - Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund. 
(a)  The city does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund. 
(b)  Special tax. The city includes in its levy and budget ordinance provisions for the levying of a special tax to pay the city's cost of participating in the retirement fund and appropriate therefrom funds to pay the cost of participation. 
(Ord. No. 638, 09-24-73; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 1-2-36. - City equipment use policy. 
(a)  Prohibited use of equipment. City equipment shall not be used for personal use. Various situations shall warrant exception to said policy, including but not limited to the following: a city emergency, a disaster either natural or unnatural, and use of the city vehicles by police, fire, and other qualified personnel. 
(b)  Non-profit and charitable organizations use. Non-profit and charitable organizations shall have limited access to the city equipment for such projects within the city limits. Approval must be granted by the city manager and be in writing and a disclaimer and/or a liability waiver must be properly executed and filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  Facilities use prohibited. Use of city facilities for maintenance and repair of personal vehicles is prohibited. 
(d)  Loans. The city shall not loan money or otherwise extend credit to any city employees. 
(Ord. No. 02-101, 01-24-02)  
Sec. 1-2-37. - Recovery in medical malpractice suits. 
(a)  In the event the litigant bringing such action at law is successful and damages are awarded for economic loss, such damages shall be specifically based upon tangible loss for cost of past and future medical and hospital expenses, loss of income and other property loss, if any. 
(b)  In the event damages are awarded for intangible loss including, but not limited to, damages for pain and suffering, disability, disfigurement, loss of consortium, and loss of society, being non-economic damages, shall be limited to no more than three times the damages awarded for economic loss. 
(c)  Any health care professional who gives aid, assistance, succor or care to anyone injured or suffering from and emergency or acute incident to the City of Mascoutah shall be exempt from liability for a subsequent loss inadvertently inflicted provided the aid, assistance succor or care was given in a usual and customary manner under the circumstance at the time. 
(d)  Any person who unsuccessfully prosecutes an action at law against a provider of medical or health care for malpractice shall pay and be responsible for all costs incurred by the successful party including, but not limited to, court costs and attorney fees. 
(e)  That it is the intention of the City Council of the City of Mascoutah that this Ordinance and every provision thereof shall be considered separable, and the invalidity of any section, clause, or provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this Ordinance. 
(f)  That the City Council of the City of Mascoutah finds that the subject matter of this Ordinance pertains to the government and affairs of the City of Mascoutah and is passed pursuant to authority granted by state statutes and the Home Rule powers of the City of Mascoutah pursuant to the provisions of Article VII, Section 6(a) of the Illinois Constitution. 
(g)  That this section shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval, recording, and publication in accordance with law. 
(h)  Nothing is intended to exempt medical malpractice suits from all other provisions and requirements of law hereby including, but not limited to, minimum filing and complaint requirements for plaintiffs in medical malpractice cases. 
(Ord. No. 04-21, §§ 1—8, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 1-2-38. - Recall of elected officials. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to provide a method of removing elected officials from office if they do not perform their responsibilities. Recall of an elected official is a serious matter and should not be taken lightly. Therefore, the standards for recall set forth in this section are established in order to prevent frivolous recall attempts while maintaining the citizen's ability to recall. 
(b)  Applicability. Any elected official in the City of Mascoutah is subject to recall under these provisions, specifically the mayor and all members of the city council. An elected official cannot be recalled during the first or last 12 months of the official's term. Only two officials can be subject to recall at the same time. 
(c)  Recall procedure. 
(1)  Letter of intent. A recall of an elected official must be initiated by a letter of intent to recall by a registered voter of the City of Mascoutah. The letter of intent to recall must contain the name and office of the official to be recalled and the reason for the recall (not to exceed 200 words). This letter must be filed with the city clerk. 
Upon receipt of letter of intent to recall, the city clerk will notify the official subject to recall, all other elected officials, the city manager and the city attorney within two days of receipt. The city clerk will then publish a notice notifying the public that the recall process has been initiated within ten days. Such notice will include the name and office of the official to be recalled and the reason for the recall; and shall be posted at City Hall, placed on the city website and published in the next edition of the local newspaper. 
(2)  Petitions for recall. 
i.  Petitions for recall may begin to circulate ten days after the letter of intent to recall has been filed with the city clerk. 
ii.  Only registered voters of the City of Mascoutah may circulate a petition for recall and/or sign petitions for recall. 
iii.  The number of signatures collected on the petitions for recall must equal at least 15 percent of the registered voters of the City of Mascoutah at the time of the last regularly scheduled election. 
iv.  Petition forms must contain the name and office of the official subject to recall and the reason for recall (as stated on the letter of intent to recall). 
v.  Petition forms must contain the printed names, addresses, date signed, and signatures of registered voters. 
vi.  Each petition form must be signed by the circulator of the petition, attesting that they witnessed each signature and that each signature is genuine. 
vii.  Each petition form must be signed, dated, and stamped by a Notary Public of the State of Illinois attesting the signature of the circulator of the petition. 
viii.  If recall is sought for more than one official, a separate petition is required for each person whose removal is sought. 
ix.  Petition forms must be filed within 30 days after the publication of the recall notice by the city clerk. If the petition forms are not filed within this time period, the recall process will stop and cannot be initiated again against that official during that elected official's term of office. 
(3)  Filing of petitions for recall. 
i.  Upon completion, all petition forms must be filed as a single document with the city clerk. 
ii.  Within 30 days after the filing of the petitions, the city clerk (in coordination with the St. Clair County Clerk's Department) will examine the petitions to ensure that all requirements have been met to proceed with a recall election. 
iii.  The city clerk, after verifying the sufficiency of the petition to recall, will notify the official subject to recall. The official will be given ten days to either appeal the recall or resign from office. If no appeal is filed and if the official does not resign, the city clerk will proceed with arranging for a recall election. 
(4)  Recall appeal process. 
i.  Upon notification of a successful petition to recall, the official will be given ten days to appeal the recall process. Such appeal must be filed with the city clerk and city attorney and identify the reason for the appeal and which of the following documents or procedures the official is appealing: 
1.  Letter of intent. 
2.  Petitions for recall. 
3.  Certification. 
ii.  Upon receipt of letter of appeal, the city clerk shall provide copies of the requested materials to the official within two days. 
iii.  The official shall provide a review of their findings on the recall process within 15 days to the city clerk and city attorney. 
iv.  The city clerk and city attorney shall provide a response to the official's findings within ten days stating whether the official's findings are valid or invalid and stating whether the recall process will continue to proceed or the recall process will stop. 
(d)  Recall election. 
(1)  Due to the cost of conducting a special election, a recall election will be scheduled in conjunction with a regularly scheduled election conducted by the St. Clair County Clerk's Office. 
(2)  The city clerk shall take the necessary action to place the recall question on the ballot of the next regularly scheduled election. The question shall read as follows: 
"Shall (name of elected official) be recalled and removed from the office of (Mayor/City Council)?" 
If a majority of the votes cast (more than 50 percent) are "Yes", the official shall be removed from office upon receipt of certification by the St. Clair County Board of Elections. If a majority of the votes cast (more than 50 percent) are "No", the official will remain in office. 
(3)  If any official is subjected to a recall election and is not recalled by the voters, the official shall not be subject to recall again during that term of office. 
(e)  Vacancies. Any vacancy that is created as a result of an official being recalled will be filled in accordance with the sections 1-2-4 and 1-2-42 of the City of Mascoutah Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 5-3-10)  
Sec. 1-2-39. - Grievance Procedures under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(a)  That the Grievance Procedure Under the Americans with Disabilities Act be and the same are hereby authorized, approved and adopted under and pursuant to the Act, to become effective immediately, as attached [to Ordinance No. 10-03. A copy can be found in the city offices]. 
(b)  That the city engineer is hereby designated as the ADA Coordinator for the City of Mascoutah. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, §§ 1, 2, 3-15-10) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 10-03, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 15, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 1-2-39 at the editor's discretion.  
DIVISION 5. - MAYOR 
 
Sec. 1-2-40. - Election. 
The mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until his successor is elected and has qualified. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-15-5 and 5/3.1-15-10.  
Sec. 1-2-41. - Mayor pro-tem; temporary chairman. 
(a)  If the mayor is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the office, the corporate authorities shall elect one of their members to act as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the Mayor but shall not be entitled to vote both as mayor pro tem and as a councilman. 
(b)  In the absence of the mayor, or mayor pro tem, the council may elect one of their members to act as a temporary chairman. The temporary chairman shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right to vote only in the capacity as councilman on any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-35.  
Sec. 1-2-42. - Vacancy. 
When a vacancy occurs, the council shall appoint an interim qualified person on the council. When the vacancy occurs with more than 130 days before the next scheduled municipal election under law and with more than 28 months remain in the term, the mayoral appointee shall serve until the next municipal general election for council, at which time the mayoral position will be up for election for a two-year term. When the vacancy occurs with less than 130 days before the next scheduled municipal election under law or with less than 28 months remaining in the term, the mayoral appointee shall serve the remainder of the four-year term. 
(Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 10-18-10) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-5, 5/5-2-12.  
Sec. 1-2-43. - Chief executive officer. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and he shall see to the enforcement of all laws and ordinances. He shall preside over the meetings of the city council and perform such duties as may be required of him by statute or law; provided however, the city manager shall have supervision over all executive officers and city employees; to prescribe the duties of various officers and employees. The mayor shall have the power and authority at any reasonable time to inspect all books, papers and records pertaining to city affairs and kept by any officer of the city. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-15-10 and 3.1-35-20.  
Sec. 1-2-44. - Reserved.  
Sec. 1-2-45. - Mayor's signature. 
The mayor shall sign all city warrants, commissions, permits and licenses granted by authority of the city council, except as otherwise provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require his official signature. 
The mayor may designate another to affix his signature to any written instrument that requires the mayor's signature. The mayor must send written notice of this designation to the city council stating: (1) the name of the person whom he has selected, and (2) what instrument the person will have authority to sign. 
A written signature of the mayor executed by the person so designated with the signature underneath the signature of the person so designated shall be attached to the notice. The notice with the signature attached shall be recorded in the journal of the city council and then filed with the city clerk. When the signature of the mayor is placed on a written instrument at the direction of the mayor in the specified manner, the instrument, in all respects, shall be as binding on the city as if signed by the mayor in person. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-30.  
Sec. 1-2-46. - Appointment of officers. 
(a)  Appointed. At the first annual meeting in May, the mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, all officers of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for, and said officers shall hold their offices for the ensuing month or year, and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. The mayor shall issue a commission or certificate of appointment to all persons appointed to office in the municipality. (See 65 ILCS Secs. 5/3.1-55-5) 
(b)  Filling vacancies. The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, all officers of the city whose appointment will not otherwise be provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur in any office, which by law or ordinance the mayor is empowered and required to fill, the mayor shall, at the next regular meeting of the city council, communicate to it the name of the appointee to such office and pending the concurrence of the city council in such appointment, the mayor may designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such office. 
State Law reference— See 50 ILCS Sec. 105/2.  
Sec. 1-2-47. - Supervise conduct of officers; removal of officers. 
The mayor shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the city and see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their respective offices. Except where otherwise provided by statute or division VI, the mayor may remove any officer appointed by the mayor under this Code, on any written charge, whenever the mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the municipality demand removal. The mayor shall report the reasons for the removal to the corporate authorities at a meeting to be held not less than five days nor more than ten days after the removal. If the mayor fails or refuses to report to the corporate authorities the reasons for the removal, or if the corporate authorities by a two-thirds vote of all members authorized by law to be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which the officer was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon the journal of the corporate authorities. Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-10.  
Sec. 1-2-48. - Designation of officers' duties. 
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city, this dispute shall be settled by the mayor, after consultation with the city attorney; and the mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointive officer, any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.  
Sec. 1-2-49. - Formal occasions. 
The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on formal occasions and receptions, but in his absence or inability to attend any such function, the mayor may select any other city officer to so act.  
Sec. 1-2-50. - General duties. 
The mayor shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law and shall take care that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. 
The mayor from time to time, may and annually shall give the city council information relative to the affairs of the city, and may recommend for their consideration such measures as he believes expedient. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-5.  
Sec. 1-2-51. - Local liquor commissioner. 
The mayor is hereby designated as local liquor commissioner with all the powers to license and/or revoke any city liquor license according to state and city laws. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-2.  
Secs. 1-2-52, 1-2-53. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 1-2-54. - Creation of office. 
There is hereby created the office of city manager, an administrative office of the city. He shall be the chief administrative officer of the city.  
Sec. 1-2-55. - Appointment; qualifications. 
The city manager shall be appointed by the city council. He shall be chosen solely on the basis of his professional qualifications, including education and experience. The person appointed city manager shall reside within the city during his tenure in office, but need not be a resident at the time of his appointment nor for a period of one year thereafter. In extenuating circumstances, the city council may waive the residency requirement by super-majority vote of the council members. If such a waiver is granted, and the city manager shall change his place of residence during the time of his appointment, the city manager shall be required to move within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-4-10) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/5-3-7.  
Sec. 1-2-56. - Temporary absence. 
If the city manager shall be absent from the city or incapacitated from performing the duties of his position, he may designate a qualified administrative officer to act as manager during his absence or incapacity. Upon the failure of the city manager to designate a qualified administrative officer to act as city manager, the council, may in its discretion, so designate an administrative officer as the acting city manager.  
Sec. 1-2-57. - Tenure. 
The term of office of the city manager shall be indeterminate. The city council may remove the city manager from office at any time by a majority vote of the council members, provided they give the city manager written notice of their intention to consider action concerning tenure at a closed session at least ten days before any resolution or ordinance concerning tenure shall be passed. Such written notice can be initiated by any two council members. The city council may suspend the city manager from his duties, with pay, during any time that such written notice is in effect. Tenure shall otherwise be governed by the Illinois Statutes and the provisions of any employment agreement. 
(Ord. No. 10-01 § 1, 1-4-10)  
Sec. 1-2-58. - Bond and oath. 
(a)  Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the city council, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city manager shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the state.  
Sec. 1-2-59. - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive compensation in such amount and manner as the council shall fix from time to time.  
Sec. 1-2-60. - Administrative powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the mayor and to the city council for the management and operation of all the affairs of the departments of the city. As such administrative officer he shall have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to the day to day operations of the city and of all departments of the city. All administrative power previously exercised by the city manager shall continue unless specifically limited by the city council. He shall also have supervision of such other administrative agencies and departments and officers as may be hereafter created by the city council unless the management and control of such departments and officers is expressly delegated elsewhere. He shall perform his duties in conformity with the ordinances or resolutions of the city and the statutes of the state. Specifically, but not in limitation of the above, he shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Appointments. He may recommend to the mayor and to the council the appointment of all officers of the city who are required by law to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council, and he may recommend to the mayor the appointment of employees and officers who are required to be appointed by the mayor. He shall further recommend the removal or suspension of any such officer or employee when such removal or suspension shall be consistent with the best interests of the city. All such recommendations for appointment or removal shall be based upon merit and upon the qualifications or disqualifications of such officer or employee without regard to political belief or affiliation. 
(b)  Attendance at meetings. He shall attend all meetings of the city council unless he requests to be excused therefrom by the mayor or council, except when his removal is under consideration by the council. He shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council and is entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the council. 
(c)  Investigate complaints. He shall make investigation of the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof and shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning city services and city administration. 
(d)  Discipline or discharge. He shall have the power to appoint, discipline or discharge the fire chief and the police chief, who shall not be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners, but by the city manager. He may make recommendations regarding the excluded officers or employees to the appropriate body or to the mayor. Upon disciplining or discharging any officer or employee he shall submit to the city council a written report of his reasons therefor. (See chapter 30, article II, fire department) 
(e)  Time constraints. He shall devote his entire time to the discharge of official duties. 
(f)  Assignment of additional duties. He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the council consistent with the City Code, ordinances or resolutions, and state statutes. 
(g)  Code enforcement. The city manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of all local, state and federal laws. 
(h)  Inventory. The city manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the city and its location. He shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such property which is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control. 
(i)  Recommendations. Recommend to the city council from time to time adoption of such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the community or for the improvement of the administrative services. 
(j)  Consolidation of offices. Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction with the prior approval of the city council. 
(k)  Complaints to be investigated. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see to it that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed, and to perform such other duties as may be required by the city council not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city or the statutes of the state. 
(l)  Business registration. The city manager is hereby designated as license registrar to issue and revoke any and all business licenses as prescribed by law, with the advice and consent of the city council.  
Sec. 1-2-61. - Administrative powers and duties, fiscal. 
The city manager shall be the fiscal agent of the city and as such shall be charged with and shall exercise general supervision over all the officers of the city charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of city revenues and all funds required to be in the custody of the city treasurer. He shall have access to all documents including debts, mortgages, leases, contracts, judgment orders, notes, bonds and evidence of indebtedness belonging to the city. He shall have general administrative supervision of the accounting work of the city, specifically, but not in limitation of the above; he shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Budget. Before the annual budget ordinance is presented to the city council, he shall submit to the city council a report of his estimate as nearly as may be of the money necessary to defray the expenses of the city during the next fiscal year. And, in the report he shall classify in detail the purpose of expenditure, aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year, the city liabilities, and other such information that is necessary to assist the city council in the adoption of the budget ordinance. 
(b)  Reports from officers. He is authorized to require all officers to submit statements of the condition and expense of their respective offices and departments, a description of proposed city improvements and the probable expense thereof, and a description of all unperformed contracts and a statement of the amount of all unexpired budgets of the preceding year. 
(c)  Salary recommendation. He shall recommend to the council the salaries to be paid each appointive subordinate employee of the city. 
(d)  Reorganization of offices. With the approval of the city council he may consolidate, combine or reorganize positions or units under his jurisdiction. If any consolidation or reorganization affects the establishment or discontinuance of such places of employment he shall notify the city council or necessary authorities as may be required by statute or ordinance or resolution. 
(e)  Monthly financial report. He shall each month cause to be prepared and shall present to the council a statement showing the exact financial condition of the city as of the end of the preceding month. 
(f)  Other reports. He shall give such additional reports and information concerning the fiscal matters of the city as may from time to time be required by the city council. 
(g)  Designated duties by council. He shall perform such duties and have such powers as are conferred upon him by the city council and the statutes of the state. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 1-2-62. - Interference in appointments by elected officials. 
No elected official or officer shall dictate or attempt to dictate the appointment or removal of any person from office or employment by the city manager or by any of his subordinates. Elected officials and officers shall deal with the administrative service through the city manager except for purposes of inquiring. Elected officials and officers shall refrain from giving orders, either publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the city manager.  
Sec. 1-2-63. - Administrative powers and duties, contracts. 
The city manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be party. The city council may authorize the city manager to sign contracts on behalf of the city. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see to it that all terms of any contract to which the city is a party are fully performed by all parties thereto.  
Sec. 1-2-64. - Health. 
The city manager shall ex-officio be director of health. He shall enforce all laws and ordinances in the city relating to the protection of the public health.  
Sec. 1-2-65. - Zoning. 
The city manager shall be the zoning enforcement officer (zoning administrator) of the city and shall see to the enforcement of the zoning code with the advice of the building inspector.  
Sec. 1-2-66. - Public works. 
The city manager shall serve as ex-officio director of public works. He shall have control over all officers and employees assigned to this department. The employees of the various departments shall be directed by the designated department heads who, in turn, shall be directed by the city manager. He shall have charge of and supervision over all public property of the city, including all streets, alleys, parks, sidewalks, municipal buildings, utility buildings and stations, and all other property. He shall have charge of, and be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the city water distribution system; the sanitary sewer system and disposal plant; the electrical generating and distributing plant including the street lighting system; and all drainage facilities of said city. He shall have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles.  
Sec. 1-2-67. - Audit. 
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than three months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the city made by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of Illinois, to be designated by the city council. Copies of such audit report shall be filed with the city clerk and with the director of the state department of revenue and in such other places as may be required by law.  
Sec. 1-2-68. - Salaries. 
The city manager shall be paid at the same time as other employees of the city are paid. His salary shall be paid by the following funds in the proportions herein set forth and as adopted by council: 
(a)  General fund ..... 30% 
(b)  Electric light fund ..... 40% 
(c)  Sewer and water fund ..... 30% 
The city manager shall not be entitled to any other compensation, fees, or commissions, except approved expenses. 
All other officers and employees shall continue to receive the salaries heretofore established by ordinance or resolution.  
Sec. 1-2-69. - Collections. 
The city manager shall direct and coordinate the employees responsible for the preparation of monthly utility bills, statements and collections of the same.  
Sec. 1-2-70. - Additional duties. 
Any officer or employee assigned to any department or division thereof may be required to perform work in any other department or division by the city manager or by direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 805, 06-01-87) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-50-5.  
Secs. 1-2-71—1-2-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 1-2-75. - Appointed. 
The clerk shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council for a four-year term and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. If a vacancy occurs in the office, it shall be filled by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The person so appointed shall hold office for the unexpired term of the officer appointed. The council shall establish the office hours for the city clerk. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/5-2-19.  
Sec. 1-2-76. - Vacancy. 
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of city clerk, the mayor shall appoint a qualified person to the office subject to the advice and consent of the city council.  
Sec. 1-2-77. - Publication of ordinances; council minutes; records. 
(a)  Ordinances. The city clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the city council imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any appropriation to be published or printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the corporate authorities, or be published at least once within 30 days after passage, in one or more newspapers published in the city. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2-5) 
(b)  Minutes; records. The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council and shall keep in a suitable book to be styled "The Journal of the City Council," a full and faithful record of its proceedings. The city clerk shall record and properly index in a book kept for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council, and at the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage, when published, and a memorandum of the publication of such ordinance. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-90) 
(c)  Bonds. He shall also record in proper books for the purpose, all official bonds and note upon each bond so recorded when the same was entered of record and the book and pages where recorded. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-110) 
(d)  Issue notices. He shall issue and cause to be served upon all councilmen, notices of all special meetings of the city council; also notices to the members of the different committees of that body and all persons whose attendance may be required before any such committee, when so directed by the chairman thereof. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2-4, 5/1-2-5 and 5/3.1-35-90.  
Sec. 1-2-78. - Delivery of papers to officers. 
The clerk shall deliver to the city council and to the officers of this city, all petitions, communications, reports and resolutions, orders, claims and other papers referred to those officers by the council on demand therefor. He shall also, without delay, deliver to the mayor, all ordinances or resolutions, orders and claims in his charge which may require to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the mayor. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-90.  
Sec 1-2-79. - Preparation of documents, commissions and licenses. 
The clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and other official documents required to be issued by him under this Code and shall attest the same with the corporate seal, and he shall, in like manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by this city.  
Sec. 1-2-80. - Report of licenses. 
The clerk shall report to the city council at its regular meeting each month and oftener if the council so requires the data contained in his license register with respect to licenses issued during the previous month.  
Sec. 1-2-81. - Delivery of licenses. 
In all cases where the city requires a license to be obtained for the purpose of engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation, and the licensee is required to obtain plates, tags or stickers from the clerk, it shall be the duty of the clerk to deliver such plates, tags, or stickers to the person paying the license fee.  
Sec. 1-2-82. - Administration of oaths. 
The clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations for all lawful purposes. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-15-20.  
Sec. 1-2-83. - Outstanding bonds. 
The clerk shall keep in his office in a book or books kept expressly for that purpose a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the city, showing the number and amount of each, for and to whom the bonds are issued; and when the city bonds are issued, or purchased, or paid, or cancelled, the book or books shall show that fact; and in his annual report, the clerk shall describe particularly the bonds sold during the year and the terms of sale with each and every item of expense thereof. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-110.  
Sec. 1-2-84. - Reports. 
The clerk shall, on or before the regular meeting in each month, make out and submit to the city council a statement or report in writing of all the moneys received and warrants drawn by him during the preceding month, showing therein from or what sources and on what account moneys were received, and for what purposes and on what account the warrants were drawn or paid.  
Sec. 1-2-85. - Successor. 
The city clerk shall carefully preserve in his office, all books, records, papers, maps and effects of every detail and description belonging to the city or pertaining to his office, and not in actual use and possession of other city officers; and upon the expiration of his official term, he shall deliver all such books, records, papers and effects to his successor in office. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 3.1-10-35.  
Sec. 1-2-86. - Payments. 
The clerk shall prepare daily an itemized list of all moneys received and shall deliver a copy of the same to the city treasurer and shall also pay over to the treasurer all moneys received by him and take a receipt therefor. All checks issued by the treasurer shall be countersigned by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 674, 11-01-76)  
Sec. 1-2-87. - Notification to persons appointed to office. 
Within five days after an appointment is made, the clerk shall notify all persons appointed to office of their appointment. The office becomes vacant unless the person appointed qualifies within ten days after such notice.  
Sec. 1-2-88. - Other duties. 
In addition to the foregoing duties, the clerk shall perform all such other duties pertaining to his office as are or may be imposed upon him by law or resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-40.  
Sec. 1-2-89. - Deputy clerk. 
The city clerk, when authorized by the city council, may appoint the deputy clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law to be executed by the clerk and affix the seal of the city thereto whenever required. in signing any documents, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the city clerk followed with the word, "by" and the deputy clerk's name and the words, "deputy clerk". 
The powers and duties herein described shall be executed by such deputy clerk only in the absence of the city clerk from the city clerk's office in the City Hall, and only when either written direction has been given by the city clerk to such deputy clerk to exercise such power or the city council has determined by resolution that the city clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-30-10 and 5/3.1-10-45 and 5/3.1-35-95.  
DIVISION 8. - CITY TREASURER 
 
Sec. 1-2-90. - Treasurer appointed; vacancy. 
The treasurer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council for a four-year term and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. The treasurer shall receive a stipend for his/her services equal to an amount determined by the mayor and city manager. For purposes of reporting worker's compensation and possible IMRF, the city shall report 600 hours as attributable to the treasurer. If a vacancy occurs in the office, it shall be filled by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The person so appointed shall hold office for the unexpired term of the officer appointed. 
(Ord. No. 98-129, 12-07-98) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/5-2-19.  
Sec. 1-2-91. - Money; warrants; accounts; payments. 
The city treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to this city and shall pay all warrants countersigned by the city clerk and not otherwise; and shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto. The treasurer shall give to every person paying money into the city treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, and upon what account paid, and he shall file copies of such receipts with the clerk with his monthly reports. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-40.  
Sec. 1-2-92. - Warrant register. 
The treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid by him showing the number, date, and amount of each, the fund from which paid, and the name of the person to whom and when paid; and he shall cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed by him. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-40 and 5/3.1-35-45.  
Sec. 1-2-93. - Personal use of funds. 
The treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the city and in the treasurer's custody separate and distinct from the treasurer's own money and shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the city's moneys or warrants for the personal use and benefit of the treasurer or of any other person. Any violation of this provision shall subject the treasurer to immediate removal from office by the corporate authorities, who may declare the treasurer's office vacant. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-55.  
Sec. 1-2-94. - Bond. 
The treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties and to indemnify the city for any loss due to neglect of duty or wrongful act on his part; and the amount of such bond shall be $100,000.00. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-10-45.  
Sec. 1-2-95. - Special assessments. 
The treasurer shall collect all payments on special assessments and shall see to it that the same are properly recorded and credited to the particular account entitled thereto. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-85.  
Sec. 1-2-96. - Bookkeeping. 
The treasurer shall keep his books and accounts in such a manner as to show with accuracy, all moneys received and disbursed by him for the city, stating from whom and on what account received, and to whom and on what account paid out, and in such a way that the books and accounts may be readily investigated and understood, and the books and accounts and all files and papers of his office shall be, at all times, open to examination by the mayor, the city manager or the council. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-40.  
Sec. 1-2-97. - Statements. 
The treasurer shall report to the city council at the regular monthly meeting, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the municipality as shown by his books up to the time of the report. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-45.  
Sec. 1-2-98. - Report delinquent officers. 
It shall be the duty of the treasurer to report to the city manager any officer of the city authorized to receive money for the use of the city who may fail to make a return of the moneys received by the treasurer at the time required by law or by ordinances of the city.  
Sec. 1-2-99. - Year-end report. 
Within six months after the end of each fiscal year, the treasurer shall prepare and file annually with the city clerk an account of monies received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year as specified in this section. The treasurer shall show the following in such account: 
(a)  All monies received by the city, indicating the total amounts in the aggregate received in each account of the city, with a general statement concerning the source of such receipts; provided, however, for the purposes of this paragraph, the term "account" shall not be construed to mean each individual taxpayer, householder, licensee, utility user, or such other persons whose payments to the city are credited to the general account; 
(b)  Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section all monies paid out by the city where the total amount paid during the fiscal year exceeds $2,500.00, giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid, and the total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account; 
(c)  All monies paid out by the city as compensation for personal services, giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid, and the total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account; and 
(d)  A summary statement of operations for all funds and account groups of the city as excerpted from the annual financial report, as filed with the appropriate state agency of the State of Illinois. 
Upon receipt of such account from the city treasurer, the city clerk shall publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers published in the city. 
The treasurer shall file a copy of the report with the county treasurer as provided in Sec. 5/3.1-35-70 of Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-65.  
Sec. 1-2-100. - Deposit of funds. 
(a)  Designation by council. The treasurer is hereby required to keep all funds and moneys in his custody belonging to the city in such places of deposit as have been designated by section 1-2-100(d). When requested by the treasurer, the city council shall designate a bank or banks in which may be kept the funds and moneys of the city in the custody of the treasurer. When a bank or savings and loan association has been designated as a depository, it shall continue as such depository until ten days have elapsed after a new depository is designated and has qualified by furnishing the statements of resources and liabilities as required by this section. When a new depository is designated, the corporate authorities shall notify the sureties of the treasurer of that fact in writing at least five days before the transfer of funds. The treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds or money that the treasurer deposits in a designated bank or savings and loan association while the funds and money are so deposited. 
(b)  The treasurer may require any bank or savings and loan association to deposit with the treasurer securities or mortgages that have a market value at least equal to the amount of the funds or moneys of the municipality deposited with the bank or savings and loan association that exceeds the insurance limitation provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. 
(c)  The treasurer may enter into agreements of any definite or indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment, reinvestment, or withdrawal of municipal funds. 
(d)  The treasurer may: 
(1)  Combine moneys from more than one fund of a single municipality for the purpose of investing those funds; and 
(2)  Join with other municipal treasurers or municipalities for the purpose of investing the municipal funds of which the treasurer has custody. 
Joint investments shall be made only in investments authorized by law for the investment of municipal funds. When moneys of more than one fund of a single municipality or moneys of more than one municipality are combined for investment purposes, the moneys combined for that purpose shall be accounted for separately in all respects and the earnings from investments shall be separately and individually computed, recorded, and credited to the fund or municipality, as the case may be, for which the investment was acquired. 
(e)  No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as permitted by this section unless it has complied with the requirements established by Section 6 of the Public Funds Investment Act. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-35-50 and 30 ILCS Sec. 235/6) 
(f)  The following bank(s) are herewith designated as places of deposit where the treasurer of the city is required to keep all funds and moneys in his custody belonging to this municipality: 
(1)  Citizen Community Bank, Mascoutah, Illinois. 
(2)  Magna Bank, N.A., Mascoutah Branch. 
(3)  Illinois State treasurer's Investment Pool. 
(4)  First Federal Savings Bank of Mascoutah, Illinois.  
Secs. 1-2-101, 1-2-102. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - JUDICIARY 
 
Sec. 1-2-103. - Appointment of attorney. 
The attorney shall be appointed at the first regular council meeting in May by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council for the term of one year, unless sooner removed for cause, and until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified. The attorney shall have full charge of the law affairs of the city and shall be known as the city attorney and shall receive an annual salary as determined by the budget ordinance, compensation for office services and advice, and shall receive reasonable fees for other services rendered when, in his judgment, or in the judgment of the mayor, city council, or city manager the same are necessary or are for the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-30-5.  
Sec. 1-2-104. - Duties. 
(a)  Prosecute for city. The city attorney shall prosecute or defend on behalf of the city in all cases in which the interests of the corporation or any officer thereof are involved; and the city clerk shall furnish him with certified copies of any ordinance, bond or paper in his keeping necessary to be filed or used in any suit or proceedings. 
(b)  Preparation of ordinances. When required, he shall advise the city council or any officer in all matters of law in which the interests of the corporation are involved, and he shall draw such ordinances, bonds, forms and contracts, or examine and pass upon the same, as may be required of him by the mayor, the city council, or the city manager. 
(c)  Judgments. He shall direct executions to be issued upon all judgments recovered in favor of the city, and he shall direct their prompt service. He shall examine all the bills of the officers of courts, and of other officers of the law, and shall certify to their correctness and the liability of the city therefore. He shall collect all reasonable costs to the city in addition to the regular fines, expenses and attorney fees. 
(d)  Violations of ordinances. He shall institute and prosecute an action in every case of violation of a city ordinance when instructed to do so by the mayor, the city council or the city manager. 
(e)  Prosecution of suits. He shall not be required to prosecute any suit or action arising under the ordinances of the city when, upon investigation of the same, he shall become satisfied that the complaint was instituted maliciously, vexatiously, or without just cause; and he shall dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such terms as he may deem just or equitable. 
(f)  Collection of taxes. He is hereby authorized and instructed to enforce the collection of any and all taxes and special assessments in the collection of which the city is interested and to attend all sales of real or personal property made to enforce the collection of such taxes or special assessments and to bid thereat on behalf of the city. 
(g)  Commissions. The city attorney shall act as the legal advisory for the utilities systems, for the plan commission, for the zoning board of appeals and for all other boards and commissions hereafter established by the city council. He shall perform all legal services as may be required for those boards and commissions. 
(Ord. No. 951, 02-21-95) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/3.1-30-5.  
Secs. 1-2-105—1-2-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CITY ENGINEER 
 
Sec. 1-2-111. - Appointment. 
With the advice and consent of the city council, the mayor may appoint an engineer for the city, who shall serve for the term of the mayor or for such period not exceeding the term of the mayor, as may be designated by the mayor and city council.  
Sec. 1-2-112. - Duties—Salary. 
The city engineer shall make and submit plans, estimates and specifications for any public work which may be proposed or ordered by the city manager or the city council. He shall also examine all public works under his charge and see that the plans, estimates and specifications for the same are properly executed. He shall also receive a salary as established in the annual budget.  
Secs. 1-2-113, 1-2-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 1-2-115. - Public works department established. 
There is hereby established a public works department in and for the city, which shall consist of electric, water, sewer, street, sanitation and engineering divisions.  
Sec. 1-2-116. - Office established. 
There is hereby established the office of director of public works in and for the city, pursuant to state statutes as may hereinafter be referred to as "director".  
Sec. 1-2-117. - Appointment. 
The director of public works shall be appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the council.  
Sec. 1-2-118. - Qualifications. 
The director shall possess, at a minimum, not less than a high school diploma and preferably two or more years of formal education in a college level engineering curriculum or trade school specializing in engineering related subjects. The director shall also have a minimum of two years practical experience in the related fields.  
Sec. 1-2-119. - Duties. 
The director shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  He shall have the general management and supervision of matters pertaining to all utilities of the city, inclusive but not limited to: Electric department, sewer department, water department and street department. 
(b)  He shall be directly responsible to the city manager for complete and proper operation of the city's utilities. 
(c)  He shall control the work and overtime schedule of all employees in public works departments and shall have the power to discipline department employees with the advice and consent of the city manager. 
(d)  He shall be responsible for all equipment assigned to the public works departments, their proper care and maintenance and the proper administration of said departments. 
(e)  He shall be responsible for maintenance coordination of public grounds and buildings of the city, including responsibility for supervision of janitorial and maintenance supplies and equipment. 
(f)  Report to city manager status of all projects and condition of departments. 
(g)  Furnish technical assistance requested by any city inspector and serve as zoning administrator. 
(h)  He shall oversee the reading of all utility meters and the condition of same. 
(i)  He shall cause to prepare bid specifications for the acquisition of all equipment relating to public works departments. 
(j)  He shall be responsible for establishing and maintenance of all equipment inventories. 
(k)  He shall have any further powers and perform further duties as provided by the State of Illinois, by the Code of Ordinances of the city and may be assigned from time to time by the city manager.  
Sec. 1-2-120. - Term of office. 
The office of public works director shall run concurrent with the fiscal year of the city and beyond, unless a written employment agreement states otherwise, and until reappointment or a successor is appointed and approved.  
Sec. 1-2-121. - Removal from office during term. 
The director of public works may be removed from office pursuant to the personnel policy, or by state statute.  
Sec. 1-2-122. - Additional responsibilities. 
Additional position requirements for the director of public works are defined in the job description to the director.  
Sec. 1-2-123. - Salary. 
The salary of the director and other department personnel shall be set by the council, upon the recommendation of the city manager, and may be done so pursuant to a contract of employment with the director, or a collective bargaining agreement for other department personnel. The director shall be exempt of the requirements of wages and hours laws and shall not be covered by any collective bargaining agreement.  
Secs. 1-2-124—1-2-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER—ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 1-2-130. - Creation of position. 
There is hereby created the position of code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall be hired under the provisions of section 1-2-60 of the Revised Code. The code enforcement officer shall also serve as the building inspector, flood plain inspector, and as the zoning administrator. Additional duties shall be outlined in the code enforcement officer's job description and may be amended from time to time by the city manager.  
Sec. 1-2-131. - Duties. 
The code enforcement officer or his authorized representative shall administer and enforce the zoning code, as amended from time to time and is in effect, in accordance with the powers and duties therein set forth, and in furtherance of such authority shall: 
(a)  Issue all Building permits and zoning certificates, and make and maintain records thereof. 
(b)  Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and maintain records thereof. 
(c)  Issue building and zoning occupancy permits as authorized by the zoning code. 
(d)  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and land to determine compliance with the zoning code and to notify in writing the person responsible for any violation found, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(e)  Order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes, discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by statute or by the zoning code to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions. 
(f)  Prepare and cause to be published on or before March 31st of each year, a map showing the existing zoning uses, division, restrictions, regulations, and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31st. 
(g)  Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning code, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special-use permits, planned building developments, variances, appeals, and applications therefor. 
(h)  Provide and maintain a source of public information relative to al matters arising out of the zoning code. 
(i)  Receive, file and forward to the plan commission, all applications for amendments, use variances and special permits, and other matters upon which the plan commission is required to act under the zoning code. 
(j)  Receive, file and forward to the zoning board of appeals all applications for variances, appeals, and other matters upon which the zoning board of appeals is required to act under the zoning code. 
(k)  Keep the mayor, city manager and city council advised of zoning activities by written report once each month, including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated. 
(l)  The code enforcement officer may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the chief of police in enforcing orders, of the city attorney in prosecuting violators, and of other city officials and officers. 
(m)  The code enforcement officer shall perform other duties as prescribed by laws and the City Code and as may be specifically assigned to him by the city manager. Such laws and code may include, but not be limited to, the Mobile Home Code, Subdivision Code, and the Building Code, as adopted and amended from time to time by the city council.  
Secs. 1-2-132—1-2-134. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
Sec. 1-2-135. - Position created. 
There is hereby created the position of director of public safety who shall be appointed by the city manager, with the consent of the majority of the city council. He shall hold his office until removed by recommendation of the city manager, confirmed by a majority vote of the city council, or until a qualified successor is appointed.  
Sec. 1-2-136. - Qualification. 
No person shall be appointed the position of director of public safety unless he shall possess the following qualifications: 
(a)  Bachelors degree from a recognized college or university. 
(b)  Adequate mental and physical health. 
(c)  If he holds the position of chief of police, also a minimum of eight years direct police experience. 
(d)  If also holding the position of chief of police, a minimum of three years of police administrative experience.  
Sec. 1-2-137. - Duties and responsibilities. 
Subject to the direction of the city manager, the director of public safety shall be in charge of the following operations of the following city functions: police department (provided he is also named as chief of police), emergency medical services (EMS), and emergency services and disaster agency (ESDA). In managing these departments, the director of public safety shall: 
(a)  Supervise the staff and operations of the police and EMS departments to insure that equipment and personnel are being used effectively and efficiently. 
(b)  If he is chief of police, report monthly on the status of the police department regarding arrests, accidents, etc. 
(c)  Coordinate the police and EMS personnel to provide for optimum cooperation. 
(d)  Develop and maintain civil defense plans and procedures necessary to deal effectively with disasters. 
(e)  Supervise and recommend all purchases of equipment for his departments. 
(f)  Evaluate and instruct staff members under his direction so that they may improve themselves in their position. 
(g)  The director of public safety shall perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager, no inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the city or laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 97-115, 08-04-97)  
ARTICLE III. - SALARIES 
 
Sec. 1-3-1. - Salaries of city officials. 
The following salaries are hereby established for elected city officials: 
(a)  Mayor. Eight hundred dollars per month. 
(b)  Council. Four hundred dollars per month. 
(Ord. No. 98-126, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 06-22, § 1, 10-16-06) 
State Law reference— See 50 ILCS 145/2; 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-10. 
Note— Compensation of elected officials must be fixed at least 180 days before the beginning of the terms of the officials whose compensation is to be fixed.  
ARTICLE IV. - MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
Sec. 1-4-1. - Participation. 
The city council does hereby authorize and approve membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association and directs the mayor and clerk to execute an Intergovernmental Cooperation Contract with the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association for membership for a period of one year beginning the date the association commences providing risk coverage to its members and each year thereafter unless this ordinance is repealed.  
Sec. 1-4-2. - Contribution. 
Each member hereby agrees to contribute to the association a sum of money to be determined by the association at the time of application based on the needs of the association and the loss experience of the member, which sum shall constitute the cost of the member's first year contribution for membership in the association. Membership contributions for second and subsequent years shall be calculated in accordance with the loss experience of the city, and the needs of the association including total losses and expenditures of the self-insured retention fund of the association. 
(Ord. No. 980, 10-02-95)  
ARTICLE V. - STATE GIFT BAN ACT 
 
Sec. 1-5-1. - Adoption of act. 
(a)  The State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS Sec. 425 et seq.) is hereby adopted as required by Section 83 of the Act (5 ILCS Sec. 425/83). 
(b)  The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed official or any employee of the city. All non-salaried appointed or elected officials are exempted from the Act and the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 1-5-2. - Ethics officer. 
To the extent authorized by law and to the extent required by Section 35 of the Act (5 ILCS Sec. 425/35), the mayor is appointed to serve as the "ethics officer" of the city. The ethics officer's duties shall be as provided in Section 35 of the Act.  
Sec. 1-5-3. - State legislative ethics commission; complaints. 
All complaints for violation of the Act and this article shall be filed with the State legislative ethics commission (created by Section 45(a)(6) of the Act).  
Sec. 1-5-4. - Future amendments to State Gift Ban Act. 
Any amendment to the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS Sec. 425/1 et seq.) that becomes effective after the passage of this article shall be incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city.  
Sec. 1-5-5. - Future declaration of unconstitutionality of State Gift Ban Act. 
(a)  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS Sec. 425/1 et seq.) unconstitutional in its entirety, then this article shall be repealed as of the date that the Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. The article shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court. 
(b)  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS Sec. 425/1 et seq.) unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this article shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this article relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-118, 06-21-99)  
Sec. 1-5-6. - State Officials and Employees Ethics Act. 
(a)  The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this Section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the City of Mascoutah to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5. 
(b)  The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the City of Mascoutah, is hereby prohibited. 
(c)  The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the City of Mascoutah under the Act, is hereby prohibited, as specified by Public Act 93-615. 
(d)  The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee of the City of Mascoutah, is hereby prohibited as specified by Public Act 93-615. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act. 
(f)  The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the act. 
(g)  This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of City of Mascoutah officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a). 
(h)  Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the City of Mascoutah. 
(i)  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City of Mascoutah if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court. 
(j)  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City of Mascoutah. 
(Ord. No. 04-12, § 1, 5-3-04)  
ARTICLE VI. - MASCOUTAH COMMUNITY PLANNING AND BUDGETING PROCESS 
 
Sec. 1-6-1. - Comprehensive plan. 
The comprehensive plan is an official long range policy statement adopted and amended by formal resolution of the city council. It is the major component of the planning process for the city as it guides the long-range, comprehensive decision making process involving primarily physical development and those city actions expected to influence development in the long-term. The comprehensive plan contains goals, objectives, policies and guidelines for growth and redevelopment for the city. Projects and infrastructure improvements within five years necessary to make the comprehensive plan a reality are detailed in the city's capital improvement plan. The comprehensive plan is reviewed annually and published every five years. 
A comprehensive plan provides many benefits including: 
(a)  Serves as a long range vision of the future development and redevelopment of the city. 
(b)  Provides guidance for comprehensive decision making and evaluation by providing goals, sub-goals, objectives and general policy statements. 
(c)  Serves as the primary source document for economic development and a development of intergovernmental agreements. 
(d)  Provides a focus and an opportunity to foster cooperation between the city council, its boards and commissions, the city manager and his staff departments and an ability to inform other units of government and the public of the entity's vision and priorities. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 1-6-2. - Capital improvement plan. 
A capital improvement program, or CIP, is a long-range plan, usually four to six years, that provides a link to the city's comprehensive plan and which identifies capital projects and equipment purchases required to support the city's comprehensive plan and provides a planning schedule. Options and recommendations for financing are detailed in the five-year strategic fiscal plan. Essentially, the CIP plan provides a link to the city comprehensive plan and the five-year strategic fiscal plan. It is a major input to and executed through the city's annual budget. The capital improvement plan is updated annually following the comprehensive plan review and prior to the beginning of the annual budget cycle. 
The CIP provides many benefits including: 
(a)  Allows for a systematic evaluation and prioritization of all potential projects at the same time. 
(b)  Provides the ability to stabilize debt and consolidate projects to reduce borrowing costs by bonding major public improvements and paying for them over time. 
(c)  Serves as a public relations and economic development tool. 
(d)  Provides a focus on preserving and developing the city's infrastructure and ensuring the efficient use of limited public funds. 
(e)  Provides an opportunity to foster cooperation among departments and an ability to inform other units of government of the entity's priorities. 
The CIP typically includes but is not limited to the following information: 
(a)  Council five-year strategic fiscal plan funding vision. 
(b)  A listing of the capital projects or equipment to be purchased. 
(c)  The projects ranked in order of preference. 
(d)  The plan for financing the projects. 
(e)  A timetable for the construction or completion of the project. 
(f)  Justification for the project. 
Overall CIP process: Prior to undertaking the development of the CIP, the council defines the criteria for what kind of projects or equipment is to be included and organize a process for developing the plan. What is defined as a capital project or capital purchase may vary from time to time but is generally depending on the city council's provisioning of the plan. Generally, they will be tangible items that have a life expectancy greater than one year, require debt financing and exceed $50,000.00. The city council annually updates its forecasts where it believes it will face future demands and growth, which will involve an inventory of existing facilities, infrastructure and equipment. In addition, the city council provides basic policies guidance for implementing the plan. 
Because the CIP includes financing issues, the city council should seek the advice and recommendations from their financial advisors the finance commission and bond counsel when projects and or purchases require debt financing. An annual review of the city's current finances and trends detailed in the annual audit is vital. Once the CIP is finalized, the council holds a public hearing before the plan is adopted by the city council. 
Specific steps: 
(a)  Establish a capital planning committee comprised of key department heads and chairmen from key boards and commissions. 
(b)  Take inventory of existing capital assets. 
(c)  Evaluate previously approved, unimplemented or incomplete projects. 
(d)  Assess financial capacity. 
(e)  Solicit, compile and evaluate new project requests. 
(f)  Prioritize CIP projects. 
(g)  Develop and maintain a financing plan (five-year strategic fiscal plan). 
(h)  Adopt the capital improvements program. 
(i)  Monitor and manage approved projects within the CIP. 
(j)  Annually update existing/ongoing capital programs. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 1-6-3. - Five-year strategic fiscal plan. 
The five-year strategic fiscal plan is a long-range plan, which identifies capital projects and equipment purchases required to support the city's comprehensive plan that are identified in the capital improvement plan. The fiscal strategic fiscal plan identifies options for financing larger projects normally requiring multi-year financing that are detailed within the capital improvement plan. Where possible the fiscal strategic fiscal plan groups projects to be bonded. Essentially the fiscal strategic fiscal plan provides a vital link between the comprehensive plan, the capital improvement plan, and the city's annual budget. When the capital program and financing plan (the "plan") are complete they provide a comprehensive report on the city's debt levels, debt service costs and capital projects spending. The five-year strategic fiscal plan is published in the CIP as the executive summary and reviewed annually. 
Overall five-year strategic fiscal plan process: Following the CIP annual update, the council reviews the strategic objectives and projects that require multi-year financing or increasing a tax or the general tax levy to fund. The finance committee works with the city staff to provide a funding strategy and recommendation. 
Specific steps: 
(a)  Council reviews strategic objectives and multi-year funding requirements. 
(b)  Council forwards to the finance committee items to fund and strategies. 
(c)  Council reviews staff forecast of revenues and expenses. 
(d)  Council evaluates previously approved, unimplemented or incomplete projects. 
(e)  Council assess debit strategies and capacity. 
(f)  Finance committee provides recommendations on debt financing to the council. 
(g)  Council adopts the five-year strategic fiscal plan. 
(h)  Council monitors debt projects within the five-year strategic fiscal plan. 
(i)  Adjust tax levy as required to support strategic objectives detailed in the five-year strategic fiscal plan. 
Components of the five-year strategic fiscal plan include but are not limited to: 
(a)  The executive summary provides a high-level summary, including key debt and capital spending strategies and measures. This overview provides highlights of the key components of five-year strategic fiscal plan funding strategies and direction, including overall capital spending and projected levels of debt service costs, debt outstanding, new debt issuances, and debt retirements. 
(b)  Debt affordability includes information related to the city's historical and projected debt levels and debt service costs, as well as detailed comparisons to objective affordability measures. 
(c)  The debt policy and portfolio explains the city's overall debt policy, current guidelines, and information on the reporting of city debt, the levels of fixed and variable rate debt, refunding, and places to find additional information. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 1-6-4. - Annual operating budget process. 
The operating budget is probably a municipality's most important work product. The budget serves a number of functions. At the most basic level it is a legal document that gives city or county officials the authority to incur obligations and pay expenses. It allocates resources among departments, reflecting the legislative body's priorities and policies and controls how much each department may spend. In most jurisdictions, the budget has evolved from just being a bunch of numbers. The budget includes mission statements, goals, and objectives that convey to the citizens the vision for the future of the municipality's elected officials and let the officials communicate why they have allocated the scarce resources in the manner that they did. The budget is also an evaluation tool, comparing commitments made in the previous year's budget with actual accomplishments. 
The annual budget provides many benefits including: 
(a)  Allows for a systematic evaluation and prioritization of all potential projects at the same time. 
(b)  Provides ability to stabilize debt and consolidate projects to reduce borrowing costs by bonding major public improvements and paying for them over time. 
(c)  Serve as a public relations and economic development tool. Provides a focus on preserving and developing the city's infrastructure and ensuring the efficient use of public funds. 
(d)  Provides an opportunity to foster cooperation among departments and an ability to inform other units of government of the entity's priorities. 
The annual budget includes the following information: 
(a)  Projected revenues and expenses. 
(b)  A listing of the capital projects or equipment to be purchased. 
(c)  The projects ranked in order of preference. 
(d)  The spend plan by department. 
(e)  A timetable for the construction or completion of the project. 
(f)  Justification for the project. 
Overall annual budgeting process: The city council annually provides the city manager budget guidance identifying funding priorities normally identified in the five-year strategic fiscal plan. Using the council's budget guidance, the city manager solicits operating inputs from the boards and commissions, city staff, and various support groups and prepares a balanced budget by fund. The city manager submits the proposed budget and impacts if any, to the finance committee. The finance committee reviews the draft budget and submits written findings and recommendations to the city council. The city council amends the budget as required and adopts it by April 30 annually. 
Specific steps: 
(a)  The city council provides the city manager budget guidance by January 31 identifying strategic funding priorities identified in the five-year strategic fiscal plan. 
(b)  Using the council's budget guidance, the city manager prepares a balanced budget by fund and submits the proposed annual budget and impacts if any, to the finance committee and city council for review by February 28. 
(c)  The finance committee reviews the draft budget and submits written findings and recommendations to the city council by March 30. 
(d)  The city council adopts the balanced budget by April 30 annually. 
(e)  Copies of the annual budget are on file in City Hall, the library, and posted on the city web site. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 10-20-08)  
ARTICLE VII. - REVISED FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 1-7-1. - Adopted. 
The Revised Freedom of Information Act Rules and Regulations be and the same are hereby authorized, approved and adopted under and pursuant to the Act, to become effective on January 1, 2010, as attached [see below]. 
The city clerk is hereby designated as the freedom of information officer of the city under and pursuant to Section 3.5 of the Freedom of Information Act and the revised Freedom of Information Act Rules and Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-19, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-09) 
REQUEST FOR INSPECTION OR COPYING OF PUBLIC RECORDS 
RULES & REGULATIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (5 ILCS 140) 
Introduction. 
The Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140 et. seq.), as supplemented and amended since its effective date of July 1, 1984, requires all public bodies in the state to make non-exempt public records available for inspection and copying. The City of Mascoutah not only strives to comply with the law, but also fully endorses the fundamental concept that all persons are entitled to full, accurate, and complete information regarding the affairs of the city and the official acts and policies adopted by city officials and public employees. The City of Mascoutah recognizes that its desire for the active and informed participation of its citizens in the public policy process necessitates as full and as free an access to this information as possible. In determining the parameters of public access to information, the City of Mascoutah also understands its obligations to protect legitimate privacy interests and maintain the efficiency of its administrative operations. 
Pursuant to Section 3 of the Act, the Mascoutah City Council shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the availability of records and procedures to be followed in conformity with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. The rules and regulations contained herein have thus been established by the City of Mascoutah to ensure that its obligations under the law and its philosophical obligation to its citizens to promote openness and transparency are satisfactorily met. These rules are intended to serve as procedural guidelines for citizens and employees and officers of the city in expediting the process of obtaining access to public records. In any instance in which these procedures shall conflict with language contained in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act as now existing or hereafter amended, the terms of the Act shall prevail. 
Procedures for the Request of Inspection or Copying of Records 
Requests for the inspection and copying of nonexempt public records pursuant to FOIA may be made in person at the City of Mascoutah, City Hall, 3 West Main Street, Mascoutah, Illinois, Mondays through Fridays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on holidays. 
The city shall also accept FOIA requests received via facsimile, electronic mail, and through the United States mail. The city is only responsible for responding to requests that it actually receives and is not responsible for transmission or delivered errors for FOIA requests that are submitted through these alternative means. Any requests received by the city after normal business hours shall be considered received on the following business day. 
All requests for public records must be made in writing. 
To ensure that each FOIA request is acted upon in a complete and timely fashion, the requestor should ensure that the public record being sought is clearly identified in his/her request. Requestors should provide as much known information about the requested record as possible (e.g. type of record, approximate date of record, department where record may be located, etc.) The request should indicate whether the records are to be inspected, copied, and/or certified. The city is not obligated to respond to requests that are overly broad or that would place an undue burden upon its operations; nor is the city obligated to interpret or advise requestors as to the meaning or significance of public records that may be provided. 
If the request is being made for a commercial purpose, the requestor must disclose that fact to the city at the time the request is made. It is violation of the Act to knowingly obtain a public record for a commercial purpose without such disclosure. 
Fee Schedule 
Pursuant to 5 ILCS 140/6, the city is given the authority to charge reasonable fees for the duplication and/or certification of public records produced in compliance with FOIA requests. The Freedom of Information Officer is given the authority to grant a waiver or reduction of fees for copying records if the requestor's stated purpose is to obtain information regarding the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial benefit. In determining the amount of any such waiver or fee reduction, the city will also consider the number of records requested and the actual costs of copying. 
Unless otherwise waived, copying fees must be paid in advance of the records being made available to the requestor. The fees are as follows: 
8.5? × 11? documents: 	$0.15/page 
8.5 × 14? documents: 	$0.15/page 
11? × 14? documents: 	$0.15/page 
Audio Tape: 	$5.00/unit 
Compact Disc: 	$5.00/unit 
Certification: 	$1.00/document 
Traffic Accident Reports: 	$5.00/report 
 
For each request form filed, citizens shall be furnished with the first 50 pages of standard, black and white copies at no charge. Fees will not be waived for the first 50 pages of colored copies or copies exceeding 11? × 14? in area, unless a waiver or fee reduction is granted by the freedom of information officer as a means of furthering the public interest. 
Fees to copy blueprints, oversized documents, pamphlets, manuals and any other records which are to be copied by an outside service shall be based on the actual costs incurred by the city. Information regarding these fees will be provided to the requestor before copying. 
City Response to Request for Inspection or Copying Records 
In accordance with the law, the city will respond to all noncommercial requests within five working days of receipt. Responses will be provided to any commercial requests within 21 working days of receipt. The city must respond in one of the following methods: 
A.  Approval of Request. 
If the requested records are available and determined to be nonexempt, the city will advise the requestor of the documents which are available and the cost to copy the records. For commercial requests, the city response will include an estimate of the time required to locate and compile the records requested, as well as the estimated fees to be assessed to the requestor. 
If the requestor has asked to inspect the documents, the city will provide the requestor with notice of a time and location in which the records will be conducted during normal business hours at the City Hall, unless another location is otherwise agreed upon by the city and the requesting party. The city may require that an officer or employee of the city be present during any inspection of public records. A requestor may also be prohibited from bringing bags, brief cases, or other containers into the room in which the inspection takes place. Documents made available for inspection will be held for 14 working days from the date of the city's response and, thereafter, will be re-filed. 
Fees for copies of records, unless waived, must be paid in advance. All copying of documents shall be done by an officer or employee of the city. Upon written request, the city will mail copies of public records to the requestor. 
B.  Notice of extension. Under certain circumstances, the Freedom of Information Act allows the city to provide notice of an extension of time for response to a request. This time period shall not exceed an additional five working days, or a total of 10 working days from the receipt of the original request. Any notice of extension must cite the reason why the extension is necessary. 
C.  Denial of request. Any denial of any part of a request shall be made in writing and shall state the reason(s) for the denial in accordance with Section 3(g), or if the record is determined to be exempt, pursuant to Section 7 of the Freedom of Information Act. 
All denials shall include the name and title of the individual or individuals responsible for the denial of the request, and shall include a detailed factual basis for the application of any exemption claimed. Any denial must also include a notice of the requestor's statutory right to petition the office of the public access counselor in the office of the Illinois Attorney General for review of the denial, as well as the right to judicial review under Section 11 of the Act. In accordance with the provisions of the Act, copies of all denials shall be retained by the Freedom of Information Officer and will be indexed according to the type of exemption asserted and, to the extent feasible, according to the type of records requested. 
If the city determines that a FOIA request should be denied by claiming an exemption under subsection (1)(c) or (1)(f) of Section 7 of the Act, the Freedom of Information Officer shall provide written notice to both the requestor and the public access counselor of the city's intent to deny the request in whole or in part. This notice shall include: a copy of the original FOIA request; the proposed response from the city; and a detailed summary of the city's basis for asserting the exemption. Upon receipt of the notice of intent to deny, the public access counselor shall determine whether or not further inquiry is warranted. Within five working days after receipt of the notice of intent to deny, the public access counselor shall notify the city and the requestor whether further inquiry is warranted. 
Administrative & Judicial Review Procedures 
Any requestor whose request for information has been denied by the city may exercise his/her statutory right to petition the public access counselor in the office of the Illinois Attorney General for review of said denial. A request for review must be filed with the public access counselor not later than 60 days after the date of the final denial. Any such request for review must be in writing, signed by the requestor, and include copies of the original FOIA request and any responses received from the city. 
Upon receipt of a request for review, the public access counselor shall determine whether further action is warranted. If the public access counselor determines that the alleged violation of the Act is unfounded, he/she shall so advise the requestor and the city and no further action will be taken with respect to the compliant. In all other cases, the public access counselor shall forward a copy of the request for review to the city within seven working days after receipt and shall specify the records or other documents that the city shall furnish to facilitate the review. Within seven working days after receipt of the request for review, the Freedom of Information Officer must provide copies of the records requested and shall otherwise fully cooperate with the public access counselor. To the extent that records produced by the city for the purposes of review contain information that is claimed to be exempt, the public access counselor shall not further disclose that information. 
Within seven working days after he/she receives the request for review and request for production of records from the public access counselor, the city may provide an answer to the allegations of the request for review in the form of a letter, brief, or memorandum. The public access counselor shall forward a copy of any such written answer to the person submitting the request for review and the requestor may respond in writing to such answer within seven working days. If the requestor chooses to file a written response to the city's answering of the allegations, he/she must also provide a copy of that response to the city. 
The attorney general shall examine the issues and records submitted in conjunction with any request for review and shall, within 60 days, issue to the requestor and to the city an opinion in response to the request for review. The opinion shall be binding upon both the requestor and the city, subject to administrative review under Section 11.5. The public access counselor may opt to extend the 60-day time period by up to 21 additional working days, provided that he/she sends written notice of such extension to both the requestor and the city. The attorney general may exercise his/her discretion and choose to resolve a request for review by mediation or by a means other than the issuance of a binding opinion. 
Upon receipt of a binding opinion concluding that a violation of the Act has occurred, the Freedom of Information Officer shall either take necessary action immediately to comply with the directive of the opinion, or shall initiate administrative review under Section 11.5. If the opinion concludes that no violation occurred the requestor may initiate administrative review under Section 11.5. 
Any person denied access to inspect or copy any public record shall also have the right to file suit for injunctive or declaratory relief in the Circuit Court of St. Clair County. 
City of Mascoutah FOIA Administrative Procedures 
In accordance with Section 3.5 of the Act, the city council shall designate an employee or officer of the city to serve as freedom of information officer. The designated freedom of information officer may, from time to time, designate additional employees or officers to serve as deputy freedom of information officers for particular departments or divisions of the city as necessary to expedite the FOIA process. Freedom of information officers and deputies shall be charged with the responsibility for implementing these policies and procedures and processing all requests for information in accordance with the terms of the Act. Deputy freedom of information officers shall, at the discretion of the freedom of information officer, be given the authority to act as the primary freedom of information officer for each department or division in which they have been assigned. Each individual designated as a freedom of information officer or deputy shall successfully complete an annual training curriculum through the State of Illinois, as provided in the Act. 
All FOIA requests shall be date stamped upon receipt, the freedom of information officer shall forward a copy of the request to the appropriate contact employee for the department in which the records are located. Upon forwarding the request to the appropriate department, the freedom of information officer shall also indicate the date by which the request must be approved or denied (five working days from the date of receipt). 
The employee responsible for providing the information on behalf of his/her department shall promptly either comply with or deny the request. The employee shall notify the freedom of information officer of his/her action on the request no later than five working days after its receipt. The freedom of information officer shall then respond in writing to the requestor accordingly. If denying the request, the official responsible for the denial must include, in writing, the following information: 
1.  The statutory exemption used as the basis for the denial and the specific reasons for the denial, including a detailed factual basis and citation to supporting legal authority; 
2.  The names/titles of each person responsible for the denial; 
3.  The notice of the requestor's statutory right to petition the public access counselor for review of the denial; and 
4.  The notice of the requestor's statutory right to judicial review under section 11 of the Act. 
If any public record exempt from disclosure contains material which is not exempt, the city shall delete the exempt information and make the remaining information available for inspection and copying. 
If the responsible employee determines that there is not adequate time to gather the requested information, the time limit may be extended by an additional five working days. Extensions should be reserved only for extenuating circumstances. Appropriate reasons for extension include: 
1.  The requested record is in a place other than the office at which the record is being requested. 
2.  The request requires the collection of a substantial number of specified records. 
3.  The request is understood in categorical terms and requires an extensive search for the records responsive to it. 
4.  The request records have not been located in the course of routine search and additional efforts being made to locate them. 
5.  The requested records require examination and evaluation by personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if the records are exempt from disclosure under Section 7 of the Act, or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions. 
6.  The request for records cannot be complied with by the public body within the time limits prescribed by Section 3 of the Act without unduly burdening or interfering with the operations of the public body. 
7.  There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all practicable speed with another public body or among two or more components of a public body having a substantial interest in the determination or in the subject matter of the request. 
When additional time is required for any of the aforementioned reasons the responsible employee shall notify the freedom of information officer as soon as possible, but no later than four working days after receipt of the request. The freedom of information officer shall then immediately send written notice of extension to the requestor, stating the reasons for the extension and the date by which the records will be available or that a denial will be forthcoming. Extensions will not be granted for a period exceeding five working days, except in the most unusual circumstances; provided that any such extraordinary period for extension will first be agreed upon in writing by both the requestor and the freedom of information officer. 
All requests for public records made under the FOIA shall be maintained in a file in an office designated by the freedom of information officer and preserved in accordance with the provisions of the Local Records Act. Documents maintained in this file shall include, but not be limited to, the following: the original request, a copy of the written response, a record of written communications with the requestor, and a copy of all other communications. Additionally, all denials of FOIA requests shall, by law, be indexed according to the statutory basis for the individual denial. To the extent practicable, these records should be further subdivided by type or category of record requested. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 4 of the Act, the Freedom of Information Officer shall be responsible for publishing and maintaining a local FOIA manual, pamphlet, or other substantially similar document containing the following information: 
(1)  A brief description of the City of Mascoutah, including, but not limited to: 
a.  A short summary of its purpose. 
b.  a block diagram of its functional subdivisions. 
c.  The total amount of its operating budget. 
d.  The number and location of each of its separate offices. 
e.  The approximate number of full and part time employees. 
f.  The identification and membership of any board, commission, committee or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the operation of the public body, or which exercises control over its policies or procedures. 
(2)  A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request information and public records. 
(3)  A directory designating by titles and addresses those employees to whom requests for public records should be directed. 
(4)  A schedule of local fees, as allowable under Section 6 of the Act. 
(5)  A reasonably current list of all types or categories of records maintained by the city. 
(6)  A listing of all documents or categories of records that the city shall immediately disclose upon request. 
(7)  A description of the manner in which public records stored by means of electronic data processing may be obtained in a format comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of computer language or printout format. 
All of the foregoing general information shall also be made available for public access on the City of Mascoutah's website. 
(Ord. No. 09-19, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-09)  
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY POLICY WITH REGARD TO THE COLLECTION, USE AND COMMUNICATION OF INDIVIDUAL'S SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS 
This policy is to comply with Public Act 096-0874 of the State of Illinois, cited as the Identity Protection Act. 
 
Sec. 1-8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any individual in the employ of the City of Mascoutah ("city"). 
Publicly post or publicly display means to intentionally communicate or otherwise intentionally make available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-2. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the city shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Publicly post or publicly display in any manner an individual's social security number. 
(2)  Print an individual's social security number on any card required for the individual to access products or services provided by the person or entity. 
(3)  Require an individual to transmit his or her social security number over the Internet, unless the connection is secure or the social security number is encrypted. 
(4)  Print an individual's social security number on any materials that are mailed to the individual, through the U.S. Postal Service, any private mail service, electronic mail, or any similar method of delivery, unless State or federal law requires the social security number to be on the document to be mailed. Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, social security numbers may be included in applications and forms sent by mail, including, but not limited to, any material mailed in connection with the administration of the Unemployment Insurance Act, any material mailed in connection with any tax administered by the department of revenue, and documents sent as part of an application or enrollment process or to establish, amend, or terminate an account, contract, or policy or to confirm the accuracy of the social security number. A social security number that may permissibly be mailed under this section may not be printed, in whole or in part, on a postcard or other mailer that does not require an envelope or be visible on an envelope without the envelope having been opened. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this policy, beginning July 1, 2010, no officer or employee of the city shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Collect, use, or disclose a social security number from an individual, unless (i) required to do so under State or federal law, rules, or regulations, or the collection, use, or disclosure of the social security number is otherwise necessary for the performance of that agency's duties and responsibilities; (ii) the need and purpose for the social security number is documented before collection of the social security number; and (iii) the social security number collected is relevant to the documented need and purpose. 
(2)  Require an individual to use his or her social security number to access an Internet website. 
(3)  Use the social security number for any purpose other than the purpose for which it was collected. 
(c)  The prohibitions in subsection (b) do not apply in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The disclosure of social security numbers to agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors of the city or disclosure to another governmental entity or its agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors if disclosure is necessary in order for the entity to perform its duties and responsibilities; and, if disclosing to a contractor or subcontractor, prior to such disclosure, the officer or employee of the city must first receive from the contractor or subcontractor a copy of the contractor's or subcontractors policy that sets forth how the requirements imposed under this policy on the city to protect an individual's social security number will be achieved. 
(2)  The disclosure of social security numbers pursuant to a court order, warrant, or subpoena. 
(3)  The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers in order to ensure the safety of: City employees, persons committed to correctional facilities, local jails, and other law enforcement facilities or retention centers; wards of the state; and all persons working in or visiting a city facility. 
(4)  The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers for internal verification or administrative purposes. 
(5)  The collection or use of social security numbers to investigate or prevent fraud, to conduct background checks, to collect a debt, to obtain a credit report from a consumer reporting agency under the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act, to undertake any permissible purpose that is enumerated under the federal Gramm Leach Bliley Act, or to locate a missing person, a lost relative, or a person who is due a benefit such as a pension benefit or an unclaimed property benefit. 
(d)  Any standards of the city for the collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers that are stricter than the standards under this policy with respect to the protection of those social security numbers, then, in the event of any conflict with the provisions of this policy, the stricter standards adopted by the city shall control. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-3. - Public inspection and copying of documents. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this policy to the contrary, all officers and employees of the city must comply with the provisions of any other state law with respect to allowing the public inspection and copying of information or documents containing all or any portion of an individual's social security number. All officers and employees of the city must redact social security numbers from the information or documents before allowing the public inspection or copying of the information or documents. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  This policy does not apply to the collection, use, or disclosure of a social security number as required by state or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(b)  This policy does not apply to documents that are required to be open to the public under any state or federal law, rule, or regulation, applicable case law, Supreme Court Rule, or the Constitution of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-5. - Compliance with federal law. 
If a federal law takes effect requiring any federal agency to establish a national unique patient health identifier program, the city shall follow that law. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-6. - Embedded social security numbers. 
Beginning December 31, 2009, no officer or employee of the city may encode or embed a social security number in or on a card or document, including, but not limited to, using a bar code, chip, magnetic strip, RFID technology, or other technology, in place of removing the social security number as required by this policy. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-7. - Identity—Protection requirements. 
(a)  All officers, employees and agents of the city identified as having access to social security numbers in the course of performing their duties to be trained to protect the confidentiality of social security numbers. Training shall include instructions on the proper handling of information that contains social security numbers from the time of collection through the destruction of the information. 
(b)  Only employees who are required to use or handle information or documents that contain social security numbers have access to such information or documents. 
(c)  Social security numbers requested from an individual shall be provided in a manner that makes the social security number easily redacted if required to be released as part of a public records request. 
(d)  When collecting a social security number or upon request by the individual, a statement of the purpose or purposes for which the city is collecting and using the social security number be provided. 
(e)  A written copy of this privacy policy and any amendment thereto, shall be filed with the city council within 30 days after approval of this policy or any amendment thereto. 
(f)  The city shall advise its employees of the existence of the policy and make a copy of the policy available to each employee, and shall also make this privacy policy available to any member of the public, upon request. If the city amends this privacy policy, then the city shall also advise its employees of the existence of the amended policy and make a copy of the amended policy available to each employee. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-8. - Violation. 
Any person who intentionally violates the prohibitions in Section 10 of the Identity Protection Act (section 1-8-2 of this policy) is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-9. - Supersede. 
This policy does not supersede any more restrictive law, rule, or regulation regarding the collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers. 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 1-8-10. - Statement of purpose. 
Attachment "A" 
What does the City of Mascoutah do with your Social Security Number? 
Statement of Purpose for Collection of Social Security Numbers Identity-Protection Policy 
The Identity Protection Act, 5 ILCS 179/1 et seq. , requires each local and State government agency to draft, approve, and implement an Identity-Protection Policy that includes a statement of the purpose or purposes for which the agency is collecting and using an individual's Social Security number (SSN). This statement of purpose is being provided to you because you have been asked by the City of Mascoutah to provide your SSN or because you requested a copy of this statement. 
Why do we collect your Social Security number? 
_____
You are being asked for your SSN for one or more of the following reasons: 
• Complaint mediation or investigation; 
• Crime victim compensation; 
• Vendor services, such as executing contracts and/or billing; 
• Law enforcement investigation; 
• Child support collection; 
• Internal verification; 
• Administrative services; and/or 
• Other: _____ 
What do we do with your Social Security number? 
_____ 
• We will only use your SSN for the purpose for which it was collected. 
• We will not : 
• Sell, lease, loan, trade, or rent your SSN to a third party for any purpose; 
• Publicly post or publicly display your SSN; 
• Print your SSN on any card required for you to access our services; 
• Require you to transmit your SSN over the Internet, unless the connection is secure or your SSN is encrypted; or 
• Print your SSN on any materials that are mailed to you, unless State or Federal law requires that number to be on documents mailed to you, or unless we are confirming the accuracy of your SSN. 
Questions or Complaints about this Statement of Purpose 
_____
Write to the City of Mascoutah: 
City of Mascoutah 
City Clerk's Office 
3 West Main St. 
Mascoutah, IL 62258 
(Ord. No. 10-18, § 2, 11-1-10)  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC COMMENT POLICY 
 
Sec. 1-9-1. - Public comment permitted. 
Public comment shall be listed on each regularly scheduled City Council or commission meeting and persons shall be allowed to address the City Council or commission members as set forth in the following provisions. 
(Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 1-9-2. - City council meeting provisions. 
(a)  The city shall provide two public comment periods in a city council meeting, one at the beginning of the meeting and one at the end of the meeting as listed on the agenda. 
(b)  Individuals wishing to address the city council during the first public comment period are requested to complete the sign-up sheet prior to the start of the meeting. The sign-up sheet will be located at the entrance to the council chambers. Speakers may address the city council in the order listed. Each person may speak for a maximum of three minutes. 
(c)  During the second public comment period, the mayor will then ask if anyone else wishes to address the city council. For this comment period, those who desire to speak who had not previously requested to do so will be recognized in the order of their request. Those who spoke in the first comment period are also eligible to speak in the second comment period. Each person may speak for a maximum of three minutes. 
(d)  Each speaker shall address the city council from the podium. Each speaker shall speak clearly and provide their name and address. Names of individuals will be recorded in the minutes of the meetings. 
(e)  Speakers shall direct their comments to the city council and not to the audience. Council members shall direct their comments to their colleagues or staff members and not to the audience or the speaker. The mayor, city manager or his representative and/or city attorney shall address the speaker if needed. 
(Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 1-9-3. - Commission meeting provisions. 
(a)  One public comment period shall be provided during commission meetings. 
(b)  At the appropriate time in the meeting, the commission chairman shall ask if anyone wishes to address the commission and will determine the order in which speakers will be recognized. Each person may speak for a maximum of three minutes. 
(c)  Speakers shall direct their comments to the commission members and not to the audience. Commission members shall direct their comments to their colleagues or staff members and not to the audience or the speaker. The commission chairman or city manager or his representative and/or city attorney shall address the speaker if needed. 
(Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 1-9-4. - Public hearing provisions. 
Public hearings are held before the city council and/or various commission meetings of the city and provide the public the opportunity to comment on a specific issue(s) for the particular hearing. The public comment period shall follow a presentation of the subject of the hearing by a staff member or their representative. 
(a)  Those wishing to speak or ask questions during the public hearing period are requested to complete the sign-up sheet prior to the start of the public hearing. The sign-up sheet will be located at the entrance to the council chambers. Speakers may address the city council or commission members in the order listed. 
(b)  Each person may speak for a maximum of three minutes. Speakers shall direct their comments to the city council or commission members and not to the audience. Speakers shall limit their comments to the subject of the hearing. 
(c)  City council or commission members shall direct their comments to their colleagues or staff members and not to the audience or the speaker. The mayor, commission chairman, city manager or his representative and/or city attorney shall address the speaker if needed. 
(d)  These provisions shall not apply to public hearings conducted by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 1-9-5. - Conduct. 
(a)  If numerous persons wish to speak on a single topic, said persons shall be recognized, but repeated comments shall be discouraged. 
(b)  Speakers, the public audience, and the city council or commission members shall maintain proper decorum at all times and shall not use abusive or foul language, make personal attack comments or exhibit unruly behavior. Any person who poses a threat or violates these decorum guidelines is subject to removal from the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 6-1-15)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS  
ARTICLE I. - DOGS 
 
Secs. 3-1-1—3-1-5. - Repealed. 
(Ord. No. 01-101, 04-02-01)  
Sec. 3-1-6. - Dog killed after five days—Redemption. 
All dogs running at large within said city are hereby declared to be nuisances, whether the same are with or without collars marked as required by this article, and shall be taken up by a police officer or animal control officer and placed in a suitable pound as may be provided by said city. If the owner of any such dog is known or may be ascertained by the number of the registration shown by the license tag attached to the collar of said dog, then said owner shall be immediately notified that said dog has been impounded; said owner may claim the same and have it released upon procuring a license if needed for said dog as herein provided, and by paying a fee of $20.00 plus the amount of $5.00 per day for impounding the same, within five days from the time such dog was placed in pound. All dogs not so released or claimed within five days from the time same were impounded shall be removed by the police or other employee, and destroyed of in a humanely manner. Owner must provide proof of vaccination and procure a license in order to redeem. 
(Ord. No. 01-101, 04-02-01)  
Sec. 3-1-7. - Dog defined. 
The word "dog" as used in this article shall be held and construed to mean all animals of the canine species, both male and female.  
Sec. 3-1-8. - Inoculation. 
An annual inoculation certificate shall be required, in accordance with St. Clair County regulations. 
(Ord. No. 01-101, 04-02-01)  
ARTICLE II. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-2-1. - Animals at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit any animal of any kind, including cats, to run at large within the city. Parades of animals, consider wild animals in the eyes of the law, may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  The chief of police shall take up and impound such animals and fowls known to be at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and confine the same in the pound to be provided for that purpose. The water fowl that reside on the Mascoutah Reservoir are excluded. 
(c)  If any animal is not redeemed within five days by owner first paying an impoundment fee of $20.00 per animal plus $5.00 per animal per day for the cost of care, then the chief of police or his designee shall dispose of the animal humanely, if of no value, or may sell the animal and remit the proceeds to the city treasurer. Within six months thereafter, the owner of the animal, upon proving his ownership of the animal may claim the proceeds of the sale, less the cost of impounding, care and sale of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 687, 05-15-87; Ord. No. 954, 03-06-95)  
Sec. 3-2-2. - Cruelty. 
No person shall treat cruelly any animal in the city in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads, or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.  
Sec. 3-2-3. - Dangerous animals. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city, exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the chief of police.  
Sec. 3-2-4. - Noises. 
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace and loud noises at any time of the day or night.  
Sec. 3-2-5. - Killing dangerous animals. 
The members of the police department or any other person in the city, are hereby authorized to kill any dangerous animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.  
Sec. 3-2-6. - Diseased animals. 
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under supervision of the health officer. 
It is hereby made the duty of the health officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of contagion or infection, except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act.  
Sec. 3-2-7. - Housing. 
No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean, or unwholesome, and it shall be unlawful to keep any live swine or pigs in the city.  
Sec. 3-2-8. - Animal waste. 
It shall be the responsibility of the animal owner or person having custody of any animal to immediately remove or arrange for the timely removal of all animal waste deposited by said animal on any property other than the owner's property. Owners shall not allow the accumulation of animal waste on their property to become noxious or a nuisance to adjoining property owners.  
ARTICLE III. - VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 3-3-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article: 
Dangerous dog means any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places. 
Enclosure means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the enclosure. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. 
Found to be vicious dog means: 
(1)  that the city manager, an animal control warden, or a law enforcement officer has conducted an investigation and made a finding in writing that the dog is a vicious dog as defined in "vicious dog" subsection (1) and, based on that finding, the city manager, an animal control warden, or the director has declared in writing that the dog is a vicious dog; or 
(2)  that the circuit court has found the dog to be a vicious dog as defined in "vicious dog" subsection (1) and has entered an order based on that finding. 
Impounded means taken into the custody of the public pound in the city or town where the vicious dog is found. 
Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property. 
(2)  Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(3)  Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or with special equipment. 
(4)  Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation. 
(5)  Any individual dog which has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three separate occasions. 
No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is specific as to breed. 
If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be subject to enclosure.  
Sec. 3-3-2. - Unlawful to maintain. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are: 
(a)  If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the dog or 
(b)  To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the animal control warden, or the police and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection.  
Sec. 3-3-3. - Owner's responsibility. 
If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within seven working days, the dog may be humanely dispatched. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be released to the owner until the Administrator, an animal control warden, or the city manager approves the enclosure as defined in this section. 
No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog.  
Sec. 3-3-4. - Dog permitted to leave premises. 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by permitting any dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods. 
Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with this Code. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the city manager of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the city manager advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The city manager shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes reported to him.  
Sec. 3-3-5. - Injunction. 
The city manager, the city attorney, or any citizen of the city in which a dangerous dog or other animal exists may file a complaint to enjoin all persons from maintaining or permitting such, to abate the same, and to enjoin the owner of such dog or other animal from permitting same to leave his premises when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods. Upon the filing of a complaint in the circuit court, the court, if satisfied that this nuisance may exist, shall grant a preliminary injunction with bond in such amount as the court may determine enjoining the defendant from maintaining such nuisance. If the existence of the nuisance is established, the owner of such dog or other animal shall be in violation of this Act, and in addition the court shall enter an order restraining the owner from maintaining such nuisance and may order that such dog or other animal be humanely dispatched. 
State Law reference— See 510 ILCS Sec. 5/17.  
Sec. 3-3-6. - Liability of owner of dog attacking or injuring person. 
If a dog, or other animal, without provocation, attacks or injures any person who is peaceably conducting himself in any place where he may lawfully be, the owner of such dog or other animal is liable in damages to such person for the full amount of the injury sustained. 
State Law reference— See 510 ILCS Sec. 5/16.  
Sec. 3-3-7. - Right of entry—Inspections. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Code and making inspections hereunder, the city manager, or his authorized representative, or any officer of the law may enter upon private premises to apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a dangerous dog or other animal, or a dog or other animal thought to be infected with rabies. If, after request therefor, the owner of such dog or other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog or other animal to the officer, the owner shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 954, 03-06-95) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Secs. 5/11-1-1 and 5/11-20-9; 510 ILCS Sec. 5/17; 510 ILCS Sec. 5/24.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITED ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 3-4-1. - Animals regulations. 
The City of Mascoutah hereby finds that to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the city it is necessary to prohibit the ownership of certain animals within the city and to establish regulations governing the ownership of animals allowed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 3-4-2. - Owning certain animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to own, within the city limits, any animal listed in section 3-4-3, excepted where provided for in this code in the agricultural zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 3-4-3. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  Mammals. 
Artiodactyla (such as cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, potbelly pigs) 
Canidae (such as coyotes, wolves, foxes, hybrid wolf dogs) except domestic dogs 
Chiroptera (bats such as fruit bats, myotis, flying foxes) 
Edentates (such as anteaters, sloths, armadillos) 
Felidae (such as tigers, leopards, cougars) except domestic cats 
Hyaenidae (such as hyenas) 
Lagomorpha (such as hares, pikas, rabbits) 
Marsupials (such as kangaroos, opossums, wallabies) 
Mustelidae (such as mink, skunks, weasels, otters, badgers) except domestic ferrets 
Non-human primates (such as chimpanzees, gorillas, monkeys, lemurs) 
Perissodactyla (such as horses, donkeys, jackasses, mules) 
Proboscidae (elephants) 
Procyonidae (such as coatimundi, cacomistles, raccoons) 
Rodentia (such as porcupines and prairie dogs) except rodents which do not exceed three pounds and are derived from self-sustaining captive populations 
Ursidae (bears) 
Viverridae (such as mongooses, civets, genets) 
(b)  Birds. 
Anseriformes (such as ducks, geese, swans, screamers) 
Galliformes (such as chickens, pheasants, grouse, guinea fowls, turkeys) 
Struthioniformes (flightless ratites such as ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, emus, kiwis) 
(c)  Reptiles. 
Crocodylia (such as alligators, crocodiles, gavials) 
All snakes which reach an adult length larger than six feet 
All lizards which reach an adult length larger than two feet 
(d)  Other. 
All venomous and poisonous animals 
(Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 6-20-16)  
Chapter 4 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
ARTICLE I. - ESTABLISHMENT OF AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 4-1-1. - Established. 
The city council establishes boards, commissions, and committees (hereafter referred to as "commissions") to assist the council in its various legislative and decision-making duties. These "commissions" are established and assigned to activity and subject areas appropriate to the logical needs of a municipality. "Commission" types, duties, authorities and structures are defined within this section. Additional articles follow, providing specific provisions suitable for the responsibilities of said "commission". 
No more than one council member may be appointed to the library board. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-2. - Types of boards/commissions. 
The council establishes and maintains various "commissions" by type and authority as follows: 
(a)  Standing. These are "commissions" that are permanent and meet regularly and frequently. Current "commissions" in this category are: 
Library board. 
Parks and recreation commission. 
Planning commission. 
Zoning board of appeals. 
Economic development commission. 
Finance commission. 
(b)  Standard. These are permanent special purpose "commissions" that meet annually or upon call as needs dictate. Current "commissions" in this category are: 
Cemetery board of managers. 
Fire and police commissioners board. 
Police pension board. 
(c)  Ad hoc. These are committees set up for specific purposes which typically disband or suspend activities after work is completed. Current committees in this category are: 
[Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 3-9-12)  
Sec. 4-1-3. - Purpose and objectives. 
By the nature of the council/"commissions" structure, it is intended that each of these "commissions" are advisory to the council. Each group is responsible for certain activities and therefore the purpose and objectives for each "commission" will vary. Certain "commissions" will have authorities that do not require advice to council prior to implementation. In these circumstances, the code for that "commission" will explicitly state the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-4. - Appointment, term of office, vacancies. 
Each appointed "commission" member shall hold office for a specified term of office, depending on the "commission". Most "commissions" provide for four-year terms, where the initial appointments to the "commission" are staggered to assure reasonable transitions, maintaining a core of seasoned members. Vacancies on the "commission" shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, maintaining the cycles. All regular terms expiring on cycle, expire on April 30th annually. Expired terms leave the position unfilled until the position is appointed and ratified by the council. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-5. - Officers elected, organization and rules. 
"Commissions" shall operate under the general rules and regulations established by the city council. Each "commission" may adopt from time to time such additional rules and regulations to ensure proper decorum and efficient operations consistent with the City Code and state law, as they may deem necessary to effectuate their responsibility to the council. 
The "commission" shall keep written records of its proceedings. "Commissions" shall file an annual report with the mayor and city council describing its activities for the period recorded. 
Additional periodic reports shall be filed on request by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-6. - Meetings, meeting structure and procedure. 
Regular meetings of each "commission" shall be held as appropriate to the duties and responsibilities of said "commission". Standing "commissions" typically meet at consistent times and places monthly. At the request of any two members of the "commission", the president/chairman shall call a special meeting; notice of such meeting and the purpose thereof shall be given all members of the "commission" at least 48 hours in advance and the business transacted at such meetings shall be limited to that contained in such notice. Generally, the order of business at said meeting shall be as follows: 
(a)  Roll call. 
(b)  Minutes. Approval. 
(c)  Report of the treasurer. 
(d)  Old business. 
(e)  New business. 
(f)  Adjournment. 
A quorum shall consist of the majority of that "commission's" membership. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-7. - Authorities/powers/duties. 
Each of the "commissions" shall be provided with additional authorities/powers/duties as required for that "commission" to perform its assigned duties. These additional authorities shall be identified within that "commission's" code. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-8. - Funding/budget. 
The "commissions" shall operate under such budget as may be established by the annual budget of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-9. - Membership and compensation. 
Each "commission" shall have an established number of voting members, appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council. The city manager and mayor (or council member) may serve as liaisons to each "commission", unless otherwise described in that "commission" regulations. 
Unless otherwise stated in specific "commission" code, all "commissions" positions are voluntary and are not compensated for services. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-10. - Sunshine laws. 
All meetings conducted by "commissions" or acts requiring compliance with State of Illinois "Sunshine Laws", therefore, each meeting shall at a minimum, provided posted agendas complaint with said laws. This also requires that business conducted during these meetings shall generally follow those items posted. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-11. - Location of meetings. 
All meetings conducted by "commissions" shall be conducted at City Hall. Exceptions based on special circumstances may be approved by council no later than two weeks prior to the meeting. One standing exception is provided for the library board, which conducts its business at the library, which is directly adjacent to City Hall. The library boards meetings shall be additionally posted at City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-1-12. - Conflict of interest. 
All members of "commissions" are responsible for familiarizing themselves with and comply with the Public Officer Prohibited Activities Act, 50 ILCS Sec. 5. All "commissions" members are responsible for notifying the city manager and mayor should circumstances place them in a potential conflict of interest. The city attorney will provide guidance to city officials concerning conflict of interest matters. 
"Commission" members may, from time to time, be sitting as decision makers where the applicant has a financial relationship with the sitting member and where the "commission" decision may cause the appearance of possible financial gain to the sitting member. In such events, to avoid any appearance of conflict of interest, the affected sitting member must excuse him/herself and move to the audience seating area during discussion and action on the item. 
(Ord. No. 02-113, 07-01-02; Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 10-17-05)  
ARTICLE II. - PLAN COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 4-2-1. - Established. 
A plan commission is hereby created under authority of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 65, Sections 5/11-12-4 through 5/11-12-12.  
Sec. 4-2-2. - Membership. 
The plan commission shall consist of seven members; said members to be residents or own or be employed by a business within the jurisdictional limits of the zoning code of the city, appointed by the mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the plan commission and subject to the approval of the city council. The city manager and a member of the council shall be "ex-officio" members of the commission.  
Sec. 4-2-3. - Term of office: decisions; absences. 
The members shall serve for a period of four years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except that if the council deems it advisable, they may receive such compensation as provided by the budget ordinance. A majority of the quorum present shall be required for an official decision. A member may be dismissed for missing three consecutive meetings by the mayor and a replacement named. The mayor shall be notified by the chairman or secretary when a member has missed the required three meetings. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 4-2-4. - Procedure. 
The plan commission shall elect such officers as it may deem necessary and adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with the City Code and state law. The commission shall keep written records of its proceedings. It shall be open at all times for and to the inspection of the public, and the commission shall file an annual report with the mayor and city council, setting forth its transactions and recommendations.  
Sec. 4-2-5. - Powers and duties. 
The plan commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  To prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the city and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits of the city and not included in any other municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan or part thereof of the city. Such plan shall be advisory, except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the city council. 
All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of the plan and ordinances with the city clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. To provide for the health, safety, comfort, and convenience of the inhabitants of the city and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted by law. 
(b)  To designate land suitable for annexation to the city and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation. 
(c)  To recommend to the city council of this city, from time to time, such changes in the comprehensive plan or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary. 
(d)  To prepare and recommend to the city council, from time to time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance to the official comprehensive plan. 
(e)  To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan or parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally, to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan. 
(f)  To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding. 
(g)  To cooperate with municipal or regional plan commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area subject to approval of the city council. 
(h)  To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under authority of an act of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois, as may be conferred by the city council. 
(i)  To exercise any additional duties as prescribed in chapter 40, zoning, as amended.  
Sec. 4-2-6. - Land subdivision or re-subdivision and the official map. 
At any time or times before or after the formal adoption of the official comprehensive plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be designated by ordinance, which may consist of the whole area included within the official comprehensive plan or one or more geographical or functional parts and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within one and one-half miles from the corporate limits of the city. All requirements for public hearing, filing notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds and filing of the plan and ordinances, including the official map with the clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. No map or plat of any subdivision or re-subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the city or within contiguous territory which is not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design and standards governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities, street lights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment in conformity with the applicable requirements of the Code, including the official map.  
Sec. 4-2-7. - Improvements. 
The city clerk shall furnish the plan commission for its consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any nature. The plan commission may report in relation thereto, if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the city council.  
Sec. 4-2-8. - Expenditures. 
Expenditures of the commission shall be at the discretion of the city council and if the commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or services, it shall be done upon authority of the city council and appropriations by the city council therefor. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-12-4 and 5/11-12-12.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS 
 
Sec. 4-3-1. - Board established. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes for municipalities of a population of at least 5,000 and not more than 250,000, a board of fire and police commissioners consisting of three persons is established for the city and shall hereinafter be referred to as the "board". 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.  
Sec. 4-3-2. - Appointment; vacancies. 
Within 30 days after this article becomes effective, the mayor shall appoint the first members of the board. One of the members shall be appointed to serve until the end of the then current municipal year, another to serve until the end of the municipal year next ensuing, and the third to serve until the municipal year second next ensuing. Every member shall serve until his successor is appointed and has qualified. Vacancies on the board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-2.  
Sec. 4-3-3. - Term of office. 
Subsequent appointments to the board shall be made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three years and until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. No such appointment, however, shall be made by any mayor within 30 days before the expiration of his term of office.  
Sec. 4-3-4. - Chairman elected. 
The members of the Board shall elect a chairman to serve during the municipal fiscal year. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-2.  
Sec. 4-3-5. - Quorum. 
A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-2.  
Sec. 4-3-6. - Oath and bond. 
The members of the board shall be considered officers of the city and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as may be required by the city council.  
Sec. 4-3-7. - Conflicting offices. 
No person holding an office of the city shall be a member of the board or the secretary thereof. The acceptance of any such office by a member of the board shall be treated as a resignation of his office as a member of the board or the secretary thereof. No person shall be appointed a member of the board who is related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the city. No more than two members of the board shall belong to the same political party existing in the city at the time of such appointments and as defined in Section 5/10-2 of the Election Code, Illinois Compiled Statutes. If only one or no political party exists in the city at the time of such appointments, then state or national political party affiliation shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed as member of the board. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-3.  
Sec. 4-3-8. - Removal from office. 
Members shall not be subject to removal, accept for cause, upon written charges and after an opportunity to be heard within 30 days in his, her or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the city council of the city. A majority vote of the elected members of the city council of the city shall be required to remove any such member from office. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-3.  
Sec. 4-3-9. - Employment of secretary. 
The board may employ a secretary, or may designate one of its own members to act as secretary. The secretary (1) shall keep the minutes of the board proceedings, (2) shall be the custodian of all records pertaining the business of the board, (3) shall keep a record of all examinations held, (4) shall perform all other duties the board prescribes and (5) shall be custodian of the seal of the board, if one is adopted, and the board is hereby authorized to adopt an official seal and to prescribe the form thereof by resolution of the board. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-20.  
Sec. 4-3-10. - Compensation of secretary. 
The secretary may be paid a reasonable compensation for his or her services, to be fixed by the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities may also fix the compensation to be paid to the members of the board, but until the corporate authorities make provision therefor, the members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-22.  
Sec. 4-3-11. - Powers of board. 
The board of police commissioners shall have the powers set forth in Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (65 ILCS Secs. 5/10-2.1-1 to 5/10-2.1-17 and 5/10-2.1-19 et seq.), said powers shall include the power to discipline officers or members of the police department pursuant to statute. (Ord. No. 99-107; 03-15-99)  
Sec. 4-3-12. - Appointments of chief and officers. 
The city manager shall appoint each new officer or member of the police department with the advice and consent of the city council, from the highest name on the eligibility list as prepared by the board of fire and police commissioners. 
The city manager shall take applications and interview for the position of chief of police and shall appoint the chief of police with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 893, 05-17-93)  
Sec. 4-3-13. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
The board shall adopt and publish rules and regulation to carry out the purpose of the Illinois Compiled Statutes and to govern appointments and removals in accordance with the provisions of said statute. Such rules and regulations shall be adopted according to the procedure required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes. The board, from time to time, may revise such rules and regulations in the same manner as for the adoption of the original rules and regulations. No such rule or regulation shall be made by the board to govern the operation of the police department or the conduct of its members. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-5.  
Sec. 4-3-14. - City attorney represents board. 
The city attorney shall represent the board and shall handle prosecutions before the board.  
Sec. 4-3-15. - Application of law. 
This article shall apply only to full-time policemen and firemen of the city and not to any other personnel of any kind or description.  
Sec. 4-3-16. - Statutes adopted. 
Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, is hereby incorporated in and made part of this law the same as if recited herein verbatim. In case of any conflict between the provisions of this article and said division, said division shall control. If and as said division is amended, from time to time, the provisions of this article in conflict with said division as a result of said amendment, shall be construed as having been amended by the amendment to the division and shall be read, construed and applied in accordance with the provisions of said amended division. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.  
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE PENSION BOARD 
 
Sec. 4-4-1. - Board established. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes for municipalities with a population of 5,000 or more, a police pension fund is established for the benefit of police officers of the police department and their surviving spouses, children and certain other dependents, as provided in the aforesaid Illinois Pension Code. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-101 et seq.  
Sec. 4-4-2. - Terms. 
The terms used in this article have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Board means the board of trustees of the police pension fund. 
Police officer means any person who (1) is appointed to the police force of the police department and sworn and commissioned to perform police duties; (2) is found upon examination of a duly licensed physician or physicians selected by the board to be physically and mentally fit to perform the duties of a police officer; and (3) within three months after receiving his or her first appointment, and if reappointed within three months thereafter, makes written application to the board to come under the provisions of this article and Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code. 
Salary means the annual salary, including longevity, attached to the police officer's rank, as established by the city's budget ordinance, including any compensation for overtime which is included in the salary so established, but excluding any "overtime pay", "holiday pay", "bonus pay", "merit pay", or any other cash benefit not included in salary so established.  
Sec. 4-4-3. - Pension funds. 
The police pension fund shall consist of the following moneys which shall be set apart by the treasurer of the city: 
(a)  All moneys derived from the taxes levied under; (See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-125). 
(b)  Contributions by police officers under Illinois Compiled Statutes; Ch. 40; Sec. 5/3-125.1. 
(c)  All moneys accumulated by the city under any previous legislation establishing a fund for the benefit of disabled or retired police officers. 
(d)  Donations, gifts or other transfers authorized by the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-125.  
Sec. 4-4-4. - Tax levy. 
The city council shall annually levy and tax upon all the taxable property of the city at the rate on the dollar which will produce an amount which, when added to the deductions from the salaries or wages of police officers, and revenues available from other sources, will equal a sum sufficient to meet the annual requirements of the police pension fund. The annual requirements to be provided by such tax levy are equal to (1) the normal cost of the pension fund for the year involved, plus (2) the amount necessary to amortize the fund's unfunded accrued liabilities as provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes; Ch. 40; Sec. 5/3-127. The tax shall be levied and collected in the same manner as the general taxes of the city, and in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all property within the city. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-125.  
Sec. 4-4-5. - Employee contribution. 
Each police officer shall contribute to the police pension fund nine and ninety-one hundredths percent of his or her salary which shall be deducted monthly. However, the chief of police may elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund rather than in the fund created under this article. Such election shall be irrevocable, and shall be filed in writing, with the board. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-127.  
Sec. 4-4-6. - Board membership. 
A board of five members shall constitute a board of trustees to administer the police pension fund and to designate the beneficiaries thereof. The board shall be known as the "board of trustees of the police pension fund of the city". 
Two members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor, one of whom shall serve for one year beginning on the second Tuesday in May after the municipality comes within the provisions of Article I of the Illinois Pension Code. The other appointed member shall serve for two years beginning on the same date. The successors to each of the foregoing trustees shall serve for two years each or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
Two members of the board shall be elected from the active participants of the pension fund by such active participants. One member of the board shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries. The election of these board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April, at such place or places in the city and under the Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the board. 
The active pension fund participants shall be entitled to vote only for the active participant members of the board. All beneficiaries of legal age may vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at such election. The term of elected members shall be two years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after the election. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS 5/3-128.  
Sec. 4-4-7. - Vacancies and resignations. 
Upon the death, resignation, or inability to act of any elective board member, his or her successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election, to be called by the board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-128.  
Sec. 4-4-8. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall neither receive nor have any right to receive any salary from the pension fund for services performed as trustees in that office. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-128.  
Sec. 4-4-9. - Quarterly meetings. 
The board shall hold annually regular quarterly meetings in July, October, January and April, and special meetings as called by the president. 
At the regular July meeting, the board shall select from its members a president, vice-president, secretary, and assistant secretary to serve for one year and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-130.  
Sec. 4-4-10. - Vice-president's duties. 
The vice-president shall perform the duties of the president during any vacancy in that office, or during the president's absence from the city, or if he or she is by reason of illness or other causes unable to perform the duties of the office. 
The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of such office. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-130.  
Sec. 4-4-11. - Powers and duties. 
The Board shall have the powers and duties provided in 40 ILCS 5/3-132 through 40 ILCS 5/3-140.1 of the Illinois Pension Code.  
Sec. 4-4-12. - Annual statements. 
On the second Tuesday in May annually, the treasurer and all other officials of the city who had the custody of any pension funds herein provided, shall make a sworn statement to the pension board, and to the mayor and city council of all moneys received and paid out by them on account of the pension fund during the year, and of the amount of funds then on hand and owing to the pension fund. All surplus then remaining with any official other than the treasurer shall be paid to the treasurer of the city. Upon demand of the pension board, any official shall furnish a statement relative to the official method of collection or handling of the pension funds. All books and records of that official shall be produced at any time by him for examination and inspection by the board. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-141.  
Sec. 4-4-13. - Report to city council. 
The board shall report to the city council on the condition of the pension fund. The report shall be made prior to the city council meeting held for the levying of taxes for the year for which the report is made. The board shall certify: 
(a)  The assets in its custody at such time; 
(b)  The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from deductions from the salaries of police officers, and from all other sources; and 
(c)  The estimated amount required during said calendar year to (a) pay all pensions and other obligations provided in this article, and (b) to meet the annual requirements of the fund as provided in section 4-3-4 hereinabove. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-143.  
Sec. 4-4-14. - Illinois Pension Code adopted. 
The provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 40, Section 5/3-101 et seq. are incorporated by reference herein. In case of any conflict between this ordinance and said article, the applicable provisions of said article shall control, and as said Code is amended from time to time, the provisions hereof, insofar as any variance may develop therefrom, if any, shall automatically be construed so as to conform therewith. 
(Ord. No. 616, 10-04-71) 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/3-101 et seq.  
ARTICLE V. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 4-5-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the economic development commission is to assist the city council promoting economic development in the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 4-5-2. - Commission established. 
The Mascoutah Economic Development Commission (hereinafter, the "commission") is hereby established in accordance with the Illinois Constitution and State Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 4-5-3. - Membership and compensation. 
The commission shall consist of five voting members and shall be established and composed of the following classification of members: 
(a)  Appointed commissioners. A total of five voting commissioners shall be selected on the merits of the appointees experience and their potential contribution to this commission. Specific qualifications may be identified and incorporated in section 4-5-5, officers, by-laws. 
(b)  The following city officials will serve as non-voting members: 
(1)  The city manager or his/her representative. 
(2)  Economic development coordinator serves as secretary of the commission. 
Each commission member shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 4-5-4. - Appointment, term, vacancies. 
The city manager and economic development coordinator shall serve on the commission by virtue of their positions. All other commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
Mayoral appointments to the commission shall be based on specific expertise in the areas of economic development, business marketing, and real estate (commercial real property expertise highly desired) with the advice and consent of the city council. The majority of the commission members shall be residents of the City of Mascoutah. 
Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant. This replacement appointment shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
Thereafter, each appointed commission member shall hold office for four years. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 4-5-5. - Officers, by-laws. 
The mayor shall select one of its members to act as chairman. The commission is hereby authorized to adopt rules of order, regular meeting times and dates, and other limited protocols to assure reasonable organization and function, with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 4-5-6. - Commission powers and duties. 
The commission shall make recommendations to the city council, working in close coordination with the economic development coordinator to facilitate promotion of commercial, industrial, and residential development in the city. These include, but are not limited to, recommendations to establish tax increment financing districts, special service areas, enterprise zones, economic development incentives, intergovernmental agreements, marketing programs, annexation, and final actions on acquisition and sale of real property. 
The city council is the final approving authority on all actions that come from this commission. 
The commission shall record minutes of all meetings and is a standing permanent commission, meeting regularly and frequently or as requested by the city council, city manager, or economic development coordinator. This commission will work in cooperation with other commissions under the city, or city council as required. Cooperation may include combined meetings wherein a comprehensive recommendation may be formulated by and between commissions. 
The economic development commission shall make recommendations to the city council on matters essential to the economic development of the city as expressed in the city comprehensive plan document. The commission assists the economic development coordinator, as required with the advice and consent of the city council. The economic development coordinator is by position responsible for general facilitation of economic development for the city. Areas of authority and powers are specifically vested in the city manager and or his designated representative, the economic development coordinator, with the advice and consent of the city council. 
The commission may, with the advice and consent of the city council, form subcommittees to investigate or develop specific topics. Once the topic for a subcommittee has been approved by the council, the commission may appoint members to the subcommittee. Subcommittee members may consist of commission members or members selected from the community. 
The economic development commission shall make periodic reports of its progress and shall make its recommendations to the mayor and city council regularly, but not less than every six months. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 4-5-7. - Funding of projects/annual budget. 
The commission shall operate under such budget as may be established by the annual budget of the city. Requests for budget considerations shall be prepared and submitted to the city council in a timely manner during the budgeting process. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 4-5-8. - Staffing and support. 
The city manager shall provide sufficient staff support to the commission. Support shall include professional and clerical assistance as needed to sustain the economic development activities required. 
(Ord. No. 03-101, 01-06-03; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-7-08) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-74-2.1 et seq. and 50 ILCS Sec. 445/1.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, adopted March 19, 2012, repealed §§ 4-6-1—4-6-4, which pertained to historic preservation commission. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 4-6-1—4-6-4. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 4-7-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the parks and recreation commission is to assist the city council in the promotion of parks and recreation in the City of Mascoutah. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-7-2. - Commission established. 
The Mascoutah Parks and Recreation Commission (hereinafter, the "commission") is hereby established in accordance with State Statutes and the Illinois Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-7-3. - Membership and compensation. 
The commission shall consist of seven voting members and shall be established and composed of the following classification of members: 
(a)  Appointed commissioners. A total of seven voting commissioners shall be selected on the merits of the appointees' experience and their potential contribution to this commission. Specific qualifications may be identified and incorporated in section 4-5-5, officers, by-laws. 
(b)  The following city officials will serve as non-voting members: 
(1)  The mayor or his/her representative. 
(2)  City manager. 
Each commission member shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-7-4. - Appointment, term, vacancies. 
The mayor, city manager, and director of parks and recreation shall serve on the commission by virtue of their office or position. All other commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
Initial appointments of the commission: one member shall be appointed for a one-year term, two members shall be appointed for two-year terms, two members shall be appointed for three-year terms, and two members shall be appointed for four-year terms. 
Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant. This replacement appointment shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
Thereafter, each appointed commission member shall hold office for four years. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-7-5. - Officers, by-laws. 
The commission shall select one of its members to act as chairman, and shall select such other officers as it deems necessary. The commission is hereby authorized to adopt rules of order, regular meeting times and dates, and other limited protocols to assure reasonable organization and function, with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-7-6. - Commission powers and duties. 
This commission shall, on behalf of the city council, direct and facilitate promotion of and facilitation of parks and recreation in the city. The council shall take final action on certain items that come before it from this commission. 
This commission will work in cooperation with other commissions under the city council. 
Cooperation may include combined meetings wherein a comprehensive recommendation may be formulated by and between commissions. 
Commission powers. The parks and recreation commission shall work in cooperation with the city manager and the city council, and general facilitation of parks and recreation for the city. Areas of authority and powers are as follows: 
(a)  Facilitate inter-government agreements and mutually beneficial partnerships. 
(b)  To search out and facilitate proposals for the development/redevelopment of Mascoutah's parks. 
(c)  To facilitate applications for and accept grants from the United States and the State of Illinois or any instrumentality for the City of Mascoutah Parks and Recreation projects. 
(d)  To facilitate contracts with any public or private agency or person for the purpose of implementing parks and recreation proposals with final consent of the city council. 
(e)  To facilitate construction, acquisition by gift or purchase, reconstruction and improvements, to better or extend the parks and recreation services as permitted by law. 
(f)  To exercise any other such powers and authority reasonably necessary to accomplish the stated purposes of this commission. 
(g)  To perform other functions as authorized and directed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-7-7. - Funding of projects/annual budget. 
The commission shall operate under such budget as may be established by the annual budget of the city. 
The commission may make recommendations to the city council regarding suggested acquisition and capitalized expenditures for annual budget consideration. Such recommendations shall be prepared and submitted to the city council in a timely manner, for consideration within the annual city budget. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-7-8. - Staffing and support. 
The city manager shall provide sufficient staff support to the commission. Support shall include professional and clerical assistance as needed to sustain the parks and recreation activities required. 
(Ord. No. 03-106, 04-21-03; Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 10-17-05)  
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 4-8-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the finance commission is to assist the city council and city staff in the development, review and promotion of sound fiscal policies and procedures for the city. The commission is chartered to evaluate current and proposed fiscal policies and procedures, to evaluate all capital expenditures associated with development, infrastructure maintenance and improvement, and to develop and maintain a five-year financial plan for the council in support of the strategic objectives defined in the comprehensive plan document and the capital improvement plan. By definition, the finance commission is an advisory body to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-2. - Commission established. 
The Mascoutah Finance Commission (hereinafter, the "commission") is hereby established. By "type" of commission, this shall be a "standing" commission as defined in section 4-1-2 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-3. - Membership, qualifications, and compensation. 
The commission shall consist of three voting members and shall be established and composed of the following classification of members: 
(a)  Appointed commissioners. A total of three voting commissioners shall be selected on the merits of the appointees' experience and their potential contribution to this commission. Specific qualifications may be identified and incorporated in section 4-8-5, officers, "by-laws." The mayor appoints a representative chairperson. 
(b)  Non-voting members. The following city officials will serve as non-voting members: 
(1)  The mayor or his/her representative. 
(2)  City manager or his/her representative 
Commission members shall have specific expertise in accounting and/or finance evidenced by no less than five years practical experience in a related field and higher education and/or professional designations such as a certified public accountant (CPA), a certified financial planner (CFP), or a masters degree is accounting and/or finance. Mayoral appointments to the finance commission shall be accompanied by evidence of the required experience. 
Each commission member shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-4. - Appointment, term, vacancies. 
The mayor and city manager or their designated representative shall serve on the commission by virtue of their office or position. All other commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
Initial appointments of the commission: One member shall be appointed for one-year term, one member shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one member shall be appointed for a three-year term. Thereafter, each appointed commission member shall hold office for four-year terms. 
Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant. This replacement appointment shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-5. - Officers, rules of order. 
The commission may select officers, except the chair, as it deems necessary to fulfill its duties. The commission is hereby authorized to adopt rules of order, regular meeting times and dates, and other limited protocols to assure reasonable organization and function, with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-6. - Meetings, meeting structure and procedures. 
Regular meetings of the commission shall be held as appropriate to meet the duties and responsibilities of the commission. The commission shall typically meet monthly at a consistent time and place. 
Special meetings. At the request of any two members of the "commission", the chairman may call a special meeting; notice of such meeting and the purpose thereof shall be given all members of the commission at least 48 hours in advance and the business transacted at such meetings shall be limited to that contained in such notice. 
A quorum shall consist of the majority of that "commission's" voting membership. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-7. - Commission powers and duties. 
Commission powers. By the nature of the "council commissions" structure, it is intended that this commission is advisory to the council. As such, the finance commission's role is to provide well reasoned, financially sound recommendations to the council. Reporting shall be on a project-by-project basis as well as an annual report. 
Commission duties. The finance commission shall work in cooperation with the city council and the city manager, to evaluate, study and recommend fiscal policies and programs regarding strategic level fiscal programs as related to the city's financial well being. 
Targeted task areas/objectives. General objectives and targeted areas of evaluation/study are presented as follows: 
(a)  Annual audit report analysis. Review the independent auditor's annual report. Provide observations regarding fund balance results, trending factors and effectiveness of public funds protection systems. Commentary regarding progress towards long term financial goals is expected. Recommendations about continuation of effective programs and modification/addition of new programs are also requested. 
(b)  Five-year fiscal strategic plan. Evaluate and understand the city's current fiscal strategic plan. Develop and improve the plan to further the fiscal stability of the City of Mascoutah and eliminate existing, open and unsecured lines of credit. Other components to evaluate and improve include: 
(1)  Utility rate structures. Evaluate, understand, and recommend regarding current and projected sewer, water, and electric utility rates. Consider revenues needed to adequately cover: Operations expenses, CIP/FAR expenses, and sufficient, funding for emergency/ capitalized sinking funds. 
(2)  Debt strategy. Evaluate, understand, and recommend regarding the city's debt structures, repayment schedules, use of sinking funds, and elimination of dependence on unsecured lines of credit. Be aware of municipal standards related to reasonable debt level limit ratios as applied to Mascoutah and advise the council on programs, policies and fiscal procedures required to meet the strategic objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  TIF strategy. Evaluate, understand, and recommend regarding: 
• Existing TIF 1 & 2B district plan/programs. 
• Developer agreements. 
• Cash flow projections for each TIF. 
• Current debt structures. 
Review the TIF audit document prior to the annual TIF joint review board meeting. 
(4)  Infrastructure investment strategy. Evaluate and recommend regarding expenditures for capital improvement projects (CIP) and fixed asset replacement (FAR) programs. 
(5)  Annual tax levy. Evaluate and recommend any annual tax rate levy. Council intends to operate a fiscally responsible municipality that supports the strategic objectives of the comprehensive plan. Therefore, as required, evaluate and recommend any tax rate levy that would exceed the base "5% non-hearing" rate. 
(c)  Development infrastructure investments. Evaluate and recommend regarding partnered infrastructure improvement projects where the city will be committing public funds that will benefit a development as well as an adjacent "area of benefit." 
(d)  Evaluation of annexation agreements and inter-government agreements which commit public funds. 
(e)  To perform other functions as authorized and assigned by the council. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-8. - Funding of projects/annual budget. 
The commission shall operate under such budget as may be established by the annual budget of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 4-8-9. - Staffing and support. 
The city manager shall provide sufficient staff support to the commission. Support shall include professional and clerical assistance as needed to sustain the finance commission activities required. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 9-19-05)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDING CODE  
ARTICLE I. - BUILDING CODE ADOPTED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, adopted May 5, 2008, amended article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article I, §§ 6-1-1—6-1-10, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 07-13, § 1, 8-6-07. 
 
Sec. 6-1-1. - Adoption of Building Code (IBC 2003). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated as the "The International Building Code, 2003" as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Building Code, 2003, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
Building Code; amendments. The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and all references listed within the adopted edition of the International Building Code - 2003 Edition. 
(a)  Chapter 11 Accessibility insert the following text. When there is a conflict between this Chapter and the Illinois Accessibility Code the stricter of the two shall apply. 
(b)  Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas amend to read the following: To establish flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special food hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for County of St. Clair," dated March 1, 2007, as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. 
(c)  Section 1805 Footings and Foundation all references to wood footings and foundation are deleted. The use of wood footings and foundation is prohibited. 
(d)  Delete all and any reference to the ICC Electrical Code and insert the National Electric Code 2005 edition. 
(e)  Delete all and any reference to the International Plumbing Code and add the following: The city building official shall require that the provisions of the current "Illinois Plumbing Code Law", 225 Illinois Complied Statutes 320/1 et seq., as presently in force or as the same may be hereafter amended or modified and the same hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the standard for the purposes of this chapter. Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be determined by the strictest standard contained in the code provisions. 
(f)  Section 2902 Plumbing Systems delete this section in its entirety and replace article IX. 
(g)  Section 3410.2 Applicability amended to read the following: Structures existing prior to 1978, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the provisions of Sections 3403 through 3407. The provisions in Sections 3410.2.1 through 3410.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, M, R, S and U. These provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H or I. 
(h)  Adopt Appendix F - Rodent proofing. 
(i)  Adopt Appendix J - Grading. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-2. - Adoption of Residential Code (IRC 2003). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The International Residential Code, 2003" as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Residential Code, 2003, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
Residential Code; amendments. The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and all references listed within the adopted edition of the International Residential Code - 2003 Edition. 
(a)  Delete all and any reference to the ICC Electrical Code and insert the National Electric Code 2005 edition. 
(b)  Delete all and any reference to the International Plumbing Code and add the following: The City Building Official shall require that the revisions of the current "Illinois Plumbing Code Law", 225 Illinois Complied Statutes 320/1 et seq., as presently in force or as the same may be hereafter amended or modified and the same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the standard for the purposes of this chapter. Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be determined by the strictest standard contained in the code provisions. 
(c)  Delete all and any reference to wood footings and foundation are deleted. The use of wood footings and foundations is prohibited. 
(d)  Adopt Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. 
(e)  Adopt Appendix H Patio Covers. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-3. - Adoption of Mechanical Code (IMC 2003). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The International Mechanical Code, 2003" as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Mechanical Code, 2003, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
Mechanical Code; amendments. The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and all references listed within the adopted edition of the International Mechanical Code - 2003 Edition. 
(a)  Delete all and any reference to the ICC Electrical Code and insert the National Electric Code 2005 edition. 
(b)  Delete all and any reference to the International Plumbing Code and add the following: The City Building Official shall require that the provisions of the current "Illinois Plumbing Code Law", 225 Illinois Complied Statutes 320/1 et seq., as presently in force or as the same may be hereafter amended or modified and the same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the standard for the purposes of this chapter. Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be determined by the strictest standard contained in the code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-4. - Adoption of Fuel Gas Code (IFGC 2003). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The International Fuel Gas Code, 2003" as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Fuel Gas Code, 2003, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
Fuel Gas Code; amendments. The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and all references listed within the adopted edition of the International Fuel Gas Code - 2003 Edition. 
(a)  Delete all and any reference to the ICC Electrical Code and insert the National Electric Code 2005 edition. 
(b)  Delete all and any reference to the International Plumbing Code and add the following: The City Building Official shall require that the provisions of the current "Illinois Plumbing Code Law", 225 Illinois Complied Statutes 320/1 et seq., as presently in force or as the same may be hereafter amended or modified and the same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the standard for the purposes of this chapter. Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be determined by the strictest standard contained in the code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-5. - Adoption of energy conservation code (IECC 2012). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The International Energy Conservation Building Code, 2012" as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Energy Conservation Code, 2012, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Note— Public Act 097-1033.  
Sec. 6-1-6. - Adoption of Electric Code (NEC 2005). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The National Electric Code, 2005" as published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc. be and is hereby adopted as the Electric Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said the National Electric Code, 2005, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
Application for appeal. The owner of a building or structure or any other person may appeal from a decision of the electrical Inspector refusing to grant a modification to the provisions of standards and specifications applicable thereto. The city board of appeals application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that; the true intent of the standards and specifications applicable thereto do not apply, or any equally good or better form of electrical installation can be used. (See chapter 6, article VI, division II, electrical board of appeals.) 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-7. - Adoption of Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions (ICCEC 2003). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions, 2003" as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said the Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions, 2003, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-8. - Adoption of Illinois Accessibility Code (IAC 1997). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The Illinois Accessibility Code, 1997" as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Illinois Accessibility Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said the Illinois Accessibility Code, 1997, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-9. - Adoption of Illinois Plumbing Code (IPC 2004). 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated at the "The Illinois Plumbing Code, 2004" as published by the Illinois Department of Public Health (225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 320/inclusive) be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said the Illinois Plumbing Code, 2004, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division of this Code. 
Any person who practices, offers to practice, attempts to practice, or holds himself or herself out to practice as a plumber or plumbing contractor without being licensed under the Illinois Plumbing License Law shall be reported to the Illinois Department of Public Health and be subject to the penalties set out in the Illinois Plumbing License Law and shall be fined $500.00 by the City of Mascoutah. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-22-11)  
Sec. 6-1-10. - Fence permits. 
All fences erected in the city shall secure a permit from the building inspector. All fences shall conform to the provisions of section (34-3-6) of the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-1-11. - Issuance of building permits. 
Building permits will not be issued to any person(s) or entity(ies) who have invoices owed to the city that have remained unpaid for 60 days beyond the original due date. 
(Ord. No. 10-21, § 1, 12-6-10)  
Sec. 6-1-12. - Adoption of Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act. 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city manager of the city, being marked and designated as the "Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act" as published by the State of Illinois (225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 335/1—335/12 Inclusive) and is hereby adopted as the Roofing Act of the City of Mascoutah, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in divisions of this Code. 
Any person who practices, offers to practice, attempts to practice, or holds himself or herself out to practice roofing without being licensed under the Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act shall be reported to the State of Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulations and be subject to the penalties set out in the Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act and shall be fined $500.00 by the City of Mascoutah. 
Roofing hours of operations for the city shall be no earlier than 5:30 a.m. and no later than 30 minutes past sunset. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-22-11)  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING INSPECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, adopted May 5, 2008, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 6-2-1—6-2-8, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 575; Ord. No. 656, 08-04-75; Ord. No. 709, 3-3-80; Ord. No. 885, 1-4-93; Ord. No. 97-112, 7-7-97. 
 
Sec. 6-2-1. - Establishment of office of building inspectors. 
(a)  The office of building inspectors is hereby created and the executive official in charge shall be known as the building inspectors. 
(b)  The building inspectors shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. Their appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. 
(c)  During temporary absence or disability of the building inspectors the city manager shall designate an acting building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-2-2. - Qualifications of building inspectors. 
To be eligible to appointment, the candidate for the position of building inspector shall have had experience as an architect, structural engineer, building inspector, superintendent of building construction or experienced in the building trades. The inspector shall be in good health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections. The inspector shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-2-3. - Duties of building inspectors. 
(a)  The building inspector shall devote the time necessary to the duties of his office. He shall act upon applications received by the city clerk, issue permits and furnish permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(b)  Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the building inspectors or his duly appointed assistant. 
(c)  The building inspectors shall keep comprehensive records of applications of permits issued, of inspections made, or reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. They shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work for one year after the final inspection is approved. 
(d)  The building inspectors shall make written reports to the city manager once each month, or oftener if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated. 
(e)  The building inspectors shall also be responsible for the enforcement of the City of Mascoutah zoning regulations and take all actions necessary as prescribed in this section as same would apply to enforcement of the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-2-4. - Compensation of building inspectors. 
The building inspectors shall receive as compensation for their services required by this chapter in an amount as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-2-5. - Cooperation of other officials. 
The building inspectors may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of their duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-2-6. - Right of entry. 
The building inspectors, in the discharge of their official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-2-7. - Fees. 
No permit as required by the building code shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this chapter shall have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid as provided in the consolidated fee ordinance system. 
All applications for permits shall be made to the office of the city with the proper amount of fee therefore based upon the estimated cost at the time of application. The city inspector shall remit all applications received to the building inspectors who shall submit monthly reports to the city manager accounting inspections made. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
Sec. 6-2-8 - Location of property markers. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit, a contractor or builder shall locate and identify by pins all corners of lots on which improvements are proposed and identify by markers the location of all proposed structures for verification of set-back and side lot line measurements by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-5-08)  
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 6-3-1. - Definitions. 
The term "dangerous building" as used in this article, is hereby defined to mean and include: 
(a)  Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which is dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition, or which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health of the occupants of it or of neighboring structures. 
(b)  Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is especially liable to fire, and constitutes or creates a fire hazard. 
(c)  Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which, by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such a structure. 
(d)  Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which, because of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows is available to and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure.  
Sec. 6-3-2. - Declared nuisance. 
Any such dangerous building in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance.  
Sec. 6-3-3. - Dangerous building unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building in the city; and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.  
Sec. 6-3-4. - Abatement. 
Whenever the building inspector, the fire chief, the health inspector, or any other officer or employee of the city shall find that any building or structure in the city is a dangerous building, he shall file a written statement to this effect with the city clerk. The clerk shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared to be in dangerous condition, and that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it; and that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the following form: 
To ___________(owner/occupant of the premises) of the premises known and described as _______. 
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by ___________. 
The causes for this decision are (here insert the facts as to the dangerous condition). 
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the City will proceed to do so. 
If the person receiving such notice has not complied therewith within ten days from the time when this notice is served upon such person by personal service or by registered mail, the city manager may, upon orders of the city council, proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building.  
Sec. 6-3-5. - Business district. 
Any building or structure within one of the business districts of the city as hereinbefore prescribed by the zoning code, which has or may be damaged by fire, decay, or other cause to the extent of 50 percent of its value, shall be torn down and removed. 
Upon written notice by the building inspector, health commissioner, fire chief, or any other city employee filed with the city clerk, the clerk shall notify the mayor of the receipt of such notice. The mayor shall then appoint three persons to determine whether or not such building or structure has been damaged to the extent of 50 percent of its value. A copy of the notice filed by the city officer, together with a notice of the appointment of this board of three persons to determine the damage, shall be served upon the owner of the premises by personal service or by registered mail to his last known address. 
Such notice may be in substantially the following form: 
To ___________. 
You are hereby notified that ___________ has determined that the building owned by you at ___________ located within the business district has been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to the extent of 50 percent of its value; and that a board of three members has been appointed to verify this finding, which board will hold its first meeting in the City Hall on the ___ day of _______ at the hour of _____ o'clock, at which time it will determine whether this finding is correct. 
If this finding is verified by the board, you must tear down and remove the said building. 
If the said board of three members determined that the building in question has been damaged to the extent of 50 percent of its value, it shall be the duty of the owner to tear down or remove the said building within 20 days after the finding of the board; and it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit such building to be occupied after such finding.  
Sec. 6-3-6. - Unknown owners. 
If the owner of the premises concerned is unknown, or if his address is unknown, service of any notice provided for in this article may be made by posting a copy thereof on the premises and by publishing one time a copy thereof in a newspaper published within the city.  
Sec. 6-3-7. - Alternative action. 
In addition to the action authorized by other sections of this article, the fire chief of the fire department or any other municipal official whose duty it is to investigate fires, may make the investigations authorized by the statute found in 425 ILCS Sec. 25/9 et seq. If such officer shall find that any building or structure is so occupied or situated as to endanger persons or property, or by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of repair or for any other cause is especially liable to fire, or is liable to cause injury by collapsing or otherwise, he shall order the dangerous condition removed or remedied, and shall so notify the owner or occupant of the premises. Service of such notice may be in person or by registered mail, and any person so notified may appeal from the decision of such officer in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 629, 11-06-72)  
ARTICLE IV. - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY CONSTRUCTION IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 6-4-1. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the city's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the city exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act. 
(b)  Conflicts with other ordinances. This article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(c)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 6-4-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code. 
Applicant. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
Application. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application. 
Collocate or collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
Communications service. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service. 
Communications service provider. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider. 
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
Fee. A one-time charge. 
Historic district or historic landmark. A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the city pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending. 
Law. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution. 
Micro wireless facility. A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
Municipal utility pole. A utility pole owned or operated by the city in public rights-of-way. 
Permit. A written authorization required by the city to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project. 
Person. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization. 
Public safety agency. The functional division of the federal government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents. 
Rate. A recurring charge. 
Right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include city-owned aerial lines. 
Small wireless facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
Utility pole. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function. 
Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider. Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the City. 
Wireless provider. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services. Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider. A person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 6-4-3. - Regulation of small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in paragraph (9) regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. 
(b)  Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the city to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the city, together with the city's small cell facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure: 
a.  Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989; 
b.  The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility; 
c.  Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed; 
d.  The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility; 
e.  A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and 
f.  Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's knowledge. 
g.  In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the city, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation. 
(2)  Application process. The city shall process applications as follows: 
a.  The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure. 
b.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a completed application. 
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application. 
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
c.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed application. 
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application. 
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
d.  The city shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this article. 
If the city determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider. 
The city shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies an application. 
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the city's review period. 
The applicant must notify the city in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application. 
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. 
e.  Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement, provided by the city for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement. 
(3)  Completeness of application. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the city shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the city fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the city's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the city. 
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the city sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information. 
(4)  Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by: 
a.  An express written agreement by both the applicant and the city; or 
b.  A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay. 
(5)  Consolidated applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the city shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. 
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the city may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The city may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application. 
(6)  Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the city makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable city codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this article. 
If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable city code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal. 
(7)  Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the city by personal delivery at the city's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail. 
(c)  Collocation requirements and conditions. 
(1)  Public safety space reservation. The city may reserve space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the city's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the city reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. 
(2)  Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations. 
(3)  No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications. 
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment. 
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. 
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. 
The city may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(4)  The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on city utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. 
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the city utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. 
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
(5)  The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. 
(6)  The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a city ordinance, written policy adopted by the city, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district. 
(7)  Alternate placements. Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the city may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. 
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the city, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph. 
(8)  Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. 
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of: 
a.  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the city, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the city, provided the city may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or 
b.  Forty-five feet above ground level. 
(9)  Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a special use permit, variance, or administrative waiver in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in chapter 34, article VIII. 
(10)  Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the city and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. 
(11)  Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances. 
(12)  Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles. 
(13)  Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the city and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the city grants an extension in writing to the applicant. 
(d)  Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows: 
(1)  Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650.00 for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures. 
(2)  Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable. 
(4)  The city shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for: 
a.  Routine maintenance; 
b.  The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the city at least ten days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with subsection d. under the section titled application requirements; or 
c.  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes. 
(5)  Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the city to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures. 
(e)  Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this article authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on: 
(1)  Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the city or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner; 
(2)  Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or 
(3)  Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this article do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this article. 
(f)  Pre-existing agreements. Existing agreements between the city and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the city's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the city before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article. 
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the city on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the city makes available under this article for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the city that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the city's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the city before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph. 
(g)  Annual recurring rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the city an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200.00 per year or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the city utility pole. 
If the city has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200.00 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. 
(h)  Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the city notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment. 
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the city to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the city may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. 
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the city if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the city. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 6-4-4. - Dispute resolution. 
The Circuit Court of St. Clair County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the city shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200.00 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. 
(Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 6-4-5. - Indemnification. 
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the city improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the city or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the city with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. 
(Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 6-4-6. - Insurance. 
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance: 
(a)  Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks; 
(b)  Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or 
(c)  Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the city improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of city improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. 
The wireless provider shall include the city as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the city in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. 
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the city. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 6-4-7. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this article is severable. 
(Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 9-4-18) 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
OFFICE OF CODE ENFORCEMENT 
#3 WEST MAIN STREET 
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 62258 
(618) 566-2964 
Permit #94-56 	By BOCA 	35% 	50% 	75% 
Type 5B Use R3 Cost $38.44 	304 x 60 x .65 x .0035 	4.150 	59.28 	88.92 
Sq Ft 304 				
Addition 				
Permit #94-33 	By BOCA 			
Type 3B Use R3 				
Duplex Cost $307.32 				
1st Sq Ft 686 x 2 	686 x 60 x .74 x .0035 x 2 	213.21 	304.58 	456.88 
2nd Sq Ft 854 x 2 	854 x 60 x .74 x .0035 x 2 	265.42 	379.18 	568.76 
Garage 276 x 2 	276 x 60 x .20 x .0035 x 2 	 23.18 	 33.12 	 49.68 
		501.81 	716.88 	1075.32 
Permit #94-52 	By BOCA 			
Type 5B Use R3 Single family 				
Sq Ft 1918 Cost $207.95 	1918 x 60 x .65 x .0035 	261.81 	374.01 	561.02 
Garage 391 	391 x 60 x .20 x .0035 	 16.42 	 23.46 	 35.19 
		278.23 	397.47 	596.21 
Permit #94-29 	By BOCA 			
Type 5B Use R3 Cost $201.70 				
Single Family 				
Sq Ft 1736 	1736 x 60 x .65 x .0035 	236.96 	338.52 	507.78 
Basement 1736 	1736 x 60 x .20 x .0035 	72.91 	104.16 	156.24 
Garage 	624 624 x 60 x .20 x .0035 	 26.21 	 37.44 	 56.16 
		336.08 	480.12 	720.18 
Permit #94-40 	By BOCA 			
Type 3A Use F-1 				
Commercial 				
Sq Ft 4920 Cost $420.25 	4921 x 60 x .55 x .0035 	568.26 	811.80 	1217.70 
  
Chapter 7 - BUSINESS CODE  
ARTICLE I. - BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSE 
 
Sec. 7-1-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the terms defined in this section have the meanings given them. 
Business means any for profit business operated by a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation or organization within the City of Mascoutah. 
Designated representative means owners or key officials responsible for the business. 
FIN means federal identification number assigned by the Internal Revenue Service. 
Owners means any sole proprietor, partners, corporation or organization. 
Sales tax number means the registration number assigned to the business by the Illinois Department of Revenue for sales tax collections. 
(Sec. 117)  
Sec. 7-1-2. - Registration. 
All businesses within the City presently operating and all business located in the City of Mascoutah in the future shall register their business with the city clerk. 
(Sec. 118)  
Sec. 7-1-3. - Application for registration. 
Any business or organization registering pursuant to provisions of this article shall file a written registration thereof in the office of the city clerk, such registration shall be in writing and shall contain at least the following information: 
(a)  Name of business. 
(b)  Names of owners or contact officials representing the business. 
(c)  Street address of the business. 
(d)  Phone number to be used in case of emergency. 
(e)  Illinois Department of Revenue sales tax number or FIN. 
(f)  Such other information as deemed necessary by the city clerk's office and approved by the city manager.  
Sec. 7-1-4. - Fee for registration and license. 
The annual fee for such license shall be $25.00 and shall be for one year, beginning the first day of February of each calendar year. Application shall be made to the city clerk and the city clerk shall issue such license. 
(Sec. 120)  
Sec. 7-1-5. - Penalties. 
Any person who fails to register a business within 90 days of commencement of business or within 90 days of the effective date of this article (December 18, 1995) or violates any other provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-1-20. 
(Ord. No. 983, 12-18-95)  
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 7-2-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meaning herein ascribed thereto, to-wit: 
(a)  Soliciting shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities: Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever, or seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project. 
(b)  Residence shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
(c)  Registered solicitor shall mean and include any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor or his or her person while engaged in soliciting. 
(d)  Solicitor is defined as any person, firm or corporation, including agents and employees of any firm or corporation whether a resident of the City of Mascoutah or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from door to door, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever, or any other item for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future. Solicitor shall also include any auctioneer or auction company conducting an auction within the city limits of the City of Mascoutah. 
(e)  Commercial is any place of business within the city or any structure used by any party for the purpose of sale of any items on a commercial basis.  
Sec. 7-2-2. - Certificate of registration. 
Every person desiring from persons in residences or commercial buildings within this municipality, is hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 7-2-3. - Application for certificate of registration. 
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the city manager or his designee of this municipality and filed with such manager. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to-wit: 
(a)  Name and address of present place residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than residence address; also Social Security Number. 
(b)  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address. 
(c)  Age of applicant and marital status; and if married, the name of spouse. 
(d)  Physical description of the applicant. 
(e)  Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation. 
(f)  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer. 
(g)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will engage in. 
(h)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied. 
(i)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this Code, if any. 
(j)  Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this article ever been revoked? 
(k)  Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or the Code of any other Illinois Municipality regulating soliciting? 
(l)  Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States? 
(m)  Also such additional information as the city manager or his designee may deem necessary to process the application. 
(n)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any of its employees and agents, have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than a traffic violation, the nature of the offense and the penalty imposed. 
(o)  The names of the last cities or villages, not exceeding three, where applicant has carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and the addresses from which said businesses were conducted in those municipalities. 
(p)  Two photographs of, and provided by the applicant and such of its employees as will be used in the solicitation, peddling, or merchandising, taken within 60 days, immediately prior to the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant, or its agents and employees, in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States, within five years of the date of the application; the provisions of this Article, nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.  
Sec. 7-2-4. - Issuance and revocation of certificate. 
(a)  Generally. The city manager, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application of the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this article. Endorsement shall be made by the city manager upon the application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith. 
Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city manager if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of the certificate in person, or by certified U.S. Mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(b)  Bond. Applicant for certificate of registration under this article shall file with the city a surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00 covering the applicant, his agents and employees, if any, and conditioned that the applicant, his agents and employees, if any, shall comply fully with the ordinances of the city and statutes of the State of Illinois, regulating solicitors and guaranteeing to the residents of this city that all money paid to such licensee will be accounted for, and applied according to the representations of the licensee, and further guaranteeing to the residents of this city doing business with the licensee that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the licensee. Action on such bond may be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given. 
(c)  Credentials. Upon approval of the application for a certificate of registration, as hereinbefore stated, the city manager shall issue credentials to the applicant and each of his agents and employees which credentials shall be issued over the name of the city clerk, and to which shall be appended a photograph of the applicant or its employees and agents. Such credentials must be worn by the licensee, his agents and employees, within this city. The credentials will be worn in such a manner as to be readily visible to all individuals being solicited. In lieu of a photograph, the clerk may approve any type of identification such as a uniform which would indicate the organization for which the person is soliciting.  
Sec. 7-2-5. - Duty of solicitors. 
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence or commercial building, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.  
Sec. 7-2-6. - Uninvited soliciting prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence or commercial building, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of a notice exhibited at the residence or commercial building stating in clear and concise wordage that soliciting is not invited.  
Sec. 7-2-7. - Time limit on soliciting. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence or commercial building located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence or commercial building for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a State or National Holiday unless approved by the city manager.  
Sec. 7-2-8. - Fees. 
Upon making an application for a certificate, the applicant shall pay a license fee, which shall be: 
(a)  For a period of not less than one nor more than five days, the sum of $10.00 for each day not to exceed five days. 
(b)  For an annual license, the sum of $25.00. 
(c)  Ten dollars for each calendar day an auction is held or $50.00 for an annual registration. 
(Ord. No. 96-112, 02-19-96)  
Sec. 7-2-9. - Notice to solicitors. 
(a)  Each person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this article shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, to any residence or commercial building, shall be made by exhibiting upon or near the main entrance door to his residence or commercial building, a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in size, containing the following words: 
ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED 
IN MASCOUTAH INVITED 
or, in the alternative: 
NO SOLICITORS INVITED 
(c)  The letters on the notice shall be at least one-third-inch in height. For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the chief of police to persons requesting them, at the cost thereof. Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence or commercial building of the information contained thereon.  
Sec. 7-2-10. - Duty of solicitor to observe notice. 
It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the city to first examine the notice provided for in this division, if any is attached to the residence or commercial building; and to be governed by the statement contained thereon. If the notice states "ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN MASCOUTAH INVITED", then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration issued pursuant to this article shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice states "NO SOLICITORS INVITED", then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.  
Sec. 7-2-11. - Exemptions. 
Subsections 7-2-4(b) and 7-2-8(a) and (b) shall not apply to any charitable or nonprofit association or organization, corporation or project.  
Sec. 7-2-12. - Solicitations on streets at intersections. 
Charitable organizations will be permitted to solicit on a city street at intersections under the following conditions: 
(a)  That all traffic at said intersection shall be required to come to a full stop. 
(b)  That the agency be registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization as provided by "An Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes, Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making an Appropriation Therefor". 
(c)  That they be engaged in a civic, local or statewide fund raising activity which will either benefit the well-being of the community or the philanthropic efforts of recognized, registered organizations. 
(d)  That they be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent. 
(e)  Any person so engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or more, and shall be wearing a highly visible vest. 
(f)  That any such person or organization have liability insurance in an aggregate amount of no less than $500,000.00.  
Sec. 7-2-13. - Permit. 
The agency or organization shall make application as provided for in this article for a permit.  
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 7-3-1. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of hawker or peddler of any merchandise, article, or thing without having first secured a license therefor.  
Sec. 7-3-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Peddle" shall mean the selling, bartering, or exchanging or the offering for sale, barter or exchange of any tangible personal property upon or along the streets, highways, or public places of this city or from house to house, whether at one place thereon or from place to place, from any wagon, truck, pushcart, or other vehicle or from movable receptacles of any kind, but shall not include the delivery routes where the purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and exhibit his items. Nor shall "peddle" be taken to include the solicitation of orders by sample where the goods are not delivered at the time the order is taken. 
(b)  "Peddler" as used herein shall include any person, firm or corporation, including agents or employees of any firm or corporation, whether a resident of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from door to door, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. 
(c)  "Transient merchant" is defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, and whether a resident of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois or not, who temporarily engages in the sale of merchandise for present or future delivery within the city and who is furtherance of such purpose, leases, uses or occupies any building, vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad car, hotel or motel room or other place in the city for exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise.  
Sec. 7-3-3. - Application. 
A person desiring a license may obtain the same by making application with the city manager and providing the following information: 
(a)  Name and physical description of applicant. 
(b)  Permanent home and address and local address if operating from such an address. 
(c)  A brief description of the business and of the goods to be sold. 
(d)  Name and address of the employer, if any. 
(e)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(f)  Evidence that the agent is acting on behalf of the corporation he represents. 
(g)  Statement of the applicant's criminal record other than a traffic record. 
(h)  The last three municipalities where the applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application, and the address from which such business was conducted in those municipalities. 
(i)  Two photographs of, and supplied by the applicant and such of its employees as will be used in the solicitation, peddling or merchandising, taken within 60 days, immediately prior to the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant, or its agents and employees, in a clear and distinguishing manner.  
Sec. 7-3-4. - Issuance and revocation of certificate. 
(a)  Generally. The city manager, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this article. Endorsement shall be made by the city manager upon the application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith. 
Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of the certificate in person, or by certified U.S. Mail, addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(b)  Bond. The applicant for license under this article shall file with the city a surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00, covering the applicant, his agents and employees, if any, and conditioned that the applicant, his agents and employees, if any, shall comply fully with all ordinances of the city and statutes of the State of Illinois, regulating peddlers, and transient merchants, and guaranteeing to the residents of this city that all money paid to such licensee will be accounted for, and applied according to the representations of the licensee, and further guaranteeing to the residents of this city doing business with the licensee that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the licensee. Action on such bond may be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given. 
(c)  Credentials. Upon approval of the application for certificate of registration, as hereinbefore stated, the city manager shall issue credentials to the applicant and each of his agents and employees with credentials shall be issued over the name of the city manager, and to which shall be appended a photograph of the applicant or its employees and agents. Such credentials must be worn by the licensee, his agents and employees within this city. The credentials will be worn in such a manner as to be readily visible to all individuals being solicited.  
Sec. 7-3-5. - Fees. 
The fee for a license issued under this article shall be: 
(a)  Annual license ..... $25.00 
(b)  For five days or less, per day ..... 10.00  
Sec. 7-3-6. - Hours. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this Code or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence or commercial building located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence or commercial building for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in peddling as herein defined prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., unless approved by the city manager, of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a State or National Holiday.  
Sec. 7-3-7. - Fraud. 
Any licensed peddler or hawker who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself/herself or through an employee while acting as a peddler in the city or who shall barter, sell or peddle any goods or merchandise or wares other than those specified in his application for a license shall be fined not less than $10.00, nor more than $200.00, for each offense; and the city manager may revoke his license for such an offense.  
Sec. 7-3-8. - Unwanted peddling. 
Nothing contained in this article, nor the issuance of any license hereunder, shall entitle the licensee to go in or upon any private residence or commercial building for the purpose of peddling if such licensee, his agents, or employees are directed to depart from said private residence or commercial building by the owner, or person in charge thereof.  
Sec. 7-3-9. - Notice to peddlers; duty of peddler to observe notice. 
The provisions of section 7-2-9, "notice to solicitors" and section 7-2-10, "duty of solicitor to observe notice" apply in the same manner to peddlers/transient merchants.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 7-4-1. - Definition. 
The term "food establishment" as used in this article, shall be construed to mean any structure, fixed or mobile, room stand, lunch wagon, enclosure, premises, place or establishment used for the preparation, distribution, selling or offering or keeping for sale at retail or wholesale, any article of food, confection, condiment or drink used or intended for human consumption, or any such article which is an ingredient of or is used for or is mixed with or enters into the composition of any such food, confection, condiment or drink.  
Sec. 7-4-2. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain or operate any food establishment without first having obtained a license as hereinafter required. No license shall be required for any not-for-profit or religious organization.  
Sec. 7-4-3. - License fee. 
The annual fee for such license shall be $25.00 and shall be for one year, beginning the first day of February of each calendar year. Application shall be made to the city clerk and the city clerk shall issue such license.  
Sec. 7-4-4. - Disposition of fees. 
The license fees shall constitute a separate fund to be used to defray the reasonable expense of inspections, hereinafter provided, and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 7-4-5. - Sanitary requirements. 
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation conducting, operating or maintaining a food establishment to keep the floors, walls, pillars, partitions, ceiling, receptacles, refrigerators, implements and machinery of every such establishment, and all cars, trucks, vehicles and containers used in the transportation of food products, in a clean and sanitary condition. For the purposes of the enforcement of this article, unclean and unsanitaryconditions shall be deemed to exist if the food in the process of preparation, packing, storing, sale, distribution or transportation is not adequately protected from flies, vermin, dogs, cats, dust, dirt and from other foreign or injurious contamination; or if refuse, dirt or waste products subject to decomposition and fermentation are not removed daily; or if trucks, trays, boxes, buckets or other receptacles or platforms, racks, tables or shelves, or the knives, saws, cleavers or other utensils, or the machinery are not clean, or if the clothing of persons employed therein is unclean; or if no adequate toilet facilities, soap or clean towels are provided for employees handling foods. The direct sale of baked goods as described in Section 4 of the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 ILCS 625/4, and regulated through the use of a home kitchen operation, as described by Section 3.4 of the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 ILCS 625/3.4, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, is authorized. 
(Ord. No. 15-16, § 3, 8-3-15)  
Sec. 7-4-6. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 7-4-7. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $75.00, nor more than $750.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. Any license granted under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city manager for any violation of section 7-4-5 hereof, and such revocation shall be addition to any fine imposed by virtue of this section.  
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLES CARRYING FOODSTUFFS 
 
Sec. 7-5-1. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any vehicle, including wagons and motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by human power, for the storage or carrying of any meats, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables, flour, meal, bread or bakery products or any other provisions intended for human consumption, including beverages and milk in the city for the purpose of delivering any such foodstuffs to any place in the city for such purpose, unless a license for such vehicle is first secured and the provisions of this article are fully complied with. 
Applications for such license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state thereon the name and address of the owner thereof, the name or names of the persons for whom such deliveries are made and the nature of the goods carried. The clerk shall issue such license and shall give to the city council a list of all such licenses issued.  
Sec. 7-5-2. - Fees. 
The annual fee for such license shall be $25.00 and shall be for one year, beginning the first day of February of each calendar year. Such fees shall be paid to the city clerk, who shall turn them over to the city treasurer forthwith.  
Sec. 7-5-3. - Regulations. 
All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used. It shall be unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter or other waste material to accumulate in or on such vehicle while it is so used. If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle, such goods shall be carried in a portion of the vehicle which is screened and protected against dust and insects.  
Sec. 7-5-4. - Use of fees. 
The license fees so paid over to the city treasurer shall constitute a separate fund to be used to defray the reasonable expense of such inspections and regulations in the interest of public health and safety and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 7-5-5. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make or cause to be made inspections to insure compliance with the provisions of this article, and the city manager shall give to each party a certificate that the vehicle has been inspected and keep a record thereof; the inspections to be made at the City Hall and respective parties notified when they shall report for inspection. The city manager's designated representative may conduct the inspections.  
Sec. 7-5-6. - License fee regulation. 
No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food dealing establishment in the city, and the vehicles of which food dealing establishments are likewise inspected, said licensing and inspection being provided for by other codes of the city, but all provisions of this article shall be complied with in connection with such vehicles other than that providing for the payment of the fee. 
Any license granted under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city manager for any violation hereof, and such revocation shall be in addition to any fine imposed by virtue of this section.  
ARTICLE VI. - VENDING MACHINES 
 
Sec. 7-6-1. - Definitions. 
Definitions of terms as used in this article, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, are as follows: 
The term "cigarette vending machine" shall mean any automatic vending machine used for the sale of cigarettes and controlled by the insertion of a coin or currency. It shall not include machines or devices used solely for the vending of service, food, or confections. 
The term "coin-operated amusement device" as used herein means any amusement machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token, or currency for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement features. 
The terms "person", "firm", "corporation" or "association" as used herein shall include the following: Any person, firm, corporation, or association which owns any such machines; the person, firm, or corporation or association in whose place of business any such machines are placed for use by the public and the person, firm, corporation, or association having control over such machine, provided, however, that the payment of such fee by any person, firm, corporation or association enumerated herein, shall be deemed a compliance with this section of this article.  
Sec. 7-6-2. - License required. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or association displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any cigarette vending machine, coin operated amusement devices, or device as herein defined by section 7-6-1, shall be required to obtain a license fee from the city upon payment of a license fee. Application for such license shall be made to the city manager upon a form to be supplied by him for that purpose.  
Sec. 7-6-3. - Applications. 
The application for such license shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of the applicant, age, date, and place of birth. 
(b)  All prior convictions of felonies of the applicant, if any. 
(c)  Address and name of business where the machine or device will be displayed and operated and the nature of the business conducted at the address under said name. 
(d)  The name and address of the owner of the machine and if said machine is serviced and supplied by any person, firm, corporation or association other than the applicant or the owner of the machine, the name and address of such person, firm, corporation or association shall be set out in the application. 
No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over 21 years of age.  
Sec. 7-6-4. - Inspection. 
Application for license shall be made out in duplicate; one copy being retained by the city clerk and the other copy being referred to the chief of police of the city. 
(a)  The chief of police shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate such machine (and ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character). 
(b)  If the chief of police determines that the applicant is not of good moral character, he shall report such findings to the city manager.  
Sec. 7-6-5. - License approval. 
No license shall be issued until the application therefor has been approved by the city council.  
Sec. 7-6-6. - License fees. 
Every applicant before being granted a license, shall pay an annual license fee of $25.00 per machine for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation of each cigarette vending machine or coin operated amusement devices, as defined herein. 
The license fee shall be paid annually, in advance, on the first day of February of each year, excepting that for the first year the license shall be obtained within 30 days after the effective date of this Code, and if additional machines or devices are to be installed or displayed from time to time, the license shall be obtained before display or installation, the license shall expire on the 30th day of January of each year.  
Sec. 7-6-7. - Display of license. 
The license herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine on the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained. Not more than one machine shall be operated on any one license and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him. 
If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the city clerk, giving the street and number of the new location. The new location shall be inspected by the chief of police in the same manner as provided in the previous sections of this article.  
Sec. 7-6-8. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
No person, firm, corporation or association holding a license under this article shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to operate any cigarette vending machine or device as herein defined.  
Sec. 7-6-9. - Revocation of license. 
Every license issued under this article is subject to the right which is hereby expressly reserved to revoke the same should the licensee directly or indirectly permit the operation of any cigarette vending machine or coin operated device, contrary to the provisions of this article, the Code of the City of Mascoutah, or the laws of the State of Illinois. The license may be revoked by the city council after written notice to the licensee which notice shall specify the Code or law violation with which the licensee is charged. The licensee shall be entitled to a hearing on the charge, said hearing to be held before the city council. At such hearing, the licensee may appear and with counsel present evidence in his behalf.  
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATIONS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 7-7-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Employee. Any and all persons other than the masseurs or masseuses, who render any service to the permittee, who receive compensation directly from the permittee, and who have no physical contact with customers and clients. 
Massage. Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the human body, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
Massage establishments. Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engaged in, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in the definition, "massage," of this section. 
Out-call massage service. Any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on messages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage establishment. 
Masseur or masseuse. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as herein defined. 
Persons. Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
Permittee. The operator of a massage establishment. 
Sexual or genital area shall include the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.  
Sec. 7-7-2. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a massage establishment as herein defined, without first having obtained a permit from the city manager.  
Sec. 7-7-3. - Filing of application and fee provision. 
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application in duplicate under oath with the city manager upon a form provided by said city manager and pay a nonrefundable filing fee of $100.00 to the city treasurer, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed with the city manager. 
The city manager shall within five days refer copies of such application to the department of inspection services, the fire department, the board of health and the city planning department. The departments shall within 30 days inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and make written recommendations to the city manager concerning compliance with the codes that they administer. 
Within ten days of receipt of the recommendations of the aforesaid departments, the city manager shall notify the applicant that his application is granted, denied or held for further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation the city manager shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied. 
Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the city manager shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. 
The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding the said application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any inspection required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the city manager.  
Sec. 7-7-4. - Application for massage establishment. 
The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, and the proposed place of business and facilities therefor. 
In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit, including any partner or limited partner of a partnership applicant, and any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the following information: 
(a)  Name and address. 
(b)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(c)  All residential addresses for the past three years. 
(d)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(e)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(f)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(g)  All criminal or city ordinance violation convictions, forfeitures of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations. 
(h)  The fingerprints and photograph of the applicant. 
(i)  If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation.  
Sec. 7-7-5. - Issuance of permit for a massage establishment. 
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the departments referred to in section 7-7-3 that the establishment is in compliance with all of the requirements of section 7-7-12 the city manager shall issue a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment, unless he finds: 
(a)  That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not have complied with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, the building, health, planning, housing, zoning and fire codes of the City of Mascoutah; or 
(b)  That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or indirectly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment has been convicted of: 
(1)  A felony. 
(2)  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children. 
(3)  Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping or other offense opposed to decency and morality. 
The city manager, at his discretion, may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes in subsections (b)(1), (2), and (3) if he finds that such conviction occurred at least four years prior to the date of application, the applicant has had no subsequent convictions and the applicant has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public trust. 
Every massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.  
Sec. 7-7-6. - Revocation or suspension of permit for massage establishment. 
Any permit issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the city manager after a hearing for good cause or in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated or any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct at permittee's place of business, which violates any of the provisions of this article or any state law which provides for imprisonment, and permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of such violations or the permittee should have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or where any applicant has made a false statement on an application for a permit under this article or in any case where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer or inspector of the city and the County of St. Clair to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Such permit may also be revoked or suspended by the city manager, after hearing upon his recommendation of the city inspectors or officials that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the public health or healths of patrons or customers or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene. 
Any violation of this article by any employee of the permittee including a masseur or masseuse, shall be cause for suspension of the permit for not more than 30 days in the first instance. Any subsequent violation of this Article by any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit. 
The city manager, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least ten days written notice of the charges against him or her and the opportunity for a public hearing before the city council, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charge shall be specific and in writing.  
Sec. 7-7-7. - Masseur or masseuse permit. 
Any person, including an applicant for massage establishment permit, who engages in the practice of massage as herein defined, shall file an application for a masseur or masseuse permit with the city manager upon a form provided by said city manager and shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee of $25.00 for an original application and $10.00 for a renewal application, to the city clerk, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed with the city clerk.  
Sec. 7-7-8. - Application form for masseur or masseuse permit. 
The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall contain the following: 
(a)  Name and residence address. 
(b)  Social security number and driver's license number, if any. 
(c)  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes. 
(d)  Written evidence that applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(e)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately proceeding the date of application. 
(f)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere to or suffered a forfeiture on a bond charge of committing any crime except minor traffic violations. If the answer is in the affirmative, a statement must be made giving the place and the court in which such conviction plea of forfeiture was had, the specific charge under which the conviction plea or forfeiture was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result thereof. 
(g)  The chief of police, or his delegate, shall have the right to take fingerprints and photograph of the applicant and the right to confirm the information submitted. 
(h)  All persons who desire to perform the services of masseur or masseuse at a massage establishment, shall first undergo a physical examination for contagious and communicable diseases, which shall include a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, blood test for AIDS, a test or tests which will demonstrate freedom from tuberculosis, which is to be made and interpreted by a licensed physician acceptable to the chief of police and such other laboratory tests done in a laboratory acceptable to the city, as may be necessitated by the above examination, and shall furnish to the city a certificate based upon the applicant's physical examination and issued within 30 days of such examination, signed by a physician duly licensed by the State of Illinois and stating that the person examined is either free from any contagious or communicable disease or incapable of communicating any of such diseases to others. Such persons shall undergo the physical examination referred to above and submit to the city the certificate required herein prior to commencement of their employment and at least once every 12 months thereafter.  
Sec. 7-7-9. - Issuance of masseur or masseuse permit. 
The city manager may issue a masseur or masseuse permit within 21 days following application, unless he finds that the applicant for masseur or masseuse permit has been convicted of: 
(a)  A felony. 
(b)  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children. 
(c)  Keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering. 
The city manager, in his discretion, may issue a permit to any person convicted of such crimes if he finds that such conviction occurred at least four years prior to the date of the application and the application has had no subsequent convictions. 
Every masseur or masseuse permit issued pursuant to this article shall terminate at expiration of one year form the date of its issuance, unless sooner suspended.  
Sec. 7-7-10. - Revocation of masseur or masseuse permit. 
A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the city manager shall be revoked or suspended where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this article. 
The city manager in revoking or suspending masseur or masseuse permit shall give the permit holder a written notice specifying the grounds therefor. Such person may within ten days of such revocation or suspension file a written request with the city clerk for a public hearing before the city council, at which time the masseur or masseuse may present evidence bearing upon the question.  
Sec. 7-7-11. - Facilities necessary. 
No massage establishment shall be issued a permit, nor be operated, established or maintained in the city unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall be installed in accordance with the Building Code of the City of Mascoutah. 
(b)  All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected. 
(c)  Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities shall be provided. 
(d)  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron. 
(e)  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. 
(f)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(g)  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(h)  The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services. 
The city inspector shall certify that the proposed massage establishment complies with all the requirements of this section of this article and shall send such certification to the city manager.  
Sec. 7-7-12. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(c)  All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas, whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(d)  All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(e)  The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, clothes or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur or masseuse. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a massage establishment, to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any other person. 
(g)  No masseur or masseuse, employee or operator shall perform, offer or agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the patron's genital area. 
(h)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry. 
(i)  Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets. 
(j)  Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals, except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work areas. 
(k)  No masseur or masseuse shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption; unless a physician duly licensed by the State of Illinois certifies in writing that such person may be safely massaged prescribing the conditions thereof. 
(l)  Each masseur or masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to each patron.  
Sec. 7-7-13. - Advertising. 
No massage establishment granted a permit under provisions of this article shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any services are available, other than those services described in definition of "massage," section 7-7-1 of this article, or that employees, masseurs or masseuses are dressed in any manner other than prescribed in section 7-7-12(c) of this article, nor shall any massage establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any services are available other than those services described in definition of "massage," section 7-7-1.  
Sec. 7-7-14. - Out-call registration. 
Any masseur or masseuse who provides any of the services listed in definition of "massage," section 7-7-1 of this article at any hotel or motel must first register his or her name and permit number with the owner, manager or person in charge of the hotel or motel.  
Sec. 7-7-15. - Out-call service. 
No "out-call massage service" may be operated other than by a licensed massage establishment. All massages performed by an "out-call massage service" must be performed in the manner prescribed in sections 7-7-12 and 7-7-13.  
Sec. 7-7-16. - Inspections. 
The police department and the city inspector shall from time to time, and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this article for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner.  
Sec. 7-7-17. - Employment of person under the age of 18 prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age.  
Sec. 7-7-18. - Identification card. 
The city manager shall provide each masseur or masseuse granted a permit with an identification card which shall contain a photograph of the masseur or masseuse and the full name and permit number assigned to the said masseur or masseuse, which must be worn on the front of the outermost garment at all times during the hours of operation of any establishment granted a permit pursuant to this article.  
Sec. 7-7-19. - Transfer of permits. 
No permit for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall be transferable except with the written consent of the chief of police and approval of the city inspector; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.  
Sec. 7-7-20. - Display of permit. 
Every permittee shall display a valid permit in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.  
Sec. 7-7-21. - Employment of masseurs and masseuses. 
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage establishment or the employer of any persons purporting to act as masseurs and masseuses to insure that each person employed as a masseur or masseuse shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this article.  
Sec. 7-7-22. - Time limit for filing application for permit. 
All persons who presently operate a massage establishment or who are employed as a masseur or masseuse must file for a permit within three months of the effective date of this article. Applications for renewal of permits must be filed not more than two months nor less than one month prior to termination of an existing permit.  
Sec. 7-7-23. - Nonapplicability of this article. 
This article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the State of Illinois, or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this article apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois.  
Sec. 7-7-24. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager, the city inspector, or both officers, may, after public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to carry out the intent of this article.  
Sec. 7-7-25. - Violation and penalty. 
Every person except those persons who are specifically exempted by this article, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment without first obtaining a permit and paying a license fee to do so from the city, or shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $750.00.  
Sec. 7-7-26. - Maintaining public nuisance. 
Any building used as a massage establishment in violation of this article with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent permission of the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with all fixtures and other property used in violation of this article are hereby declared to be a nuisance.  
Sec. 7-7-27. - Review of city manager's decision. 
The decision of the city manager with regard to the issuance, suspension or revocation of any license under this article shall be reviewable by the mayor and city council, upon the written request of the party filed with the city clerk within ten days of such refusal, revocation or suspension. The mayor and city council shall review evidence previously submitted to the city manager, the report of the city manager, and any additional evidence presented with the written request for review. The decision of the mayor and city council upon such review shall be a final, appealable order.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 7-8-.5. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose: It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of: 
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 (1986), 
Young v. American Mini Theatres , 426 U.S. 50 (1976), 
FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas , 493 U.S. 215 (1990); 
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560 (1991), 
City of Erie v. Pap's A.M. , 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), 
City of Los Angeles v. Alemeda Books , 535 U.S. 425 (2002), 
New Albany DVD v. City of New Albany , 581 F.3d 556 (7 th Cir. 2009), 
R.V.S. v. City of Rockford , 361 F.3d 402 (7 th Cir. 2004), 
Daytona Grand v. City of Daytona Beach , 490 F 3d 860 (11 th Cir. 2007), 
Wis Enterprises, Inc., v. United Government of Athens-Clarke County , Georgia, 217 F. 3d 1360 (11 th Cir. 2000) 
Joelner v. Washington Park , IL 378 F.3d 613 (7 th Cir. 2004), 
Palmoetto Properties v. County of DuPage , IL 375 F. 3d 542 (7 th Cir. 2004), 
and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to: 
Phoenix, Arizona; 
Minneapolis, Minnesota; 
St. Paul, Minnesota; 
Houston, Texas; 
Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Amarillo, Texas; 
Garden Grove, California; 
Los Angeles, California; 
Whittier, California; 
Austin, Texas; 
Seattle, Washington; 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; 
Cleveland, Ohio; 
Beaumont, Texas; 
Dallas, Texas; 
Newport News, Virginia; 
Bellevue, Washington; 
New York, New York; 
St. Croix County, Wisconsin; 
and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this article as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
(7)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985, and 253,448 through December 31, 1992. 
(8)  There continue to be increasing numbers of reported cases of AIDS in the State of Missouri. 
(9)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in Missouri. 
(10)  The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982, and 45,200 through November, 1990. 
(11)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990. 
(12)  In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(13)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(14)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(15)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (15) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(17)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(19)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(20)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(21)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(22)  In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct. 
(23)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(24)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(25)  The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 2-22-11)  
Sec. 7-8-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  A striptease club or pornographic movie theater whose business is the commercial sale, dissemination, or distribution of sexually explicit material, shows, or other exhibitions; or 
(b)  An adult bookstore or adult video store whose primary business is the commercial sale, dissemination, or distribution of sexually explicit material, shows, or other exhibitions, as set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-1.5. 
Permittee. The operator of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Persons. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
Sexual or genital area shall include the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or vulva or breasts of a female. 
Sexually oriented establishment. Any business or use that includes offering its patrons goods or services of which a material portion involves the sale, display or provision of sexually oriented products or services. Any establishment in which sexually oriented products and services constitute more than ten percent of the building floor area or gross receipts of the establishment, or any establishment in which any sexually explicit activities or adult entertainment facilities are located shall be deemed a sexually oriented establishment. 
Sexually oriented products and services. 
(1)  Sexual devices. Any three dimensional object designed or marketed as useful primarily in the performance of a sexual act or to enhance or entice sexual stimulation or gratification. Such devices include any item which has no substantial non-sex related utility, such as erotic undergarments and artificial sexual organs, as well as devices with other utility when they are marketed for sexual purposes, such as chains, handcuffs, or the like, but does not include devices primarily intended for protection of health or prevention of pregnancy; 
(2)  Sexually explicit materials. Any book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper or other printed or written matter, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, pictorial representation, statue, figure, or other three dimensional object, recording, transcription or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication that depicts, describes, or portrays human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation, urinary and defecatory functions, sadism, masochism, sadomasochistic abuse, exhibition of the genitals, or any touching of the exposed genitals, pubic areas, breasts or buttocks of the human male or female, whether alone, or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; 
(3)  Sexually explicit activities. Any live exhibition of the human genitals, or female breasts or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas, breasts or buttocks of the human male or female, whether alone, or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 2-22-11)  
Sec. 7-8-2. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in or upon any premises in the City of Mascoutah, the operation of an adult entertainment establishment as herein defined, without first having obtained a permit from the city manager.  
Sec. 7-8-3. - Filing of application and fee provision. 
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct an adult entertainment establishment shall file an application in duplicate under oath with the city manager upon a form provided by said city manager and pay a nonrefundable filing fee of $5,000.00 to the city treasurer, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed with the city manager. 
The city manager shall within five days refer copies of such application to the department of inspection services, the fire department, the board of health and the city planning department. The departments shall within 30 days inspect the premises proposed to be operated as an adult entertainment establishment and make written recommendations to the city manager concerning compliance with the codes that they administer. 
Within ten days of receipt of the recommendations of the aforesaid departments, the city manager shall notify the applicant that his application is granted, denied or held for further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation the city manager shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied. 
Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the city manager shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. 
The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding the said application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any inspection required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the city manager.  
Sec. 7-8-4. - Application for an adult entertainment establishment. 
The application for a permit to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the business, and the proposed place of business and facilities therefor. 
In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit, including any partner or limited partner of a partnership applicant, and any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the following information: 
(a)  Name and address. 
(b)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(c)  All residential addresses for the past three years. 
(d)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(e)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(f)  The business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(g)  All criminal or city ordinance violation convictions, forfeitures of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations. 
(h)  The fingerprints and photograph of the applicant. 
(i)  If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation.  
Sec. 7-8-5. - Issuance of permit for an adult entertainment establishment. 
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the departments referred to in section 7-8-3 that the establishment is in compliance with all of the requirements of section 7-8-10 the city manager shall issue a permit to maintain, operate or conduct an adult entertainment establishment, unless he finds: 
(a)  That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not have complied with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, the Building, Health, Planning, Housing, Zoning and Fire Codes of the City of Mascoutah; or 
(b)  That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or indirectly engaged in the management and operation of an adult entertainment establishment has been convicted of: 
(1)  A felony; 
(2)  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or 
(3)  Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping or other offense opposed to decency and morality. 
The city manager, at his discretion, may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes in subsections (b)(1), (2) and (3) if he finds that such conviction occurred at least four years prior to the date of application, the applicant has had no subsequent convictions and the applicant has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public trust. 
Every adult entertainment establishment permit issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.  
Sec. 7-8-6. - Revocation or suspension of permit for an adult entertainment establishment. 
Any permit issued for an adult entertainment establishment may be revoked or suspended by the city manager after a hearing for good cause or in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated or any employee of the permittee, is engaged in any conduct at permittee's place of business, which violates any of the provisions of this article or any state law which provides for imprisonment, and permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of such violations or the permittee should have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or where any applicant has made a false statement on an application for a permit under this article or in any case where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer or inspector of the city and the County of St. Clair to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Such permit may also be revoked or suspended by the city manager, after hearing upon the recommendation of the city inspectors or officials that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the public health or healths of patrons or customers or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene. 
Any violation of this article by any employee of the permittee, shall be cause for suspension of the permit for not more than 30 days in the first instance. Any subsequent violation of this article by any employee of the permittee, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit. 
The city manager, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least ten days written notice of the charges against him or her and the opportunity for a public hearing before the city council, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charge shall be specific and in writing.  
Sec. 7-8-7. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  All persons and employees of any such establishment shall wear nontransparent clothing which covers the nipples of a female's breasts and which shall cover the genital area and anus of both males and females. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in an adult entertainment establishment, to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of the other person. 
(c)  No adult entertainer, employee or operator shall perform, offer or agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the patron's genital area. 
(d)  Except where contrary to any superceding applicable law, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Employ in a sexually oriented entertainment establishment any person under the age of 18 years or who has been convicted of a sex offense under ILCS Ch. 720, Title III, Article 11 (Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.), as amended, or any city ordinance adopted thereunder; 
(2)  Permit any sexually oriented products and services to be visible from outside the building in which such item or items are sold, displayed, offered, or provided, or inside the building except by a separate room with the entrance staffed at all times to ensure no entry by persons under 18 years; or 
(3)  Sell, display, offer, or otherwise provide child pornography as that term is defined and used in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20.1, as amended, or obscenity as that term is defined, as amended; 
(4)  Sell, display, offer, or otherwise provide a sexually oriented product and service to a person under the age of 18 years; 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Sell, provide, or consume liquor on the premises of any sexually oriented establishment or within any public area or on the premises of any commercial enterprise within 100 feet of such sexually oriented establishment. 
(7)  Sell, display, offer, or otherwise provide any sexually oriented products that are otherwise prohibited by law. 
(8)  No sexually oriented establishment may be located closer than 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented establishment; 
(9)  Make a false written statement or provide false information in conjunction with any required permit application form filed with the city. 
(e)  Adult entertainment facilities and/or sexually oriented establishments may be located within the GC general commercial and GI general industrial zoning districts under the following conditions: 
(1)  The proposed facility/use shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from any residential zoning district, park, school, church, or other institutional use; 
(2)  The proposed facility/use shall maintain a distance of at least 1,000 feet from any other such facility/use; 
(3)  No facility/use shall occupy a structure in excess of 5,000 square feet without an approved alternate parking plan designed for that use and supported by a traffic study submitted to and approved by the city council; 
(4)  The proposed facility/use shall be subject to all the regulations of the underlying zoning district; 
(5)  Where applicable the proposed facility/use shall also be subject to the requirements of the AO airport overlay district; 
(6)  For the purpose of subsection (e)(1) and (2) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the plan of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest portion of the building or structure of the use listed in subsection (e)(1) or (2). 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 2-22-11)  
Sec. 7-8-8. - Advertising. 
No adult entertainment establishment granted a permit under provisions of this article shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter than depicts any portion of the human body in photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 2-22-11)  
Sec. 7-8-9. - Inspections. 
The police department and the city inspector shall from time to time, and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each adult entertainment establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this article for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner.  
Sec. 7-8-10. - Employment of person under the age of 18 prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any adult entertainment establishment to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age.  
Sec. 7-8-11. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager, the city inspector, or both officers, may, after public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to carry out the intent of this article.  
Sec. 7-8-12. - Maintaining public nuisance. 
Any building used as an adult entertainment establishment in violation of this article with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent permission of the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with all fixtures and other property used in violation of this article are hereby declared to be a nuisance.  
Sec. 7-8-13. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this article, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of effectiveness of the remaining portions of this article or any part thereof.  
Sec. 7-8-14. - Review of city manager's decision. 
The decision of the city manager with regard to the issuance, suspension or revocation of any license under this article shall be reviewable by the mayor and city council, upon the written request of the party filed with the city clerk within ten days of such refusal, revocation or suspension. The mayor and city council shall review evidence previously submitted to the city manager, the report of the city manager, and any additional evidence presented with the written request for review. The decision of the mayor and city council upon such review shall be a final, appealable order.  
ARTICLE IX. - RAFFLES 
 
Sec. 7-9-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the terms defined in this section have the meanings given them: 
Enabling act means Illinois Public Act Number 81-1365 (1980) entitled "An act to provide for licensing and regulating certain games of chance and amending certain acts herein name". 
Net proceeds means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, license fees as provided herein, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in Illinois Compiled Statutes, conducted by an organization licensed under the terms of this article, in which: 
(a)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers, or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance; 
(b)  The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
State Law reference— See 230 ILCS Sec. 15/2.  
Sec. 7-9-2. - Licensing. 
No person, firm or corporation, shall conduct raffles or chances within the City of Mascoutah, without first having obtained a license therefore as provided in this article; provided, however, that such a license hereunder may be issued only to bona fide religious, civic charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, namely non-profit, civic charitable, educational, religious, fraternal, veterans, and labor, all referring to organizations and/or institutions established for such purposes, shall have the same meanings as are given to such terms pursuant to Section 2(b) of the "Enabling Act".  
Sec. 7-9-3. - Application for license. 
Any firm, person or organization applying for a raffle license pursuant to the provisions of this article shall file a written application therefore in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Mascoutah. Such application shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The area or areas within the City of Mascoutah in which raffle chances will be sold or issued. 
(b)  The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued. 
(c)  The time of determination of winning changes. 
(d)  The location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. 
(e)  A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization. 
Any such application for a raffle license filed pursuant hereto shall be acted upon by the City Council of the City of Mascoutah within 30 days from the date on which it is filed.  
Sec. 7-9-4. - Filing fee for license application. 
Each application for a raffle license filed pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of $15.00 to be paid at the time of filing.  
Sec. 7-9-5. - Limitations. 
The following limitations shall apply as to prizes, merchandise and chances in connection with any raffle conducted within the City of Mascoutah. 
(a)  The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in connection with a single raffle shall not exceed $25,000.00. 
(b)  The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $15,000.00. 
(c)  The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed $100.00. 
(d)  The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold shall not exceed 120 days.  
Sec. 7-9-6. - Conduct of raffles. 
The following limitations shall apply in respect to the conduct of raffles within the City of Mascoutah. 
(a)  The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct that game. 
(b)  No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(c)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(d)  A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine a winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this article. 
(e)  Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license. 
(f)  No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(g)  Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for only one raffle, and the same may be suspended or revoked for any violation of the terms of this article or the "enabling act".  
Sec. 7-9-7. - Raffle manager; bond. 
All operation of and the conduct of raffles within the City of Mascoutah shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of $1,000.00 in favor of the organization conditioned upon the honesty of such manager in the performance of his duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the City of Mascoutah by filing the same with the office of the city clerk not less than 30 days prior to the cancellation of such bond. The City Council of the City of Mascoutah may waive this bond requirement by the affirmative vote of three-fifths members of the city council and provided further that a waiver provision as to such bond shall be contained in the license issued to the applicant organization pursuant to this article; provided however, and notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in section 7-1-1, a license containing such bond waiver provisions shall be granted only by the unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization.  
Sec. 7-9-8. - Records. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and games of chance shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from the gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment. 
(b)  Each organization conducting raffles pursuant to this article shall have separate records of each raffle conducted pursuant hereto. The persons who account for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles on behalf of such organization shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. 
(c)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership, and upon request to the city manager, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this section. 
(d)  Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.  
Sec. 7-9-9. - Ineligibility. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provision hereinabove contained, the following are ineligible for any license under this article: 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony. 
(b)  Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter. 
(c)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(d)  Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which such a person is active or employed. 
(e)  Any organization in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not. 
(f)  Any organization in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this article.  
ARTICLE X. - DISTRIBUTION OF NEWSPAPERS, ADVERTISEMENTS, FLYERS AND HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 7-10-1. Distribution. 
No publisher, distributor, or deliverer of newspapers, advertisements, flyers, handbills or other printed information shall cause to be delivered, thrown, placed or otherwise set upon any residence, business or property within the city limits, if the resident, property or business owner has notified the publisher, distributor, or deliverer, that they do not wish to receive said publication, advertisement, handbill or flyer.  
Sec. 7-10-2. - Notification. 
For purposes of this article a publisher, distributor, or deliverer of any publication under this article will have been deemed to receive adequate notice if the person or entity sends a certified letter, return receipt requested informing the publisher, distributor or deliverer of the person or entities' desire not to receive the publication with the persons or entities' address.  
Sec. 7-10-3. - Penalties. 
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who continues to deliver, throw or otherwise place upon the property of a residence, business or property any publication referred to in this article, after being duly notified, shall be fined an amount not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 983, 12-18-95)  
ARTICLE XI. - GAMBLING AND VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS 
 
Sec. 7-11-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Board. The Illinois Gaming Board. 
Licensed establishment. Any licensed retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the premises, which possesses a city class F liquor license. A retail establishment that sells alcoholic liquor or other alcoholic beverages, where the majority of the alcoholic liquor or beverages sold are not consumed on the premises, is not a licensed establishment. 
Licensed fraternal establishment. The location where a qualified fraternal organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization regularly meets which possesses a city class C liquor license. 
Licensed veterans establishment. The location where a qualified veterans organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization regularly meets which possesses a City Class C liquor license. 
Terminal operator. An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, licensed to own, service, and maintain video gaming terminals for placement in licensed establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or licensed veterans establishments. 
Video Gaming Act. Gaming (230 ILCS 40/). 
Video gaming terminal. Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
Sec. 7-11-2. - Video gaming terminals allowed. 
Video gaming terminals are permitted within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah only if licensed and registered by the Illinois Gaming Board under the Video Gaming Act. 
The number of video gaming terminals permitted to be operated in each establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board at any time is the number established by the Video Gaming Act. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
Sec. 7-11-3. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any video gaming terminal in any licensed establishment, licensed veterans establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah without having first obtained a video gaming terminal permit issued by the city, and are otherwise compliant with Illinois Gaming Board regulations. 
Each video gaming terminal shall require a separate permit. No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
Sec. 7-11-4. - Filing of application and fee provisions. 
(a)  Every applicant for a permit to place a video gaming terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed veterans establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment shall file an application with the city clerk upon a form provided by the clerk annually. 
(b)  The annual fee for each permit shall be $50.00 per video gaming terminal. In no case shall any portion of said permit fee be refunded. The annual fee shall not be prorated for periods of less than 12 months. 
(c)  Each video gaming terminal permit issued pursuant to sections 7-11-3 and 7-11-4 shall run from the 1st day of May through the 30th day of April in the following year. Each license issued later than May 1 shall terminate on the 30th day of April. The annual license fee shall be paid in advance of the ensuing license year. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
Sec. 7-11-5. - Display of permit. 
Every permit issued shall be framed and hung in a conspicuous place in the permitted premises. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
Sec. 7-11-6. - Right of entry. 
The chief of police, or his designee, has to the power to and shall inspect any licensed establishment, licensed veterans establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah at such times and intervals as he may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
Sec. 7-11-7. - Violations and penalty. 
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code shall be subject to the general penalty described in division 4 of chapter 1 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
Sec. 7-11-9. - Distribution of revenue. 
Permit fees and revenue received by the City of Mascoutah pursuant to 230 ILCS 40/75, Revenue sharing; local government video gaming distributive fund, less costs of issuing video gaming terminal permits, shall be applied to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12)  
ARTICLE XII. - SHORT TERM RENTALS 
 
Sec. 7-12-1. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Short term rental. A rental of any dwelling unit, in whole, to any persons for exclusive transient use of 29 consecutive days or less. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 7-12-2. - License required and regulations. 
(a)  Short term rentals as defined in section 7-12-1 require a short term rental business license. 
(b)  An application for a short term rental business license must be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk will coordinate review of the license with affected city departments. 
(c)  Each short term rental property must also comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Agent or owner will have the building/property inspected annually to ensure compliance with building codes to protect the health, safety and welfare of tenants. 
(2)  Number of nights the property can be rented in a 12-month period will not exceed 90 days for those properties located in residentially zoned districts (RS-10, RS-8, RS-5, RT, RM, RMH, PDP Residential 8.1); or 240 days for those properties located in commercially zoned districts (AG, O, NC, DC, GC, LI, GI, AP, CF). If renting dwelling unit out for more than the specified time aforementioned, dwelling unit must be owner/operators primary residence. 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance ($100,000.00 minimum coverage) will be provided to the city along with a copy of the safety procedures and emergency phone numbers, copy of which will be required to be posted at the property. 
(4)  Short term rentals will be allowed in any zoning districts where residency is allowed by this Code. 
(5)  Owner/operator will provide the city with quarterly reports on number of stays and length of time. 
(6)  Stays of 30 days or more will not count towards short term rental limits of either 90 days or 240 days. 
(7)  Number of people (related and un-related) that can occupy the property will have to comply with current code. 
(8)  Evidence of short term rental use from the exterior is prohibited, except for signs as permitted by article X of the city code. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 6-19-17)  
Sec. 7-12-3. - Fees. 
Cost for a short term rental business license shall be $50.00 for applicants. Short term rental business licenses must be renewed annually with proof of annual property inspection and liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 7-12-4. - Penalties. 
Any owner/operator who fails to register a short term rental property within 90 days of commencement of business or within 90 days of the effective date of this article or violates any other provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-1-20. 
(Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 8-1-16)  
ARTICLE XIII. - YARD SALES 
 
Sec. 7-13-1. - Definition. 
[For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.] 
Yard sale. Any display of merchandise for the purpose of exchanging it for legal tender or barter at a residential location not otherwise regularly used or specifically designated for the sale or exchange of merchandise whether advertised or not; also commonly known as garage sales, lawn sales, porch sales, back yard sales, patio sales, rummage sales, tailgate sales, flea markets, house sales, moving sales. This shall not apply to bankruptcy, estate or other sales under judicial process and sales conducted from church, school or civic buildings by non-profit religious, civic or charitable organizations. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 7-13-2. - Permit. 
Permits for yard sales are not required. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 7-13-3. - Regulations. 
(a)  No more than four yard sales may be held at any one property during any calendar year. A yard sale is considered either a one day event or a two consecutive day event. 
(b)  No sales conducted under the provisions of this section shall be located on any public sidewalk, alleyway or public right-of-way. 
(c)  Yard sales shall be conducted only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 7-13-4. - Advertising signage restrictions. 
No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint or fasten, or cause to be nailed, tacked, painted or fastened, any sign or any other foreign substance or material onto any telephone, electric light, police and/or fire alarm pole or post, or any street or traffic sign located on any sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds or injure or deface any such pole or post. 
Any signs placed on public right-of-way shall be allowed up to 24 hours prior to sale and shall be removed within 24 hours after sale conclusion. 
Any and all signs posted on private property are allowed to remain standing from dawn until dusk on the day of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 7-13-5. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-1-20. 
(Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 8-21-17)  
Chapter 8 - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
Sec. 8-1-1. - Statement of intent and purpose; authority. 
(a)  Continental Cablevision has been operating a cable communications system pursuant to the city cable television franchise, Ordinance 717.1, expiring March 15, 1996. The City of Mascoutah, Illinois intends, by the adoption of this Chapter, to authorize the continued operation of its cable communications system following the expiration of the current franchise. 
(b)  Insofar as the State of Illinois has delegated to the city the authority to grant a franchise for CATV system operation within the city's territorial boundaries, the city hereby exercises its authority to grant a non-exclusive franchise permitting the operation of a cable system within the city.  
Sec. 8-1-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Mascoutah, Illinois Cable Franchise Ordinance for Continental Cablevision of St. Louis County, Inc.".  
Sec. 8-1-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
Basic CATV service shall mean the lowest price level of service which includes the retransmission of local broadcast signals (as authorized) and public, educational, and government access programming. 
CATV shall mean a cable communications system as hereinafter defined. 
Cable communications system shall mean a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, fiber optic cables, towers, waveguides or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, used for distributing video programming to home subscribers, and/or producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electrical signals to, from and between subscribers and other users. 
Cable service shall mean: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video, audio, digital, and other programming services; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
City shall mean the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
City council shall mean the governing body of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
Company shall mean Continental Cablevision of St. Louis County, Inc. and its successors, transferees or assignees. 
Franchise area shall mean the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, and subsequent additions thereto. 
Gross subscriber revenues shall mean all revenues received by the company for any service provided by the company by means of the CATV system, within the confines of the city, excluding taxes, franchise fees, and other assessments collected by governmental authorities. 
Mayor shall mean the Mayor of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Property of company shall mean all property owned, installed or used by the company in the conduct of a CATV business in the franchise area. 
Public property shall mean any real property owned by the city other than a street. 
Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, right-of-way, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, communication, or utility easement, on or hereafter existing as such within the franchise area. 
Subscriber shall mean any person or entity who subscribes to a service provided by the company by means of the CATV system. 
Tier shall mean a category of cable service provided by the company and for which a separate rate is charged by the company.  
Sec. 8-1-4. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  Whereas the city has approved the legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the company and the adequacy and feasibility of the company's construction arrangements as part of a full public proceeding affording due process, there is hereby granted by the city to the company the right and privilege to continue to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street and public property, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the franchise area such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. 
(b)  The city, in granting such rights and privileges to the company to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city, shall grant to the company all access to premises privileges, pursuant to all applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(c)  Neither this chapter nor any of the company's rights or obligations hereunder shall be assigned or otherwise transferred without the prior written consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Consent of the city shall not, however, be required for a transfer to a parent, subsidiary, or affiliate of the company; provided however, the obligations of the company shall not be released because of any such assignment to a parent, subsidiary or affiliate. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the successor of this company shall be obligated by the terms and conditions of this chapter.  
Sec. 8-1-5. - Non-exclusive grant. 
(a)  The franchise granted herein and the right to use and occupy said streets and public property for the purpose herein set forth, shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant the same use in said streets and public property to any other person. 
(b)  In the event that the city permits another CATV system to operate within the city on terms more favorable than those extended to the company, such more favorable terms shall be applicable to the company.  
Sec. 8-1-6. - Term of franchise and renewal. 
(a)  This franchise and rights herein granted shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of acceptance by the company, and shall continue in full force and effect for a term of 20 years beginning March 15, 1996. 
(b)  The franchise may be renewed for an additional 20 years upon such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed between the parties, all in accordance with the substantive and procedural requirements of any laws, statutes, or regulations than applicable to the renewal of a CATV franchise.  
Sec. 8-1-7. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by the company within the franchise area shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and public property, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the streets and public property. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all local, state and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. The company shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city or of any public utility serving the city. Whenever practical and possible, the CATV system shall utilize existing poles and easements. All poles and conduit installed within the franchise area shall be made available for attachment or use by the company, at just and reasonable rates applied to public utilities under the formula presently established in 47 U.S.C. Section 244, now or as amended from time to time. 
(b)  In case of disturbance of any street or public property, the company shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street or public property in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done and in accordance with the prevailing ordinances. 
(c)  In the maintenance and operation of the CATV system, and in the course of new construction or additions to its facilities, the company shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public. Any opening or obstruction in the street or public property made by the company shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate safety devices, which shall be clearly designated by warning lights. 
(d)  If at any time during the period of the franchise, the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street or public property, the company, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(e)  Any poles or other fixtures placed in any street or public property by the company shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(f)  The company shall, on the request of any person holding the necessary permits, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the company shall have the authority to require such payment, in advance. The company shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(g)  The company shall have the authority, subject to the jurisdiction of the city, to trim trees upon and overhanging streets and public property of the franchise area so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company. Such trimming shall be done in a reasonable and minimal manner. 
(h)  In all sections of the franchise area where all cables, wires, or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the company shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the company to do so. 
(i)  The company shall at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or public property, or remove from the street or public property, any property of the company when reasonably required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the company shall in all such cases have the privilege and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the company in place. 
(j)  The city shall have the reasonable right to make additional use for any public or municipal purpose, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the company in any street or public property provided such use by the city does not interfere with the use by the company. The city shall indemnify and hold harmless the company against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of action, actions, suite, proceedings, damages, costs or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever arising out of such use of company's poles or conduits.  
Sec. 8-1-8. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  The company shall at all times take reasonable precautions for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury to the public, to employees of the company, and to public or private property. 
(b)  All lines, equipment, and facilities with the franchise area shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair.  
Sec. 8-1-9. - System extension. 
(a)  No person within 150 feet of the company's facilities shall be arbitrarily refused service. 
(b)  The city and company agree that a reasonable standard of practicality is warranted for requiring service ability in areas which may be annexed after the date of this franchise agreement. The company agrees that it shall extend its CATV system to all annexed parts of the franchise area having a minimum of either 50 dwelling units per street line, or 25 potential subscribers per cable mile. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation within 150 feet of the company's facilities shall be arbitrarily refused service. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a requirement for underground cable of more than 150 feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscriber; a density of less than 50 dwelling units per street mile; or, less than 25 potential subscribers per cable mile, in order that existing subscribers shall not be unfairly burdened, service may be made available on the basis of a nonrefundable capital contribution including cost of material, labor, and easements.  
Sec. 8-1-10. - System. 
(a)  The company agrees to maintain its CATV system in conformity with the generally accepted state of the art technology for such systems of comparable size and age to the system serving the city. 
(b)  The company shall allocate one channel to be shared by local origination (cablecasting) in full color and programmed to meet the needs and interests of the area community; government access for use by local government; educational access for use by local educational authorities; and public access for use by anyone in the community on a first come, first serve basis. Upon completion of a CATV system upgrade and expansion of channel capacity and as additional utilization requires, the company shall make available, as permitted by channel capacity and technical limitations, one additional access channel for the provision of public, educational, and governmental access television. 
(c)  To enhance and improve the overall technical and picture quality of its CATV system, the company plans to upgrade its CATV system in or about 1998. Such an upgrade will increase the system's bandwidth to a minimum of 550 MHZ, supplying capacity for 78 channels. The CATV system will be designed to meet or exceed all FCC rules and regulations regarding technical standards and will be built with addressability or comparable technology. The company shall notify the city not less than 60 days prior to the beginning of construction along with a report of the CATV system upgrade. 
(d)  The company shall design and construct the CATV system to provide for an audio override of all channels during emergencies or disasters, whereby a designee approved by the company may introduce an audio message on all channels of the CATV system simultaneously. 
(e)  The company shall make available to its subscribers, a signal scrambling device capable of rendering cable service inaccessible or accessible, subject to the subscriber's discretion. 
(f)  The company shall provide audio services. 
(g)  In the event that the company provides another community within the CATV system with a more favorable CATV system upgrade or cable programming service package than those extended to the city, such more favorable terms shall be applicable to the city.  
Sec. 8-1-11. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The company shall operate and maintain its CATV system in full compliance with the standards set forth by the Federal Communications Commission. Procedures for testing the technical capacity of the CATV system shall conform with the standards applied to CATV systems by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, installations, or adjustments, the company shall do so at such times as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers and unless such interruption is of short duration or is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall give reasonable notice thereof to its customers.  
Sec. 8-1-12. - Local office; complaints; and customer service obligations. 
(a)  The company shall maintain a business office which subscribers may telephone during regular business hours without incurring added message or toll charges, so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available. Should a subscriber have an unresolved complaint regarding the quality of cable service, equipment malfunctions, or similar matters, the subscriber shall be entitled to file his complaint with the city clerk and thereafter to meet jointly with a representative designated by the mayor and a representative of the company within 30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matter. 
(b)  The company shall adhere to all general operating requirements as set forth by the Federal Communications Commission under Section 76.309 of Title 47 CFR, Part 76, Subpart H of the FCC Rules, or as amended from time to time. 
(c)  In the event that the company agrees to a standard with another community with the CATV system that exceed the provisions extended to the city in section 8-1-12(b), such more favorable standards shall be applicable to the city.  
Sec. 8-1-13. - Rates. 
(a)  The company shall have the right to charge and collect compensation from all subscribers to whom it shall furnish services on its CATV system. The rate schedule to be charged customers shall be kept on file with the city clerk at all times and no change in such schedule shall be made without first filing the changed schedule with the city clerk 30 days prior to the effective date. 
(b)  The company, however, may: 
(1)  Conduct promotional campaigns in which rates are discounted or waived; 
(2)  Make special contracts for non-profit charitable, educational, governmental and religious organizations; and 
(3)  Offer bulk rate discounts on multiple unit dwellings, hotels, motels, or similar institutions. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to regulate the basic CATV service tier, installation and equipment rates to the maximum degree permitted under applicable federal law.  
Sec. 8-1-14. - Franchise payments. 
The company shall pay to the city, within 45 days after the close of each calendar quarter, a five percent franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues as defined herein for CATV system operations in the city for the preceding calendar quarter. No other fee, charge, or consideration shall be imposed. The company shall provide a quarterly summary report verified by an officer of the company showing its gross subscriber revenues received during the preceding quarter. The five percent franchise fee based upon gross subscriber revenues shall be effective for all quarters commencing after March 15, 1996.  
Sec. 8-1-15. - Indemnification of the city. 
(a)  The company shall at all times protect and hold harmless the city from all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expense or damages of every kind and description, including investigation costs, court costs, and attorney's fees which may accrue to be suffered or claimed by any person or persons arising out of the negligence of the company in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of said CATV system and by reason of any license, copyright, property right or patent of any article or system used in the construction or use of said system. The city shall give the company prompt notice of any such claims, actions, suits, without limitation, in writing. The company shall also indemnify and hold the city harmless from all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expense, or damages of every kind and nature, including court costs and attorney's fees which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any person or persons for any alleged violation of the anti-trusts laws of the United States of America or any civil rights action which may be brought against the city arising out of the grant of any franchise under this chapter, or as amended from time to time. 
(b)  The company shall maintain in full force and effect during the life of any franchise, public liability insurance in a solvent insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois, at no less than in the following amounts: 
(1)  Two hundred thousand dollars property damage in any one accident; 
(2)  Five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury in any one person; 
(3)  One million dollars for personal injury in any one accident. 
Provided that all such insurance may contain reasonable deductible provisions not to exceed $50,000.00 for any type of coverage, and provided further, the city may require that any and all investigation of claims made by any person, firm, or corporation against the city arising out of any use or misuse of privileges granted to the company hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense, of the company or its insurer.  
Sec. 8-1-16. - Procedure upon termination. 
Upon expiration of the franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company may have and it is hereby granted, the right to enter upon the streets and public property of the city for the purposes of removing therefrom any or all of its property and otherwise. In so removing said property, the company shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it, and shall leave said streets and public property in as nearly as possible as good condition as that prevailing prior to the company's removal of its property.  
Sec. 8-1-17. - New developments. 
It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend this franchise upon application of the company, when necessary to enable the company to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of video, audio, digital, and data signals, which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently and/or economically serve its customers.  
Sec. 8-1-18. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The company shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise if such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the company by the city clerk upon the company's filing of acceptance and shall be paid at that time. 
(c)  The company further agrees to provide, without charge, one cable outlet and service to each educational and local governmental facility, located within 150 feet of the company's facilities. Such cable service shall include all CATV programming except for non-advertiser supported programming offered on a per-channel or per-program basis. The installation of such outlets shall not require special equipment or extraordinary materials. If more than one outlet is requested at any of the said facilities, the company shall install the same at the cost of time and material only. In no event will there be a monthly service charge of said facilities, unless a request is made for per-channel or per-program services, or other auxiliary services, to the extent that the company is allowed under its contract with the programming suppliers.  
Sec. 8-1-19. - Modifications. 
(a)  During the term of a franchise, the company may need to request from the council modifications of the franchise ordinance. Any required modifications request by the company not related to equipment, facilities and services issues must be submitted to the council in writing. Upon a written request by the company for a modification of the franchise ordinance, the city shall have 120 days within which to render a decision approving, or disapproving the modification request. If such a decision is not rendered within 120 days of the date the written request is received by the council, such request will be deemed approved. 
(b)  If a modification request is made by the company on matters involving issues related to the company's equipment, facilities, and services, the city shall follow all procedures as set forth under 47 U.S.C. Section 545.  
Sec. 8-1-20. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
The company shall at all times during the life of this franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city. The city reserves the right to adopt from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, such ordinances as may be deemed necessary to the exercise of police power. Such regulation shall be reasonable and not destructive to the rights herein granted and not in conflict with the laws of the State or other local laws or regulations.  
Sec. 8-1-21. - Forfeiture or revocation. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of any franchise or otherwise, the city reserves the right to revoke, terminate and cancel any franchise and all rights and privileges of the company thereunder in the event that the company: 
(1)  Should default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this chapter, or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city and the company; 
(2)  Should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages as required herein; 
(3)  Should frequently and materially violate any orders of rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the company relative to this franchise unless such orders or rulings are being contested by the company in a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(4)  Fails to receive necessary FCC approval; 
(5)  Ceases to provide services for reasons within the control of the company. The company shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond the company's control; or 
(6)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(b)  In the event that the city believes that the company has not complied with the terms of its franchise, the city shall notify the company in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 
(c)  The company shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in subsection (b) above to: 
(1)  Respond to the city contesting the assertion of noncompliance; 
(2)  Cure such default; or 
(3)  In the event that, by the nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, the company shall initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the city of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
(d)  In the event that the company fails to respond to the notice described in subsection (b) pursuant to the procedure set forth in subsection (c), or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 60 days after the company is notified of the alleged default pursuant to subsection (b) above, the mayor shall schedule a private meeting with a delegate of the company to investigate the default. A subsequent public meeting may be held if the alleged default is not remedied within 30 days after the private meeting is held with the company. Such public hearing shall be held at the next regularly schedule meeting of the city council which is scheduled at a time which is not less than 14 business days therefrom. The city council shall notify the company of the time and place of such meeting and provide the company with an opportunity to be heard. 
(e)  Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the city council, after such meeting, determines that the company is in default of any provision of its franchise and/or this chapter, the city council may: 
(1)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek specific performance or other equitable relief; or 
(2)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declare the franchise to be revoked. 
(f)  The company shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the city council to enforce prompt compliance. 
(g)  In a situation where the company's franchise is revoked, in removing its plant, structures and equipment, the company shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all streets and public property in as good condition as prevailed prior to the company's removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachment. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the streets and public property; and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the company with the terms and conditions of this subsection and this chapter. 
(h)  In the event of a failure by the company to complete any work required by subsection (g) above, or any other work required by local law or ordinance within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause such work to be done and the company shall reimburse the city the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(i)  Upon the revocation of a franchise, the city may require the company to continue to operate the system for a period of time not to exceed one month from the date of such revocation. The company shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the CATV system under the terms and conditions of its franchise and to provide cable service that may be provided at that time. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(j)  The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city or the company under any other provision of federal, state or local law.  
Sec. 8-1-22. - Violations. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any street or public property of the city, or within any privately-owned area within the city which has not yet become a street or public property but is designated or delineated as a proposed street or public property on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any video, audio, digital, or data signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or public property has first been obtained on the same terms and conditions, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of the franchised CATV system within the city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any video, audio, digital, or data signals, without payment to the operator of said systems. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of video, audio, digital, or data signals. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in acts that have the purpose or effect of limiting competition for the provision of cable service or services similar to cable service in the city, except for such actions as are expressly authorized by law.  
Sec. 8-1-23. - Penalties. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of section 8-1-22 of this chapter shall be guilty of violating or failing to comply with provision of section 8-1-22 of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each day of the violation or failure to comply, and shall also be subject to penalty provisions contained in all applicable state and federal laws.  
Sec. 8-1-24. - Company rules and regulations. 
The company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the company to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this chapter, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal law.  
Sec. 8-1-25. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not abate, reduce or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the company. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.  
Sec. 8-1-26. - Federal regulation. 
The city and the company shall acknowledge and adhere to all applicable federal rules and regulations, as they relate to cable communication systems. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with provisions of this chapter, the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Rules and Regulations established by the Federal Communications Commission, and any other applicable federal statute related to this subject, are hereby repealed.  
Sec. 8-1-27. - Renewal. 
The City of Mascoutah, Illinois has conducted a public hearing affording due process concerning the application for a renewal for an additional 20 years by Continental Cablevision of St. Louis County, Inc. and has reviewed the performance of the company and adequacy of Ordinance 717.1. The city does hereby grant to the company pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for an additional 20-year period from and after March 15, 1996. This grant to Continental Cablevision of St. Louis County, Inc. is not exclusive and the city hereby reserves the right to make a similar grant of franchise to any other company on the same terms and conditions.  
Sec. 8-1-28. - Effective date. 
An emergency is hereby declared to exist in that the existing franchise, Ordinance 717B, expires on March 15, 1996, and passage and approval of the chapter is necessary for the continued provision of cable service to subscribers in Mascoutah, Illinois. This chapter shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after its passage as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-114, 03-04-96)  
Chapter 9 - CEMETERIES  
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF MANAGERS 
 
Sec. 9-1-1. - Board members. 
There shall be a Cemetery Board of Managers of the City of Mascoutah consisting of five board members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.  
Sec. 9-1-2. - Terms of office. 
The initial terms of office shall be as follows: one board member shall be appointed for one year; one board member shall be appointed for two years; one board member for three years; and the remaining two board members for four years. After the initial appointments, each term of office shall be for a period of four years.  
Sec. 9-1-3. - Officers. 
The board of managers, as soon as may be convenient after appointment, shall meet and organize by selecting one of their number to be president and another as clerk. A treasurer shall also be elected by the board, who may or may not be a member of the board, and who before entering upon his duties as such shall execute a bond to the People of the State of Illinois for the use of the board of managers in a penal sum of not less than double the value of such money or funds coming unto the hands as such treasurer.  
Sec. 9-1-4. - Meetings. 
The board shall meet as often as necessary to perform their duties, but in no event shall the board meet less than once every three months. Should a board member fail to attend three consecutive meetings of the board of managers, said board member will have been deemed to have resigned and a new appointment shall be made by the mayor.  
Sec. 9-1-5. - Duties. 
The board shall manage and hold in trust any and all funds received, in perpetual trust, for the maintenance, care, repair, upkeep or ornamentation of any of the city's cemeteries, lots, or graves. The board of managers shall have the care, charge, management, and control of such cemetery, under the supervision of the city council. The board may invest any such money, property, or other gifts or bequests as prescribed in 65 ILCS 5/11-52.2-1. The principal of such trust fund shall be kept intact, and perpetually invested, and the income thereof, shall be perpetually applied for the purposes specified, in the instrument making such gift, donation or legacy and for no other purpose. The board shall have all other duties and powers as prescribed in 65 ILCS 5/11-52.2-1.  
Sec. 9-1-6. - Treasurer. 
The treasurer of the board shall have custody of all money and property received in trust by the board of managers and shall pay out same only upon written order of the board, signed by the president and clerk thereof. The treasurer shall keep permanent books of record of all such trust funds and all receipts and disbursements thereof, and for what purposes received and disbursed, and shall annually make a written report to the board of managers and the city council, under oath, showing balances, receipts and disbursements, including a statement showing the amount and principal of trust funds on hand and how invested. Nothing in this section shall relieve the treasurer from any other duties as prescribed by statute.  
Sec. 9-1-7. - Clerk. 
The clerk of the board of managers shall keep a permanent record of the proceedings of the board, signed by the president and attested by the clerk, and shall also keep a permanent record of the several trust funds from what sources received, the amounts thereof, and for what uses and purposes, respectively. Nothing in this section shall relieve the clerk of any other duties prescribed by statute.  
Sec. 9-1-8. - Removal from office. 
The city council shall have the power to remove from office any or all of the board of managers or the treasurer for non-performance of duties or for misappropriation or wrongful use of the funds or property and to require a just and proper accounting. 
(Ord. No. 98-113, 07-06-98)  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-2-1. - Burial permit required. 
Persons desiring to bury a corpse in the cemetery shall first obtain a permit to bury as required under the laws of the State of Illinois and the sexton is strictly prohibited from burying any corpse in the cemetery unless such permit is first obtained and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 420)  
Sec. 9-2-2. - Prices. 
(a)  The price of single graves in the city cemetery shall be $450.00. 
(b)  There shall be paid into the cemetery trust fund the amount of one-third of the cost of the grave for perpetual care. 
(c)  There shall be paid into the cemetery purchase fund the amount of one-third of the cost of the grave for the purchase of additional land, improvements, extensions, and other necessary expenses in connection with said cemetery. 
(d)  The price of a single infant grave in the city cemetery shall be $175.00. 
(e)  A bequest of $500.00 may be paid to the cemetery trust fund for perpetual care that includes one arrangement of flowers to be placed on a designated grave space each Memorial Day. 
(f)  There shall be no more than two burials per grave space: one casket burial and one cremated remains or two cremated remains. The fee for right of second burial shall be $150.00 in addition to the grave opening charge in section 9-2-7. 
(g)  The price for a disinterment shall be one and one-half times the grave opening charge in section 9-2-7. 
(h)  A late fee of $175.00 shall be charged for a burial scheduled for after 3:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 574; Ord. No. 673, 09-20-76; Ord. No. 01-103, 04-16-01; Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-18-13, eff. 5-1-2013)  
Sec. 9-2-3. - City clerk's register. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a correct record of all such lots sold, numbering each deed when issued, and countersigning all such certificates of purchase, and procure the mayor's signature, and affix the seal of the City of Mascoutah thereon. 
(Ord. No. 420)  
Sec. 9-2-4. - Deeds transferred. 
When deeds for cemetery lots are transferable upon duly executed deed by the owner thereof designating the transferee; the city clerk shall change the register of lots upon proper notification and filing of such deed transferring said lot or lots. The price for a deed transfer shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 420; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-18-13, eff. 5-1-2013)  
Sec. 9-2-5. - Flowers, trees, shrubs, and memorials. 
The owners of lots shall not have the right to place shrubs or trees on their lots except with the permission of the city manager and under his supervision. 
The owners of lots shall not have the right to plant or place flowers (real or artificial) on the ground. Flowers (real or artificial) and memorials must be located on the headstone or foundation and are not allowed to be placed on the grass or dirt. Exceptions: November-January to allow for Christmas flowers and grave blankets; the week directly preceding and following Easter to allow for Easter flowers and crosses; and holidays recognizing the armed forces to allow for flags and memorials (i.e. Memorial Day and Veterans Day). 
(Ord. No. 420; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-18-13, eff. 5-1-2013)  
Sec. 9-2-6. - Curbs or artificial elevations prohibited. 
No curb or artificial elevation shall be placed on or around any graves nor shall excessive mound or elevations be permitted and all graves shall hereafter be so maintained to permit same to be freely mowed with a power or mechanical mower; nothing herein shall prohibit the erection and maintenance of markers, monuments or headstones or the maintenance of curbs now in place. 
Prior to the placing of any foundation for marker or monuments in said cemetery a permit must be secured from the city clerk. The sexton of the cemetery shall check and file said permit and shall inspect and supervise the placing of said foundation. The size of all monuments shall not exceed four feet in height or width, providing the height of said monument shall reasonably correspond to the width of same. Other markers (other than the headstone) shall be erected in a way that is level with the ground allowing cemetery equipment to go over them. 
(Ord. No. 420; Ord. No. 574; Ord. No. 01-103, 04-16-01; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-18-13, eff. 5-1-2013)  
Sec. 9-2-7. - Grave opening charges. 
The charge for opening and closing a grave shall be $550.00 for full size grave and $250.00 for ashes and $200.00 for an infant grave, which charge shall include lowering device as regularly furnished. The charge for opening and closing a grave on Saturday shall be $700.00 for full size grave and $350.00 for ashes and $300.00 for an infant grave. There shall be no graves opened or closed on Sunday. The charge for opening and closing a full size grave on a holiday shall be $850.00 and the charge for opening and closing for ashes shall be $450.00 and the charge for opening and closing for an infant shall be $400.00. Holiday charges shall also apply to the Saturday directly preceding or following a Monday or Friday holiday. 
(Ord. No. 01-103, 4-16-01; Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-18-13, eff. 5-1-2013)  
Sec. 9-2-8. - Prohibits glass containers. 
No flowers or other decorations shall be placed on or about graves in glass containers, or containers commonly known as China. Nothing herein shall prohibit the decoration of graves by the use of flowers contained in clay pots, metal cans, or paper mache containers. 
(Ord. No. 420)  
Sec. 9-2-9. - City employees only authorized to perform work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Sexton of the Mascoutah Cemetery or other legally constituted agent or employee of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, to engage in, do, or perform any of the work, services, or labor about, or upon any grave, lot of cemetery ground, within the limits of said Mascoutah Cemetery which is, constitutes, or falls within the work, services, labor, or duties to be performed by or under the sexton of said cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 420)  
Sec. 9-2-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, adopted August 20, 2007, repealed § 9-2-10, which pertained to salary of sexton and derived from Ord. No. 420.  
Sec. 9-2-11. - Sunday burials. 
No burials or interments shall be permitted or allowed in the City Cemetery on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 01-103, 04-16-01)  
Sec. 9-2-12. - Sale of graves. 
The city shall pay 20 percent of the current price of a grave as specified in section 9-2-2 per grave site to present owners of graves who wish to sell any grave sites or lots or parts of lots. The purchase to be conditioned upon the availability of funds in the cemetery purchase fund. 
(Ord. No. 939, 01-16-95; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-2-13. - Vaults. 
All burials shall require the use of a vault or outside container (excluding burials of cremains). 
(Ord. No. 574; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-18-13, eff. 5-1-2013)  
Sec. 9-2-14. - Cemetery sexton. 
The sexton shall cause all laws in relation to cemeteries to be enforced and shall carry out the orders as he may receive them from the city manager. He shall preserve the fences, grounds, and keep the property in repair and shall prevent as far as possible the defacement, and destruction of the tombstones, monuments, enclosures or other things erected within said cemetery. He shall perform all duties pertaining to his office as are or may be imposed by law or resolution of the city council. 
(1900 Code)  
Sec. 9-2-15. - Not to destroy, injure, etc. 
No person shall willfully, or maliciously, cut down, break down, level, demolish, or otherwise destroy, injure or damage any railing, fence or other enclosure around or upon the Mascoutah Cemetery or any cemetery within the city limits, or any gates or posts thereon, or shall remove, break, injure or deface any tomb or other stone, or any post, plank, board or any inscription thereon, or shall cut down, destroy, injure or remove any tree or shrub standing or growing upon such cemetery. 
(1900 Code)  
Sec. 9-2-16. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 01-103, 04-16-01)  
Sec. 9-2-17. - Hours open to the public. 
The city cemetery shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk daily. 
(Ord. No. 98-122, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-19-04)  
Sec. 9-2-18. - Dogs/animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to walk any animal, whether on a leash or loose, in any of the cemeteries within the City of Mascoutah. 
(Ord. No. 98-122; 09-21-98)  
Sec. 9-2-19. - Scheduling. 
For a burial to occur on a Saturday, burial must be scheduled by noon on the Thursday prior, otherwise there will be a late fee of $175.00 added to the grave opening charges. 
For a burial to occur on a Monday holiday, burial must be scheduled by noon on the Friday prior, otherwise there will be a late fee of $175.00 added to the grave opening charges. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-18-13, eff. 5-1-2013)  
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY COLUMBARIUM 
 
Sec. 9-3-1. - Burial permit required. 
Persons desiring to have cremated remains inurned in the cemetery columbarium shall first obtain a permit for inurnment as required under the laws of the State of Illinois and the sexton is strictly prohibited from inurnment of any cremated remains unless such permit is first obtained and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-3-2. - Niche prices. 
(a)  The price of a single niche which will allow for inurnment of one cremated remains shall be $1,800.00. 
(b)  The price of a single niche which will allow for inurnment of two cremated remains shall be $2,800.00. 
(c)  Niche prices include regular charge for opening and closing a niche as specified in section 9-3-6 and basic inscription charges as specified in section 9-3-3(d). 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-3-3. - Niche regulations. 
(a)  Maximum of two human cremated remains per single niche will be allowed. No inurnment of cremated animals will be permitted. 
(b)  The price for disurnment of cremated remains shall be one and one-half times the opening charge in section 9-3-6. 
(c)  The container for cremated remains to be inurned shall be of a non-corrosive metal, water insoluble material (no cardboard boxes and no plastic bags). The sexton or his representative shall have full authority to refuse to accept for inurnment any receptacle deemed unsuitable. Size restrictions apply to the container for cremated remains. Niche size: 12" x 12" x 12" deep. 
(d)  Inscriptions on niches shall be on a plate/plaque supplied by a firm selected by the city. Basic inscriptions charges are included in the niche prices as specified in section 9-3-2 which include engraving of lettering for names and dates plus one standard design (cross, flower, emblem, etc.). Additional charges for engraving may apply for second inscription and for more detailed or elaborate inscriptions. 
(e)  Funeral decorations will be removed in seven days after the inurnment or whenever they are becoming unsightly or at the discretion of the sexton. The city will assume no responsibility for the safekeeping of any floral memorial or container. 
(f)  No floral memorials or other ornamentation will be attached to columbarium or placed around columbarium. The city reserves the right to remove any such ornamentation or correct any such alteration at the expense of the niche owner. Artificial flowers and decorations are not permitted and will be removed immediately. 
(g)  All other applicable rules and regulations governing the City Cemetery as specified in section 9-2-1 through 9-2-19 shall apply to the cemetery columbarium. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-3-4. - City clerk's register. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a correct record of all such niches sold, numbering each deed which issued, and countersigning all such certificates of purchase, and procure the mayor's signature, and affix the seal of the City of Mascoutah thereon. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-3-5. - Deeds transferred. 
When deeds for columbarium niches are transferable upon duly executed deed by the owner thereof designating the transferee; the city clerk shall change the register of the niche upon proper notification and filing of such deed transferring said niche. The price for a deed transfer shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-3-6. - Niche opening charges. 
The charge of opening and closing a niche shall be $250.00, which is included in the niche prices as specified in section 9-3-2. The additional charge for opening and closing a niche on Saturday shall be $100.00 for a total opening and closing charge of $350.00. The additional charge for opening and closing a niche on a holiday shall be $200.00 for a total opening and closing charge of $450.00. Holiday charges shall also apply to the Saturday directly preceding or following a Monday or Friday holiday. No inurnments shall be permitted or allowed on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-3-7. - Sale of niches. 
The city shall pay 20 percent of the current price of a niche as specified in section 9-3-2 to present owners of niches who wish to sell any niche. The purchase to be conditioned upon the availability of funds in the cemetery purchase fund. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Sec. 9-3-8. - Ownership. 
The grant of inurnment right in a niche gives only a right or privilege of inurnment of cremated remains, the ownership in fee to the land and the structure remains with the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-21-16)  
Chapter 10 - FEES AND RATES  
ARTICLE I. - CONSOLIDATED FEES AND DATES 
 
Sec. 10-1-1. - Fees and rates established. 
There is hereby established a chapter that shall include by reference Attachment "A" which shall include certain fees and rates established by the city council by resolution.  
Sec. 10-1-2. - Intent of fees and rates. 
The fees and rates heretofore established are intended to defray the administrative costs connected with the processing/conducting of such permits or procedures; the fees do not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device. A current schedule of filing fees shall be maintained in the city manager's office and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 03-113, 06-03-03)  
Secs. 10-1-3—10-1-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT SURCHARGES  
DIVISION 1. - SURCHARGES, GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-2-1. - Purpose. 
In order to promote orderly growth and development, to require that new growth and development pay a proportionate share of the cost of new infrastructure and public facilities needed to serve the new growth and development, and to a ensure fair and predictable method for allocating the share of the costs of such new public facilities, the city council determined it to be in the best interest of the city to impose development surcharges fees on new development activity. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are either included or are in addition to the definitions found in chapter 34, article II, of the city's development code, the following definitions are to be used to interpret and effectuate this article and all divisions thereto. 
Area of benefit. The geographic area that will receive benefit from improvements made. 
Building permit. Any written authorization from the city which authorizes the commencement of development activity. 
Capital improvement plan. The capital improvement plan element of the city's strategic plan and any capital facilities plan element of the city's comprehensive plan. 
City means the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, Saint Clair County, Illinois. 
Comprehensive plan. The city's comprehensive land use plan, adopted by ordinance. 
Development activity. Any construction or expansion of a building or structure that creates additional demand and need for public services and public facilities, but excludes interior remodeling that does not change the use of the building. 
Development surcharges. Development fees in addition to normal water/sewer tap fees and other utility hook ups, as a condition of issuance of a building permit to pay for public services and public facilities required currently or in the future to serve the new growth and development. 
Owner. The owner of record of real property. Under a valid real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of real property if the contract is recorded. 
Population equivalent. The IEPA usage factor of 100 gallons per person consumption. 
Public facilities. The following capital municipal facilities owned or operated by the city or other government entities: (a) public streets and roads; (b) utility facilities, (c) publicly owned administration, and recreation facilities; (d) school facilities; (e) fire protection facilities; and (f) public safety (police, EMS, and emergency management services) facilities. 
Public services means any and all municipal services provided by the city including administration and personnel. 
System improvements means public facilities that are included in the city's capital improvement plan (CIP). 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-3. - Establishment of service areas—Areas of benefit. 
The city hereby establishes the primary service area as the incorporated limits of the municipal boundaries. Secondary service areas "areas of benefit" may be established by the council to assure "fees to facility improvement cost nexus" and as the need arises under this Code. 
Development surcharge fee shall be established by facility (sewer, water, etc.) effective upon council adoption by ordinance. These fees may be adjusted as deemed appropriate thereafter by ordinance. Development surcharges are in addition to normal tap fees associated with water and sewer or other utility hookups. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-4. - Imposition of development surcharges. 
The city hereby authorizes the assessment and collection of development surcharges within the designated areas of benefit (service areas) as authorized by the council action. It is hereby declared that such development surcharges: 
(1)  Shall only be imposed for system improvements that are reasonably related to new development; 
(2)  Shall not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of the system improvements (including the costs of previously constructed system improvements) reasonable related to development; 
(3)  Shall be used for system improvements that will reasonably benefit new development; and 
(4)  Shall not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in any previously constructed system improvements unless the improvement(s) are necessitated by the new development. 
Such development surcharges are based on practices of other communities but, as applied to the City of Mascoutah, shall be adjusted, based on a formula for calculating the proportionate share of the costs of system improvements (including the costs of upgrading previously constructed system improvements) necessitated by new development, to be borne by development surcharges. 
Said calculations used will be generally based on the appropriate elements of the city's strategic plan and policies, the comprehensive plan and the capital improvement plan including all adopted revisions and updates. These documents are incorporated herein by this reference. The development surcharges are further based upon appropriate engineering plans, cost estimates, usage criteria that will assure that there is a "fees" to "facility improvement cost nexus." This work will further establish/confirm the four requirements described above in this section. 
The development surcharges imposed on a project by ordinance, shall generally be determined during the final plan approval process step, listed as a condition of approval, and assessed by appropriate department(s) on behalf of the city, at the time of application for the building permit. The fee(s) shall be due and payable, in whole, at the time of permit issuance. This provision is intended to provide early notice of the fee amounts and the city's failure to provide the condition of approval notice, will not constitute relief from the surcharge fees. 
Developments in process, approved, or currently in construction, where permits have not been issued, or where written, executed agreements are not in place that relieve the owner of said fees, shall be required to pay development surcharges imposed by ordinance. Owners may request relief from this requirement through the appeals process (section 10-2-7, council judgments will be based upon the merits of the request). 
Failure to pay the development surcharge fee for a given development activity at the time of assessment shall result in the denial of the building permit for which the owner applied. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-5. - Disposition of development surcharge revenues. 
There is hereby created in the city's budget system, development surcharges funds separated by type, for receipt of any and all development surcharge revenues: 
Development surcharge fees are to be deposited into the appropriate account, upon receipt. The money in the accounts of the development surcharge fund may be invested in any investment authorized for investment by the city council investment policy statement. In lieu of an adopted investment policy statement by the council, surcharge funds may only be invested in treasury securities or insured certificates of deposit (CDs) at a local demand deposit entity. 
The funds in development surcharge accounts with any interest and profit received from investment thereof, shall be expended only for the account purpose as prescribed herein for which the fees were collected. 
These fees shall be utilized or encumbered within five years of receipt of the city or they may be subject to refund requests as provided in section 10-2-6. The city may supersede this refund procedure under due consideration determines that the city should hold the funds for a longer period of time. This decision must identify an extraordinary and compelling reason for the action and support the act with written findings. 
The city manager or his/her designee with the advice of the finance committee, shall account for annual expenditures and compliance with this section. The city shall prepare an annual report on the development surcharge fees program, which shows the source and the amount of all funds collected, earned or received and the public facilities that were financed in whole or part by development surcharges. This report shall also identify any encumbrances by project, with estimated cost and related engineering information. 
This report shall also review of the various development surcharges and may make recommendations as to changes that may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-6. - Refunds. 
The city shall refund to the current owners of the property on which a development surcharge has been paid, any development surcharges paid with respect to such property that have not been expended or encumbered for facilities which were collected and not used within five years. Any development surcharge fees not expended or encumbered within the time limitations is subject to refund. For the purpose of this code, encumbrance; shall mean allocation to a specific project which has at least preliminary engineering completed. 
Owners must make written request for a refund within one year after the expiration of 60 months of deposit anniversary. If no written request is received within the year period, subject owner is said to be voluntarily abandoning their claim. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-7. - Appeals. 
Any owner may appeal the amount or calculation method of the development surcharge applied to owner's project, directly to the city council. The appeal shall be made on the required application to the city manager's office and filed with the standard appeal fee. The project will be stopped from further processing until the fee amount has been resolved. 
Any owner may pay the development surcharge imposed by this article under written protest in order to obtain a building permit, and after such payment, may file an appeal regarding the development surcharge as described above. Any appeal shall be filed within 45 calendar days of payment or the protest is deemed waived and appeal process is terminated. 
Any appeal filed through this section shall not be utilized as another opportunity to further negotiate fee reductions. The sole basis for appeal shall be new information or data that potentially demonstrate erroneous calculations by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-8. - Severability. 
If any part of this ordinance/Code is found to be unenforceable or illegal in a court of law, the remaining parts shall remain in full force. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-9. - Termination date of authority to collect and expend development surcharge fees. 
The city's authority to collect and expend development surcharge fees pursuant to this article shall be effective until the earlier of (a) repeal of this article, or (b) termination by Illinois court of law or legislation which directly affects the city's authorization to collect and expend surcharge fees. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Secs. 10-2-10—10-2-14. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SEWER SURCHARGES—NORTH 
 
Sec. 10-2-15. - Purpose. 
The city council has imposed sewer surcharges fees in order to promote orderly growth and development, to require that new growth and development pay a proportionate share of costs of new sewer infrastructure/public facilities in the north "area of benefit." This will also assure owners that adequate sanitary sewer capacity and facilities will be made available for developments sought by the owner(s). Finally the fee system within this article will ensure a fair and predictable method for allocating the owners' share of the costs of such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-16. - Establishment of service area—Area of benefit. 
The city hereby establishes a sewer "area of benefit" wherein certain properties by location and topography, have been evaluated and determined to contribute to a sewer collection/treatment infrastructure need. 
This "area of benefit" includes all the property in the city limits north of the Mascoutah Surface Water protection district's drainage facility known as the "big ditch." The "area of benefit" also includes those properties outside the city limits that are contributory to the designed sewer system (by master plan documents,) which will also be affected by sewer surcharge fees upon annexation 
Facility need and nexus established: 
The area has been engineer evaluated and sewage generation flows have been determined which resulted in responding sewer facility design. All existing urban use, contractual restricted, and non-contributory areas have been deducted. 
The estimated costs for the improvements have been defined. 
The categories of use have been defined to provide the basis of fees by type. 
A sewer surcharge fee system is supported by a sewer surcharge report with an area of benefit map. 
The city has established a "fees to facility improvement cost nexus" which supports the sewer surcharge fees. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 10-2-17. - Imposition of sewer surcharges. 
Based on the study, the proportionate share of the costs of system improvements (including the costs of upgrading previously constructed system improvements) necessitated by new development, to be borne by development surcharges have been determined and are listed as follows: 
Sewer Surcharges 
The criterion of assessment is Population Equivalent (PE), which is $772.67 per PE for non-residential. Fee based upon the Surcharge Report, Attachment 5, Table 2, gallons per day at a rate of $772.67 per PE., plus any loading factors found in the sewer rate fee within Ch. , sections , as it affects the wastewater treatment requirements. Each development will be evaluated with flows estimated and a fee concluded for payment based upon these criteria. 
A "PE" is derives use per day based upon IEPA Datum. 
NORTH SEWER SYSTEM—Area of Benefit/PE Calc. Sheet 
Area 		Low-Density Residential 	Commercial 	Office-Residential 	Industrial 	Airport 	
	Total AREA 	Acres 	PE 	Acres 	PE 	Acres 	PE 	Acres 	PE 	Acres 	PE 	
I. (w/o AKS) 	169 	160 	1,680 	9 	45 							169 
Add JoAsh West 	19.9 	19.90 	209 									20 
II. (w/o PV & Jo-ash) 	600 	185 	1,943 	130 	650 			270 	167 			585 
III. 	1250 	17 	83 					1,250 	775 			1267 
IV. 	480 			168 	841 					313 	1,252 	481 
V. 	1471 			335 	1,677 	481 	2,927 			665 	2,620 	1482 
VI. 	0 											0 
VII. 	122 	70 	735 					52 	32 			122 
Subtotal 	4111.9 	452 	4,650 	643 	3,213 	481 	2,927 	1,572 	974 	978 	3,872 	4,125 

Calculations/Data: 
Total Acres 	4,125 											
Total PE's 			15,636 	4,467 	= EDU's 							
 
LEGEND: 
IEPA 	Ill. Env. Protection Agency 
PE 	Population Equivalent 
EDU 	Equivalent Dwelling Unit 
SFH 	Single Family Homes 
GPD 	Gallons per Day (Av. Daily Flow) 
 
Current Tap. Fees for North Half 
Residential 	1600+900 per unit 
Nonresidential 	1200+900 + PE Surcharge 
	
TOTAL PROGRAM COSTS FEES: 
Cost of Full System 	$12,331,000 
	
Project Residential Tap One Fees 
Total SFH (PE/3.5) = 	1329 
Total Fee 	$3,322,500.00 
	
Projected Non-Residential 	200 Units 
Total Fee 	$420,000.00 
	
Fee's Collected to Date? 	$100,000.00 
	
Remaining Project Costs 	$8,488,500.00 
Non-Residential PE 	10,986 
PE Surcharge (Remaining Cost/PE)= 	$772.67 
 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 4-1-13)  
Chapter 11 - ELECTRIC SYSTEM  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 11-1-1. - Classification of uses. 
The following classification of electric service, at the rates and on the qualifications, conditions and terms as respectfully set forth be and hereby are established for the sale of electric energy, by the municipal electric utility, to customers located within the corporate limits or adjacent to the distribution lines of the municipal electric utility. 
(a)  Residential rate—Rate 1. The gross charges shall equal the sum of the charges below. 
(1)  Customer Charge $9.50 per month in FY 18-19. 
(2)  Energy Charge for all KW-HR—6.64 cents per KW-HR in FY 18-19. 
The minimum monthly bill shall be the facilities charge. This rate is applicable to residences and for those purposes that are predominantly domestic. 
(b)  Commercial and small power rate—Rate 2. 
First 4,500 KW hrs. used per month—7.64 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
Over 4,500 KW hrs. used per month—6.94 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
The customer charge shall be $17.00 per month. This rate is applicable to stores, shops, garages, depots, public halls, hospitals, mills, factories, pool rooms, taverns, soft drink parlors and other places of business, public resort or amusement. 
Transformer charge. If the city owns and operates transformers to convert the voltage from the main supply line to the voltage required by the customer, the customer shall be billed a charge of $1.00 per KW for each KW of distribution capacity for each billing period. 
(c)  Large power rate—Rate 3. 
First 4,500 KW hrs. used per month—7.55 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
Over 4,500 KW hrs. used per month—6.81 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
The customer charge shall be $17.00 per month. 
Rate 3 shall apply to all customers having a monthly demand of 75 kilowatts or greater with a non-lighting or heat load of more than 25 percent of the total demand, and to customers presently being served under a contract which provides for billing under this rate. 
Transformer charge. If the city owns and operates transformers to convert the voltage from the main supply line to the voltage required by the customer, the customer shall be billed a charge of $1.00 per KW for each KW of distribution capacity for each billing period. 
Larger power rate: Rate 3a. For commercial customers with at least 30,000 KWH/ month. 
— First 200 KWH per KW of billing demand—$.0415 per KWH in FY 18-19. 
— Over 200 KWH per KW of billing demand—$.0130 per KWH in FY 18-19. 
— Customer charge—$130.00 in FY 18-19. 
— Demand charge per KW—$9.15 in FY 18-19. 
(d)  Residential and Commercial Space heating—Rate 4. 
First 100 KW hrs. used per month—7.44 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
Next 700 KW hrs. used per month—6.94 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
Over 800 KW hrs. used per month—5.44 cents per KW hrs. in FY 18-19. 
The electric space heating rate is to apply to energy used during the seven month period [of] October to April, inclusive, and where no other source of fuel for space heating is being used. 
Customer charge—$12.50 per month. 
(e)  Miscellaneous municipal electric service—Rate 5. 
First 5,000 KW hrs. used per month—7.64 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
Next 20,000 KW hrs. used per month—6.57 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
All over 25,000 KW hrs. used per month—5.78 cents per KW hr. in FY 18-19. 
(f)  Municipal street lighting service—Rate 6. 
(1)  Class of service. Utility will furnish the classes of service described below each at the corresponding base rates per lamp per month, as indicated in the table of base rates per lamp per month set forth below, including maintenance, depreciation, electric energy requirements, and replacements of lamps and other glassware as required on systems owned and operated by utility, but only including electric energy requirements and lamp replacements on system owned and operated by municipality. 
(a)  Class A. Sodium vapor, mercury vapor or LED lamps, owned and operated by Municipality. 
(b)  Class B. Mercury vapor lamps, sodium vapor lamps or LED lamps on standard overhead wood pole construction, owned and operated by utility. 
(c)  Class C. Mercury vapor lamps, sodium vapor lamps or LED lamps on standard overhead concrete pole construction or on existing metal pole construction, owned and operated by utility. 
(2)  Rates. 
(a)  Base rates per lamp per month. The following rates based on 4,000 hours per year burning, including all hours of darkness: 
FY 18-19 
Size 	Class A 	Class B 	Class C 
Mercury Vapor 			
7200 Lumen, 175 watts 	$3.80 	$11.96 	$17.30 
11000 Lumen, 250 watts 	5.11 	13.47 	19.36 
17000 Lumen, 400 watts 	7.25 	17.20 	19.77 
30000 Lumen, 700 watts 	12.68 	25.04 	35.82 
46000 Lumen, 1,000 watts 	15.37 	28.41 	41.42 
Sodium Vapor 			
8700 Lumen, 100 watts 	$4.54 	$15.47 	$23.53 
15000 Lumen, 150 watts 	7.30 	16.23 	24.19 
23000 Lumen, 250 watts 	10.47 	19.67 	28.52 
46500 Lumen, 400 watts 	15.37 	25.80 	33.76 
LED 			
5800 Lumen, 70 watts 	$3.09 	$11.09 	$17.09 
19100 Lumen, 196 watts 	6.78 	14.78 	20.78 
 
(g)  Customer area lighting service—Rate 7. 
(1)  Availability. Any customer located in territory served by utility may take service under this service classification for lighting outdoor areas, where the period of lighting is limited from dusk to dawn, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  That customer is located adjacent to utility lines from which such service can be rendered, and 
(b)  That customer enters into a written contract with utility for service, for a period of one year. 
(2)  Rates. The gross charge shall equal the sum of the charges below and other applicable charges. 
(a)  Lamp charges. If the lighting fixtures can be installed on an existing distribution type wood pole and service can be supplied from an existing overhead secondary circuit on the pole, the monthly charges applicable to such installation shall be as follows: 
FY 18-19 
Type of Lamp 	Lumen Rating 	Wattage Rating 	$ Charges Per Month 
Area Lighting 			
Mercury Vapor 	6,400 	175 	$6.90 
Mercury Vapor 	9,400 	250 	6.80 
Mercury Vapor 	16,000 	400 	13.81 
Mercury Vapor 	45,200 	1,000 	19.00 
Sodium Vapor 	8,500 	100 	7.71 
Sodium Vapor 	15,000 	150 	8.28 
Sodium Vapor 	22,000 	250 	13.81 
Sodium Vapor 	45,000 	400 	25.32 
LED 	5,800 	70 	3.03 
LED 	19,100 	196 	6.64 
Pole Rental 		$2.00 per month 	
Directional Lighting 			
Sodium Vapor 	22,000 	250 	$15.83 
Sodium Vapor 	45,000 	400 	19.00 
Metal Halide 	20,000 	250 	25.32 
Metal Halide 	40,000 	400 	25.32 
Metal Halide 	117,000 	1,000 	40.29 
Metal Halide 		1,500 	
Quartz 		500 	5.76 
LED Flood Light 	9,520 	85 	6.06 
LED Flood Light 	14,190 	129 	8.15 
 
(b)  Additional charges. If additional facilities or fixtures other than utility's standard type of rearrangement of existing facilities shall be required to serve customer, utility shall install, operate and maintain such facilities for an additional monthly charge. These charges shall be in addition to the lamp charges. 
(Ord. No. 728; 8-27-81; Ord. No. 913, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 97-103, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 5-16-11, eff. 5-1-11; Ord. No. 12-07, § 1, 4-6-12, eff. 5-1-12; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, 5-6-13, eff. 5-1-13; Ord. No. 14-03, § 1, 5-7-14, eff. 5-1-14; Ord. No. 15-09, § 1, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 4-18-16; Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, 4-3-17; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1(Att.), 3-19-18)  
Sec. 11-1-2. - Purchased power and fuel cost adjustment. 
In addition to the rates for each KW-HR, for each $0.01 increase or major fraction thereof above the average cost of $.0142 (plus the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in FY 07-08 and thereafter) per KW-HR in fuel costs for power generated and for power purchased in the first three of the four months preceding each billing period, there shall be correspondingly added to each customer's bill, an amount equal to $0.011 per KW-HR times the total KW-HR billed to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 888, 3-25-93; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-22-06)  
Sec. 11-1-3. - State tax. 
All billings are subject to five percent Illinois Gross Receipts Tax on the use and consumption of electricity as provided in the Retailers' Occupational Tax Act, or the tax rate as such act may be later amended. 
(Ord. No. 728, 8-27-81; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-22-06)  
Sec. 11-1-4. - Billing procedure. 
All applications for electrical service shall be in the name of the occupant of the premises for which service is applied. Applications will be reviewed and approved subject to verification of the application, issuance of occupancy and other applicable permits, and payment of all utility deposit(s). In no case shall the application an individual, business, or other entity with outstanding past due debts or obligations to the city be approved until all past due obligations have been settled and paid in full. 
The owner(s) of rental units which are metered but where electric service is not in renter/occupants names shall convert such meters to occupant names within one year of the adoption of this Code. 
The procedure for collection of delinquent electrical bills shall be as follows: 
(a)  Bills. Charges for electrical service shall be payable monthly. The occupant of the premises whose name appears on the application shall be liable to pay for service to such premises. A penalty of ten percent shall be added to all bills not paid by the due date indicated on said bill. 
(b)  Delinquent bills. If the charges for such services are not paid within 15 days beyond the original due date of the bill for such services, electrical services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled. A $25.00 fee shall be paid prior to reconnection during regular business hours. After business hours, the reconnection fee shall be $75.00 and must be paid prior to reconnection. 
(c)  Lien notice of delinquency. Whenever a bill for electrical service remains unpaid for 60 days beyond the original due date, the city treasurer shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claims when the occupant is also the owner of the premises. 
This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
If the occupant whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises the city shall apply all, or an appropriate portion, of the utility deposit to the unpaid bill. Should application of the utility deposit to the unpaid bill result in a balance due to the customer the city shall mail a check for the remaining utility deposit to the last known address of the customer. Should the utility deposit not be sufficient to pay the unpaid bill, the city shall apply the utility deposit toward the bill and shall seek judgment against the occupant for the remaining balance and associated legal costs. 
The failure of the city to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section. 
(d)  Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the city. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 60 days beyond the original due date. 
(Ord. No. 03-118, 11-03-03; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-22-06)  
Sec. 11-1-5. - Meter deposits. 
All persons applying for electrical service, to be used on property which is not owned in fee simple by the applicant, shall pay the following meter deposits to the city prior to service being established: 
(a)  Residential. (i.e. Houses, homes, mobile homes, modular homes, trailers or apartments). Electric meter: $150.00. 
(b)  Business. Electric meter: $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 03-118, 11-03-03; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-22-06)  
Sec. 11-1-6. - Consumer price index (CPI). 
Effective for customer bills rendered after April 30, 2008, each year, at the beginning of the city's fiscal year, the unit charges for electric rates will be adjusted to reflect no more than the percentage increase of change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index For Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W): Midwest Urban Region, All Items Index, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor, on the first published date after the beginning of the most recent calendar year, to the average comparable index for the previous year (12 months). 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 7-6-10, eff. 5-1-10; Ord. No. 12-07, § 1, 4-6-12, eff. 5-1-12; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, 5-6-13, eff. 5-1-13) 
Note— This index can be found at www.bls.gov/cpi/  
ARTICLE II. - COGENERATION 
 
Sec. 11-2-1. - Introduction. 
(a)  The City of Mascoutah Electric Utility, hereinafter referred to as "Utility", is a non-regulated utility as defined by the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA) and as such, is required to adhere to the provisions of Section 210 of the act pertaining to Cogeneration and Small Power Production. 
Regulations were prepared by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) for the implementation of Section 210, PURPA, and published in the Federal Register (45FR12214, February 25, 1980). 
The Mascoutah Municipal Electric Utility will: 
(1)  Purchase the electrical output from cogenerators and small power producers at a price that equals the utility's avoided costs; 
(2)  Make available system cost data upon which avoided costs can be calculated; and 
(3)  Sell energy and capacity to cogenerators and small power producers for supplementary, backup, maintenance, and interruptible power service; subject to the regulations hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The rules set forth in this plan will apply to all entities which can be classified as qualifying cogeneration facilities or qualifying small power production facilities, and which would enter into an agreement with the utility for the purchase and sale of energy or capacity and energy. 
(c)  Provisions for these rules shall not supersede, or negate, existing contracts for service. 
(d)  These rules are not intended to be all inclusive nor to apply to all situations which may arise. They do represent guidelines for establishing an agreement between the utility and a qualifying facility for the purchase, sale, or interchange of energy or energy and capacity. Since the production capacity of qualifying facilities may vary widely in size and type, the utility is precluded from establishing rules and procedures which will readily accommodate each potential qualifying facility. Therefore, the utility will evaluate each potential qualifying facility on a case-by-case basis.  
Sec. 11-2-2. - Preamble. 
The broad purpose of the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1978 (PURPA) is to encourage conservation of energy and efficient use of energy resources by utility systems. 
Cogeneration or small power producers can supply all or a portion of their own electric requirements, thereby relieving the area utility system which serves the cogenerator or small power producer of providing this energy. Furthermore, if the cogenerator or small power producer can produce energy in excess of its needs, this excess can be sold to the utility system. In both cases, the utility system is relieved from supplying the energy and from constructing generating facilities to serve the load. Energy is conserved, construction of power generating facilities by the utility is postponed and maximum use is made of existing generating plants. 
The Mascoutah Municipal Electric Utility is in agreement with the intent of PURPA concerning cogeneration and small power production and offers to cooperate with such facilities which may be developed in the Mascoutah service area under a mutually beneficial arrangement. 
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) rulemaking on cogeneration and small power production requires that the Mascoutah Municipal Electric Utility implement Subpart C of Part 292 of the rules which may consist of the issuance of regulation by the Mascoutah Municipal Electric Utility for cogeneration and small power producers in the Mascoutah service area. These regulations must be placed in effect on or before March 20, 1982, after a public hearing to be held in the City of Mascoutah. The following regulations will be used to establish the terms under which a cogeneration or small power producing facility can be connected to the Mascoutah system. 
(a)  Supplementary power means electric energy or capacity supplied by the utility regularly used by a qualifying facility in addition to that which the facility generates itself. 
(b)  Back-up power means electric energy or capacity supplied by the utility to replace energy ordinarily generated by a qualifying facility own generation equipment during an unscheduled outage of the facility. 
(c)  Interruptible power means electric energy or capacity supplied by the utility subject to interruption by the utility under specified conditions. 
(d)  Maintenance power means electric energy or capacity supplied by the utility during scheduled outages of the qualifying facility. 
(e)  Accredited capacity means the electrical rating in kilowatts (KW) given to generating equipment based on a number of factors. These factors include the equipment availability, reliability, type, and the extent to which the equipment may be coordinated between the qualifying facility and the utility. 
(f)  Capacity costs means that portion of total electrical costs which are associated with providing the capacity to acquire or deliver power. These include the amortization of the capital cost required to produce and transmit power or to purchase like capacity from another system. 
(g)  Point of measurement means the point, or points, where power and energy are metered. 
(h)  Point of delivery, or interconnection, means the point, or points, where the qualifying facility will receive power and/or energy from the utility, or deliver power and/or energy to the utility. 
(i)  Energy costs are that portion of total electrical costs associated with providing energy as measured in kilowatt-hours (KWH). The energy costs consist largely of the variable costs associated with power production, as distinct from fixed costs associated with capacity costs, as well as purchased energy.  
Sec. 11-2-3. - Service conditions. 
The following conditions will apply to all qualifying facilities. 
(a)  The utility will purchase electricity produced by qualifying facilities at a price equal to the utility's avoided cost. Such purchase may be energy only or capacity and energy. The purchase of capacity will be dependent on the utility's need and the availability of capacity from the qualifying facility during periods of peak usage. 
(b)  The utility will sell capacity and energy to the qualifying facility as required to meet qualifying facility's electrical requirements. Service provided will be billed under the appropriate utility retail rate schedule in effect for the customer classification appropriate for the qualifying facility. 
(c)  The utility will provide supplementary power, backup power, maintenance power, and interruptible power upon request of a qualifying facility. The guarantee of service to a qualifying facility, however, shall be no greater than that provided other retail customers of the utility. 
(d)  The utility and qualifying facility will enter into a written agreement for service requested under section 11-2-3(c) above. If the utility waives the requirement for an agreement initially, this will not preclude the utility's request for a written agreement at a later date. 
(e)  The qualifying facility shall fulfill the requirements set forth by the National Electric Safety Code, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the American National Standard Institute, and other appropriate standards applicable to the facilities installed. Local, state, and national codes shall be strictly adhered to. In the event of a dispute over the proper standards, the utility shall render final decision. 
It shall be the obligation of the qualifying facility to deliver to the utility complete and detailed information on the electrical characteristics of the proposed generating facility and on the control and protective schemes to be installed for synchronizing and for protection of the utility system. 
(f)  The utility will interconnect its system for parallel operation with the qualifying facility if the utility is satisfied that such parallel operation will not impair service to its customers or cause hazardous operating procedures. All costs of the interconnection which are in excess of the costs which the utility would incur if the utility and qualifying facility were not interconnected will be paid for by the qualified facility. It is the responsibility of the qualifying facility to operate in such a manner that parallel operations will not result in a decrease in the quality of service normally maintained on the utility's system. 
(g)  The utility shall, at all times, have access to switching equipment installed for the purpose of isolating the qualifying facility from utility's system. This provision is mandatory in order to safeguard personnel and equipment of the utility, as well as the qualifying facility. If required, the utility may operate, without advance notice or liability, the switching equipment if, in the sole opinion of the utility's personnel, continued parallel operation of the qualifying facility and the utility could result in a safety hazard or emergency situation. 
(h)  In the event the utility deemed necessary the operation of switching equipment as described in section 11-2-3(g) above, the utility's obligation to purchase electricity produced by the qualifying facility would cease. At such time as the situation requiring isolation of the two systems was corrected, the schedule of purchasing would be resumed. 
(i)  The qualifying facility agrees that the utility shall be indemnified and held harmless from all liability which could arise from operation and interconnection of the facilities owned by the qualifying facility. The responsibility for the proper and safe installation and operation of production and transmission facilities required to delivery electricity to the point of interconnection is that of the qualifying facility. 
(j)  The utility may cease purchasing energy, or capacity and energy, from the qualifying facility if the continued purchase, in utility's opinion, would result in costs higher than those incurred if utility was not purchasing from the qualifying facility. 
(k)  The utility will not cease purchasing energy, or energy and capacity, without reasonable notice in order that the qualifying facility may adjust operations of production equipment accordingly. 
(l)  The utility may curtail or discontinue sales to the qualifying facility during an emergency on the utility system. However, such curtailment or discontinuation will be non-discriminatory. 
(m)  The utility may, with agreement by the qualifying facility, transmit (wheel) energy or capacity to any other utility for purchase by that utility. The utility shall receive fair compensation from the qualifying facility for this service. 
(n)  The utility will determine the manner of payment from the qualifying facility for the costs of interconnection. Where interconnection costs may impose a financial burden on the utility, an advance payment from the qualifying facility will be required. The difference between the total interconnection costs and the advance payment may, at utility's option, be amortized over a reasonable period of time. 
(o)  The utility reserves the right to inspect and review preliminary plans for cogenerators and small power production facilities to be constructed, to determine whether the physical facilities contemplated will interfere with or in any manner cause a potential operational or safety hazard to utility's physical facilities.  
Sec. 11-2-4. - Rates. 
(a)  The utility will purchase energy or capacity and energy from a qualifying facility at rates which are not discriminatory against the facility. 
(b)  The utility will not purchase energy or capacity and energy from a new qualifying facility at a cost which exceeds the utility's avoided cost. A new facility is one which construction commenced on or after November 9, 1978. 
(c)  The utility will purchase the surplus electric production from old capacity (construction commenced prior to November 9, 1978) at a negotiated rate mutually agreeable to both parties. 
(d)  The utility will pay a qualifying facility for 100 KW or less a standard rate based on avoided cost, except as specified in section 11-2-4(c) applying to old capacity. 
(e)  The utility may purchase from a qualifying facility at a standard rate if mutually agreeable. The qualifying facility may choose to furnish, at its option, energy at the utility's avoided cost at time of delivery, or capacity and energy under a negotiated contract at utility's avoided cost. 
(f)  The utility shall, upon request, provide data comparable to that required under Paragraph 292.302(b) of Subpart C of Part 292 of the FERC rules to enable a qualifying facility to estimate the utility's avoided costs. Avoided costs will be the actual or estimated energy costs from utility's generation or energy purchased by the utility from other suppliers. Avoided costs shall include an adjustment for variations in line losses as a result of displacing existing energy sources with energy from qualifying facility. 
(g)  The utility will pay avoided capacity costs to a qualifying facility where a legally enforceable contract provides that qualifying facility will supply accredited capability to the utility. The payment for the capacity dedicated will be based on the capacity costs the utility would incur if the capacity were obtained from a source other than the qualifying facility. The capacity payment will reflect the following considerations: 
(1)  Anticipated future capacity costs. 
(2)  Availability of capacity during utility peak periods. 
(3)  The ability of the utility to dispatch the capacity of the qualifying facility. 
(4)  Anticipated reliability of the qualifying facility. 
(5)  Term of the obligation. 
(6)  Ability to coordinate capacity of qualifying facility with utility's scheduled outages. 
(7)  Advantages which may accrue to the utility as a result of purchasing capacity in more easily absorbed increments from the qualifying facility than may be available to utility from other sources.  
Sec. 11-2-5. - Metering. 
The utility favors the two-meter method of determining energy interchange with the qualifying facility which provides for the simultaneous metering of the flow of power and energy to and from the qualifying facility. Power and energy delivered to the utility is paid for at the agreed upon avoided cost or standard rate. Power and energy delivered to the qualifying facility is paid under the retail rate schedule applicable to the rate classification of the qualifying facility. Small qualifying facilities will be metered with a single meter without detents and billings rendered on the net reading.  
Sec. 11-2-6. - Miscellaneous considerations. 
The following considerations are brought to the attention of a potential qualifying facility. These considerations are not intended to be all-inclusive, but are offered to assist the potential facility in evaluating the prospects: 
(a)  Property use classification and tax implications. 
(b)  Cost to interconnect to the utility system. 
(c)  Building codes and permits. 
(d)  Environmental impacts and regulatory constraints. 
(e)  Safety. 
(f)  Liability—Exposure to and insurance coverage. 
(g)  Federal, state, county, and city rules and regulations. 
(1)  Although the qualifying facility can be exempt from certain state regulations on rates and financial organization, and Federal regulation under the Federal Power Act and the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, it is recommended that the facility's legal counsel render an opinion concerning these exemptions as they may apply to the specific qualifying facility under consideration. 
(h)  Income and sales tax implications. 
(i)  Warranty on equipment purchased by the qualifying facility. 
(j)  Cost to the qualifying facility for equipment maintenance and replacement. 
(k)  Deed restrictions. 
(l)  Effect on value of property if sold - will financing cover cost of qualifying facility. 
(Ord. No. 739, 03-01-82) 
OVERHEAD SERVICE TYPE I 
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE ENTRANCE 
Meter installation must clear telephone wire and downspouts, two-feet minimum, and be placed beyond reach from all windows and doors. Unless otherwise noted, all wiring materials are to be furnished and installed by customer. All service entrance wiring must conform to the "National Electrical Code" and Local Electrical Code in force at the time the service is installed. 
1.  Weatherproof service cap (Weatherhead) must extend above service wires (by customer). 
2.  RIGID Steel conduit is to be used. Minimum size is one and one-fourth inches. 
3.  5/8 ? x 8'0? Copper Clad Ground rod driven not less than eight feet into ground (by customer). 
4.  No. 6 Copper Conductor (Min.) conduit optional for appearance. 
5.  Standard NEMA Ground Clamp. 
6.  Straps (by customer). 
7.  L.B.C. galvanized fitting having one-half-inch bottom outlet. 
8.  Detachable meter in meter sockets, furnished by city. 
9.  Galvanized locknuts. One on outside of switch box and one on inside of switch box. They must be drawn up tight against switch box, with sharp edges of locknuts against switch box (furnished by customer). 
10.  Galvanized conduit bonding type bushing (furnished by customer). 
11.  Service entrance switch, fuse, or circuit breaker box. Service entrance box must have a solid grounded neutral. Used bonding screw to bond neutral bus to the metal cabinet. Box will be sized to service, and will include protective device and disconnecting means and individual circuit protection (furnished by customer). 
12.  Copper insulated stranded wire. (Aluminum conductor of equivalent size is not recommended but may be used with correct application of "CONTAX" grease). Approximately three feet of conductor will extend from weatherhead. All conductors should be the same size. (Neutral size may be reduced up to one-half, where load is sufficiently balanced to conform to National Electrical Code and local codes permit.) 
*Billed to customer. 
OVERHEAD SERVICE TYPE II 
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE ENTRANCE 
Meter installation must clear telephone wire and downspouts, two feet minimum, and be placed beyond reach from all windows and doors. Unless otherwise noted, all wiring materials are to be furnished and installed by customer. All service entrance wiring must conform to the "National Electrical Code" and Local Electrical Code in force at the time the service is installed. 
1.  Weatherproof service cap (Weatherhead) must extend above service wires (by customer). 
2.  RIGID Steel conduit is to be used. Minimum size is two inches. 
3.  5/8 ? x 8'0? Copper Clad Ground rod driven not less than eight feet into ground (by customer). 
4.  No. 6 Copper Conductor (Min.) conduit optional for appearance. 
5.  Standard NEMA Ground Clamp. 
6.  Straps (by customer). 
7.  L.B.C. galvanized fitting having one-half-inch bottom outlet. 
8.  Detachable meter in meter sockets, furnished by city. 
9.  Galvanized locknuts. One on outside of switch box and one on inside of switch box. They must be drawn up tight against switch box, with sharp edges of locknuts against switch box (furnished by customer). 
10.  Galvanized conduit bonding type bushing (furnished by customer). 
11.  Service entrance switch, fuse, or circuit breaker box. Service entrance box must have a solid grounded neutral. Used bonding screw to bond neutral bus to the metal cabinet. Box will be sized to service, and will include protective device and disconnecting means and individual circuit protection (furnished by customer). 
12.  Copper insulated stranded wire. (Aluminum conductor of equivalent size is not recommended but may be used with correct application of "CONTAX" grease). Approximately three feet of conductor will extend from weatherhead. All conductors should be the same size. (Neutral size may be reduced up to one-half, where load is sufficiently balanced to conform to National Electrical Code and local codes permit.) 
*City furnishes and charges for it. 
ITEMS FURNISHED BY CUSTOMER: 
(a)  Temporary service cable to be installed by customer to temporary meter location must be of an approved underground type without splices from pedestal to the meter. Maximum distance from pedestal is ten feet. 
(b)  Conduit one-inch minimum galvanized rigid. 
(c)  Raintight fuse switch 60 ampere minimum. 
(d)  Conduit and bonding locknuts. 
(e)  Raintight duplex receptacle. 
(f)  4? x 4? timber or equal. 
(g)  2? x 12? board. 
(h)  No. 6 Copper Conductor. 
(i)  NEMA Ground Clamp. 
(j)  5/8 ? x 8'0? Copper Clad Ground Rod. 
ITEMS FURNISHED BY CITY AND BILLED TO CUSTOMER: 
(k)  Power pedestal. 
(l)  Meter socket base (installed by customer). 
(m)  Meter (installed by city). 
TEMPORARY UNDERGROUND SERVICE UNDERGROUND SERVICE ITEMS FURNISHED, INSTALLED & OWNED BY CUSTOMER: 
1.  Conduit (Rigid Galv. 2? minimum.) 6. Expansion Shield. 
2.  Locknut 2? 7. Cable from customer's disconnect to. 
3.  2? Conduit Bushing the Meter Socket. 
4.  2" Galv. Conduit Hanger 8. NEMA Ground Clamp. 
5.  Lag Screw 9. Ground Rod - 5/8 ? x 8'0? Copper Clad Ground Rod Method. 
ITEMS FURNISHED BY CITY AND BILLED TO CUSTOMER: 
1.  Meter socket base (installed by customer). 
2.  Meter socket. 
3.  Cable from meter to transformer. 
TEMPORARY OVERHEAD SERVICE ITEMS TO BE FURNISHED BY CUSTOMER: 
(a)  4? x 4? Timber or equal. Timber acceptable only for temporary installations. For permanent installations, a 16-foot creosoted pine pole is required. One hundred-foot is maximum service length permitted without inter-mediate support being furnished and installed by customer. Where service crosses streets a higher support may be required to provide clearance. Customer should ask advice from company if in doubt. 
(b)  Weatherhead conduit (One-inch minimum conduit). 
(c)  Cable with 3'0? pigtails for connecting to utility power lines. Cable to be U.L. approved and suitable for service. 
(d)  Raintight fuse switch 60 amp. minimum. 
(e)  2? x 4? brace. 
(f)  No. 6 Copper Conductor (minimum). 
(g)  Standard NEMA Ground Clamp. 
(h)  5/8 ? x 8'0? Copper Clad Ground Rod. 
(i)  Cable to trailer or service cable to be U.L. approve. 
ITEMS TO BE FURNISHED BY CITY: 
(j)  Triplex service drop. 
(k)  Meter socket base (Installed by customer). 
(l)  Meter (Installed by city).  
Chapter 12 - EMPLOYEES  
ARTICLE I. - DRUG TESTING 
 
Sec. 12-1-1. - Drug tests for CDL drivers. 
All CDL drivers are subject to all random drug and alcohol testing requirements as outlined pursuant to state law and consistent with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration regulations on drug and alcohol abuse. Definition of drug and alcohol shall be consistent with Illinois law.  
Sec. 12-1-2. - Positive test. 
A positive test shall result in immediate termination of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 02-102, 02-19-02)  
Sec. 12-1-3. - City employees—Requirements. 
All city employees are subject to all random drug and alcohol testing requirements as outlined pursuant to state law and consistent with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration regulations on drug and alcohol abuse. Definition of drug and alcohol shall be consistent with Illinois Law. 
(Ord. No. 05-21, § 1, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 05-21, § 1, adopted September 19, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added § 12-1-3 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 12-1-4. - Same—Positive test. 
A positive test shall result in immediate termination of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 05-21, § 2, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 05-21, § 2, adopted September 19, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added § 12-1-4 at the editor's discretion.  
Chapter 13 - FAIR HOUSING CODE 
 
Sec. 13-1-1. - Short title. 
This Code shall be known and may be cited as the Fair Housing Code of the city.  
Sec. 13-1-2. - Purpose and declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city and the purpose of this Code, in the exercise by the city of its police and regulatory powers for the protection of the public safety for the health, morals, safety, and welfare of the persons in and residing in the city, and for the maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the city, to secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the city a fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent, or occupy housing without discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin.  
Sec. 13-1-3. - Construction. 
This Code shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated in section 13-1-2 and the special purposes of the particular provision involved.  
Sec. 13-1-4. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Code: 
Dwelling means any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the city which is arranged, designed or used as a home, residence or living quarters of one or more individuals. 
Housing includes any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the city, which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or living quarters of one or more individuals, groups or families, and includes any vacant land within the city which is zoned and intended to be used for the construction of any such building or structure. 
Lease includes sublease, assignment, and rent (or rental), and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing. 
Lending institution means any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to a security interest in real estate, but shall not include any religious institution or organization nor any charitable or educational organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization. 
National origin includes the national origin of an ancestor. 
Owner means any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in, any dwelling or housing, or who holds legal or equitable title to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative which owns any dwelling or housing. 
Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
Purchase includes any contract to purchase. 
Real estate agent means any real estate broker, and real estate salesman, and any other person who, as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in the management or operation of any dwelling or housing. 
Real estate broker means any person licensed as a real estate broker in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or required thereby to be so licensed. (See 225 ILCS Sec. 455/1 et seq.) 
Real estate salesman means any person licensed as a real estate salesman in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or required thereby to be so licensed. 
Real estate transaction" means the purchase, sale, exchange, or lease of any dwelling or housing, and an option to do any of the foregoing. 
Sale includes any contract to sell, exchange, or to convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real estate.  
Sec. 13-1-5. - Discriminatory terms. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any owner or other person to sell or lease a dwelling or housing on terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion or national origin.  
Sec. 13-1-6. - Refusals to deal. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any owner or other person to refuse to negotiate for, enter into, or perform any sale or lease of any dwelling or housing, because of the race, color, religion or national origin of any party, to such sale or lease, or of any member of the family of any such party, or of any person using or occupying or intending to use or occupy such dwelling or housing, or of any person using or occupying any dwelling or housing in the area in which such dwelling or housing is located.  
Sec. 13-1-7. - Withholding housing. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any owner or other person to represent to any person that any dwelling or housing is not available for inspection, purchase, sale, lease, or occupancy when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to withhold housing from any person because of race, color, religion or national origin.  
Sec. 13-1-8. - Advertisements. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any owner or other person to publish or circulate a statement, advertisement or notice of an intention to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this Code.  
Sec. 13-1-9. - Advertisements, causing or permitting. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any owner or other person to cause any person to circulate or publish a statement, advertisement or notice that such owner or other person intends to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this chapter, or to consent thereto.  
Sec. 13-1-10. - Signs and notices. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any owner or other person to post or erect, or cause any person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this chapter.  
Sec. 13-1-11. - Exemptions. 
This Code shall not apply to the rental of any room or dwelling unit in any owner-occupied dwelling which consists of more than one but less than five dwelling units. As used herein, the term "dwelling unit" means one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family or one individual. The term owner includes the spouse or any lineal descendant or ancestor of the owner.  
Sec. 13-1-12. - Limitations. 
Nothing in this Code shall require an owner to offer property to the public at large before selling or renting it, providing he complies with all other provisions of this Code. Nor shall this Code be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or buyers for any reason other than religion, race, color or national origin. Nothing in this Code shall require an owner to offer property for sale or lease or to show his property to any person if such person is not negotiating for the purchase or lease of such property in good faith.  
Sec. 13-1-13. - Withholding housing. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any real estate agent or other person to represent to any person that any dwelling or housing is not available for inspection, sale, lease or occupancy when in fact it is so available or otherwise to withhold housing from any person because of race, color, religion or national origin.  
Sec. 13-1-14. - Refusals of offers. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any real estate agent or other person to refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bonafide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any dwelling or housing because of the race, color, religion or national origin of the person making such offer.  
Sec. 13-1-15. - Advertisements. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any real estate agent or other person to publish or circulate a statement, advertisement or notice of an intention to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this Code.  
Sec. 13-1-16. - Signs and notices. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any real estate agent or other person to post or erect, or cause or permit any person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing, other person, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this Code.  
Sec. 13-1-17. - Licensing. 
Every real estate broker shall apply for and obtain a license from the city prior to transacting any business involving real estate in the city as a real estate broker and prior to advertising or assuming to act as such real estate broker. The commission of a single act as such real estate broker without such license shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
State Law reference— See 225 ILCS Sec. 455/33 for preemptive powers.  
Sec. 13-1-18. - Discrimination in lending. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any lending institution, in making, agreeing to make, arranging, or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds for the purpose of financing the purchase or sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any dwelling or housing, to offer, seek or agree to terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion or national origin.  
Sec. 13-1-19. - Refusals to deal in lending. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any lending institution to refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds for the purchase, sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any dwelling or housing because of the race, color, religion or national origin of any party to such agreement or of any member of the family of any such party, or of the residents of the area in which such dwelling or housing is located.  
Sec. 13-1-20. - Coverage. 
This Code shall apply, respectively, to every real estate agent who, within the city, performs any function as such real estate agent but does not maintain an office or place of doing business within the city, and this Code applies to every real estate agent and lending institution who maintains an office of place of doing business within the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this Code shall not be so construed as to prohibit a real estate broker or real estate agent on behalf of the owner, from inquiring into and reporting upon qualifications of any prospective buyer or tenant with respect to limitations or exclusions other than those of race, color, religion or national origin.  
Sec. 13-1-21. - Representation. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any person, for the purpose of inducing any other person to enter into a real estate transaction with such person, his principal or his agent. 
(a)  To represent that a change has occurred, will occur or may occur with respect to the race, color, religion or national origin in composition of the owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area in which the dwelling or housing (which is the subject of the real estate transaction) is located, or 
(b)  To represent that a change with respect to the race, color, religion or national origin in the composition of the owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area will result in lowering of property values, or in an increase in criminal or anti-social behavior, or in a decline in the quality of schools, in such block, neighborhood or area.  
Sec. 13-1-22. - Other violations. 
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this Code for any person: 
(a)  To aid, abet, incite, or coerce a person to engage in unlawful housing practice; 
(b)  Willfully to interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the city council or one of its members or representatives; or 
(c)  Willfully to obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of this Code or an order issued thereunder.  
Sec. 13-1-23. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provisions of this Code may file with the city council a written verified complaint setting forth his grievance. The complaint shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the complaint; 
(2)  The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is brought, if known to the complainant; and 
(3)  The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this Code; and such complaint shall state the name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged facts. 
(b)  After the filing of any complaint, the city council shall serve a copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged.  
Sec. 13-1-24. - Hearings by city council. 
(a)  Such hearing shall be conducted by the city council upon due and reasonable notice to all parties. The city council shall have power to administer oaths and to take sworn testimony. Any party alleged to have violated this Code shall be entitled to be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call witnesses in his own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses. 
(b)  At the conclusion of such hearing, the city council shall render the complainant a decision.  
Sec. 13-1-25. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city council shall be empowered to order any person found to be engaging in an unfair housing practice to cease and desist from such practice, upon such terms as shall be necessary and proper for the enforcement of this Code. 
(b)  The city council shall be empowered at the conclusion of proceedings held under section 13-1-24, to direct the city attorney to do any one or more of the following: 
(1)  To institute and prosecute proceedings to enforce, against any person found in violation of this Code, the fine provided for in section 13-1-27 below; 
(2)  To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction; 
(a)  For an order restraining any person from violating any provision of this Code. 
(b)  For such other or further relief as may seem to the court appropriate for the enforcement of this Code and the elimination of violations hereof. 
(3)  To petition or institute proceedings with the department of registration and education for the purpose of causing the department to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the license granted by such department to any real estate broker or real estate salesman found to have violated any provision of this Code. 
(4)  In the case of any unlawful housing practice or violation of this Code by any person in the course of performing under a contract or subcontract with the state or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, to petition or institute proceedings with such contracting agency for the purpose of causing it to terminate such contract or any portion thereof, either absolutely or on condition of compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  The city council may issue such cease and desist orders and may direct such action by the city attorney, as shall be necessary for the enforcement of this Code.  
Sec. 13-1-26. - Remedies. 
Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of this Code who has exhausted the remedies provided in section 13-1-24 of this Code may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation, including: 
(a)  An order compelling compliance with this Code; 
(b)  An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated any provision of this Code from the sale, lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing which is the subject of such violation; 
(c)  An order requiring specific performance of any contract for the sale, lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing or any person who, in violation of this Code, refuses or fails to perform such contract; 
(d)  Compensatory damages; and 
(e)  Such other and further relief as may seem to the court appropriate for the enforcement of this Code and the elimination of violations hereof.  
Sec. 13-1-27. - Fines. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Code shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-1-20. 
State Law reference— See ILCS Sec. 5/11-11.1-1.  
Chapter 14 - FLOOD PLAIN CODE 
 
Sec. 14-1-1. - Purpose. 
This Code is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 65, Sections 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes: 
(a)  To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others; 
(b)  To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage; 
(c)  To promote and protect health, safety and general welfare of the citizens from the hazards of flooding; 
(d)  To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; 
(e)  To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating blight areas; 
(f)  To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and 
(g)  To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development.  
Sec. 14-1-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Code, the following definitions are adopted: 
Base flood: The flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 14-1-3 of this Code. 
Base flood elevation (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood. 
Building: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 days per year. 
The NFIP requires that references be made to "manufactured homes" rather than "mobile homes". 
Critical facility: Any public or private facility which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Examples are public buildings, emergency operations and communication centers, health care facilities and nursing homes, schools, and toxic waste treatment, handling or storage facilities. 
Development: Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to: 
(a)  Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building, or any structural addition to a building; 
(b)  Substantial improvement of an existing building; 
(c)  Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days per year; 
(d)  Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects; 
(e)  Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences; 
(f)  Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations of the ground surface; 
(g)  Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks; and 
(h)  Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters. 
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees. 
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
FEMA regulations can be found at 44 CFR 59-79 effective October 1, 1986 (revised 10/01/90). 
Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway. 
Flood insurance rate map: A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and show base flood elevations. 
Floodplain and special flood hazard area (SFHA): They are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of Silver Creek, Pig Creek, and Hog River are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map of the city prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5, 2003. The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated City of Mascoutah that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for St. Clair County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5, 2003. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community. 
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and their contents. 
Floodproofing certificate: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
Flood protection elevation or FPE: The elevation of the base flood plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain. 
Editor's note— NFIP Regulations require protection to or above the base flood elevation. One foot of freeboard is recommended by IDOT/DWR. A municipality may use higher freeboard requirements if it desires. 
Floodway: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The floodway for each of the floodplains of Silver Creek, Pig Creek, and hog river shall be as delineated on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA and dated November 5, 2003. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the city shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources. 
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources. 
Manufactured home: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. 
NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program. 
Repetitive loss: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SFHA: See definition of floodplain. 
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. 
Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places. 
Travel trailer (or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ): A vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred square feet or less in size; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.  
Sec. 14-1-3. - Base flood elevation. 
This Code's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood elevation data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior any development of the site. [See: NFIP Requirement: 44 CFR 60.3(b).] 
(a)  The base flood elevation for each of the floodplains of Silver Creek, Pig Creek, and Hog River shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the City prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5, 2003. 
(b)  The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of Mascoutah. 
(c)  The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an "A zone" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of Mascoutah shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed to determine base flood elevations. 
(d)  The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated St. Clair County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Mascoutah, or that may be annexed into the City of Mascoutah, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles of the Flood Insurance Study of St. Clair County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5, 2003.  
Sec. 14-1-4. - Duties of the building official. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the general administration of this Code and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this Code. Specifically, the city manager shall: 
(a)  Process development permits in accordance with section 14-1-5. 
(b)  Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section 14-1-6. 
(c)  Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to section 14-1-7 are met and maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate; [See: NFIP Requirements: 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)(iii) and 59.22(a)(9)(iii).] 
(d)  Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of section 14-1-8. 
(e)  Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public health standards of section 14-1-9. 
(f)  If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section 14-1-10 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted. 
(g)  Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined in section 14-1-12 as necessary to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(h)  Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local, state and federal permits. 
(i)  Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
(j)  Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques. 
(k)  Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this Code. 
(l)  Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities subject to this Code. 
(m)  Perform site inspections and make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain. 
(n)  Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map.  
Sec. 14-1-5. - Development permit. 
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the city manager. The city manager shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this Code. 
(a)  Application documents. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions. 
(2)  Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling. 
(3)  The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. 
(4)  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basements) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 14-1-7 of this Code. 
(5)  Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement. 
(b)  Elevation comparisons. Upon receipt of an application for development permit, the city manager shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this Code. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this Code. The city manager shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
Editor's note— Although survey data may show the development site to be entirely above the base flood elevation, a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) will still be required to remove the site from the mapped floodplain for insurance requirements.  
Sec. 14-1-6. - Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages. 
Within the floodway identified on the flood boundary and floodway map, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards shall apply: [NFIP Requirements: 44 CFR 60.3(a)(4)(1), 60.3(c)(10), and 60.3(d)(3).] 
(a)  Except as provided in section 14-1-6(b), no development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement: 
(1)  Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 3; 
(2)  Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No., 4; 
(3)  Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 5; 
(4)  Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6; 
(5)  Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7; 
(6)  Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8; 
(7)  Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 9; 
(8)  Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10; 
(9)  Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11; 
(10)  Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12; 
(11)  Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13; and 
(12)  Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a flood fringe area. 
(b)  Other development activities not listed in (a) may be permitted only if: 
(1)  A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); and 
(2)  Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood elevation. 
State Law reference— See 615 ILCS Sec. 5/5 through 29A.  
Sec. 14-1-7. - Protecting buildings. 
(a)  Requirements. It addition to the damage prevention requirements of section 14-1-6, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations: 
(1)  Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than $1,000.00 or 70 square feet. 
(2)  Substantial improvements made to an existing building. This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which has taken place subsequent to the adoption of this Code. 
(3)  Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any repairs which have taken place subsequent to the adoption of this Code. 
(4)  Structural alterations made to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20 percent. 
(5)  Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage). 
(6)  Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days per year. 
(7)  Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section 14-1-2(q). 
(b)  Alternative methods. Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of the following methods: [See NFIP Requirements: 44 CFR 60.3(c)(2).] 
(1)  The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
(a)  The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation; 
(b)  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation; 
(c)  The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure; 
(d)  The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or refuse materials; and 
(e)  The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary, storm water management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated; or 
(2)  The building may be elevated in accordance with the following: [See: NFIP Requirements: 44 CFR 60.3(a)(3) and 60.3(c)(5).] 
(a)  The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters; 
(b)  The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; 
(c)  If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each wall no more than one foot above grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation; 
(d)  The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris; 
(e)  The finished interior grade shall not be less than the finished exterior grade; 
(f)  All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; 
(g)  Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; and 
(h)  The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable space. 
(c)  [Manufactured homes.] Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be: 
(1)  Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 IL Adm. Code 870. 
(d)  [Travel trailers and recreational vehicles.] Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180 days shall meet the elevation requirements of section 40-1-7(c) unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times; 
(2)  The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and porches; 
(3)  The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling; 
(4)  The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no longer than 400 square feet; 
(5)  The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated; 
(6)  Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for movement out of the floodplain; 
(7)  Propane tanks, electrical and sewage connections must be quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation; 
(8)  The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park model; and 
(9)  The vehicle must be either (a) entirely supported by jacks rather than blocks or (b) have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground, and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to be easily removed by use of the hitch jack. 
(e)  [Non-residential buildings.] Non-residential buildings may be structurally floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that: 
(1)  Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood; 
(2)  The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impact from debris and ice; and 
(3)  Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity. 
Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection. [See NFIP Requirements: 44 CFR 60.3(c)(4).] 
(f)  [Garages or sheds.] Garages or sheds constructed ancillary to a residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The garage or shed must be non-habitable. 
(2)  The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools and cannot be modified later into another use. 
(3)  The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway. 
(4)  The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory to an existing principal structure on the same lot. 
(5)  Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of materials not susceptible to flood damage. 
(6)  All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be elevated above the flood protection elevation. 
(7)  The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each wall no more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for every square foot of floor area. 
(8)  The garage or shed must be less than $7,500.00 in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet. 
(9)  The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning. 
(10)  All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation. 
(11)  The lowest floor elevation shall be documented and the owner advised of the flood insurance implications. 
(g)  [Crawlspace.] A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade. 
(3)  The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade. 
(4)  The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point. 
(5)  An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a flood event. 
(6)  Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and 
(7)  Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.  
Sec. 14-1-8. - Subdivision requirements. 
The city shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and development. 
(a)  Data required. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards of sections 14-1-6 and 14-1-7 of this Code. Any proposal for such development shall include the following data: 
(1)  The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation); 
(2)  The boundary of the floodway when available; and 
(3)  A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (See 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes, Sec. 205/2).  
Sec. 14-1-9. - Public health and other standards. 
(a)  Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to the requirements of sections 14-1-6 and 14-1-7, the following standards apply: 
(1)  No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of section 14-1-7 of this Code. 
(2)  Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(3)  Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(4)  New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight. 
(5)  Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. In addition, all ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(b)  All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. 
Editor's note— This section sets minimum subdivision design review and recording standards when subdivisions are located within a floodplain. It also provides guidance for other activities defined as "development" which may occur in a floodplain. NFIP Requirement: 44 CFR 60.2(c) 
NFIP Requirement: 44 CFR 60.3(b)(3) only applies to subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots. 
All new plats recorded must show the location of any floodplains and must be signed, sealed, and certified by an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor as per the requirements of Public Act 85-267.]  
Sec. 14-1-10. - Variances. 
Whenever the standards of this Code place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board of appeals for a variance. The zoning board of appeals shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. The city council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this Code. 
(a)  Requirements for variance. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain. 
(2)  An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted. 
(3)  The relief requested is the minimum necessary. 
(4)  There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or creation of a nuisance. 
(5)  There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public facilities. 
(6)  The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP. 
(7)  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained. 
State Law reference— [65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-13-4 and 5/11-13-5 establishes specific municipal zoning variance criteria.] 
(b)  Notification of applicant. The zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of section 14-1-7 would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: 
(1)  Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage. 
(2)  Increase the risks to life and property. 
(3)  Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability. 
The Standard Flood Insurance Policy permits an insurance adjustor to not pay for damage that was caused by something the owner did which increased the hazard to the property. Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act authorizes local officials to request denial of flood insurance for buildings in violation of local floodplain codes. 
(c)  Variances to the building protection requirements of section 14-1-7 of this Code requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or alteration of a site or building included on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections 14-1-9(a)(1) through (5). 
Communities in the NFIP are required to maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report them to FEMA. FEMA may review variances and suspend a community from the NFIP if the review "indicates a pattern inconsistent with the objectives of sound floodplain management…"  
Sec. 14-1-11. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection required by this Code is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Code does not imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This Code does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this Code or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.  
Sec. 14-1-12. - Penalty. 
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this Code. Upon due investigation, the city attorney may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this Code exist. The city attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. 
(a)  If such owner fails, after ten days' notice, to correct the violation: 
(1)  The city shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this Code or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this Code. 
(2)  Any person who violates this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 or each offense. 
(3)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(4)  The city shall record a notice of violation on the title to the property. 
(b)  The city attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.  
Sec. 14-1-13. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This Code repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city council to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including: Floodplain Ordinance, 1981. However, this Code does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this Code repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this Code and other ordinance easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. [See: NFIP Requirement: 44 CFR 60.2(B).]  
Sec. 14-1-14. - Separability. 
The provisions and sections of this Code shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this Code shall not affect the validity of the remainder.  
Sec. 14-1-15. - Effective date. 
This Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication, as required by law. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1; 5/11-12-12; 5/11-30-2; 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2.  
Chapter 15 - FRANCHISES  
ARTICLE I. - ILLINOIS POWER COMPANY 
 
Sec. 15-1-1. - Franchise for Mid-America. 
The following franchise has been granted to Illinois Power Company for the Mid-America Airport area: 
Section 1. There is hereby given and granted to Illinois Power Company (hereinafter referred to as the "company") its successors and assigns, the exclusive right, privilege and authority to construct, operate, maintain and/or extend within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah, a municipal corporation, (hereinafter referred to as "municipality"), an electric utility system for the distribution and/or sale of electric energy to the Mid-America Airport as defined by the attached map identified as "Exhibit A" and incorporated by reference. Should Mid-America expand the airport in the future, said franchise shall include any such expansion. The municipality further agrees and grants to the company, the right, privilege and authority at all times deemed necessary by the company to trim trees, brush, shrubs, or any portion thereof upon, along, over and/or across each and all such streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, easements, rights-of-way and/or other public places in such a manner that shall provide and maintain proper clearance, in the determination of the company. 
Section 2. All poles, conductors, wires, cables, conduits, equipment and other apparatus erected, placed or installed pursuant to this Ordinance shall be located so as not to interfere unreasonably with travel on such streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, easements, rights-of-way or other public places. 
Section 3. All poles and conduits erected, placed or installed under this Ordinance shall be located so as not to injure unreasonably any pavement, drains, sewers, catch basins, water pipes or other like improvements, but should any pavement, drain, sewer, catch basin, water pipe, or other like improvement be unreasonably injured by such placement, the company shall forthwith repair the damage caused by said injury, at its own expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the municipality. All overhead conductors, wires and cables shall be installed with sufficient height that will allow the company to maintain all clearance requirements prescribed by the applicable Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission of the State of Illinois. 
Section 4. When any street, avenue, alley, bridge, easement, right-of-way or other public places, upon which or in which any poles, wires, cables, conduits, or equipment of the company are located, shall be graded, curbed, paved or otherwise changed so as to make the resetting of such poles or reinstalling such other equipment necessary, the company shall make application to municipality for the establishment of permanent grades. Such conduits or other similar equipment shall not be installed until such permanent grades have been established. The municipality agrees to establish promptly such permanent grades upon such application. 
Section 5. The municipality and the company acknowledge that the County of St. Clair has executed a contract with the company by which the company will provide electric energy to Mid-America Airport, including those areas located inside and outside of the corporate limits of the municipality and all improvements thereon. The municipality shall not serve or attempt to serve Mid-America Airport, or any improvements thereon, until at least ten years after the effective date hereof. 
Section 6. As consideration for the rights, privileges and authority given and granted by this Ordinance so long as the company during the term hereof shall exercise its right, the company shall pay to municipality a fee of three percent of the company's gross revenues from the sale of electric energy to the County of St. Clair for those Mid-America Airport facilities and improvements located within the corporate limits of the municipality. Payment representing the initial five-year period of said franchise fee in the amount of $29,000.00 shall be paid to the municipality on the first day that the company provides permanent electric energy to Mid-America Airport, but no later than October 1, 1997. After the initial five-year term, company shall submit a pre-payment franchise fee on or before October 1, 2002, in the amount equal to three percent of the projected gross revenue generated from the sale of electric energy to the Mid-America Airport facilities located within the corporate limits of the municipality during years six through ten. The projected gross revenue is to be determined by the company. 
Section 7. The company shall be exempt from any special tax, assessment, license, rental or other charge during the term of this Code, on all poles, towers, conductors, wires, cables, conduits, equipment and other apparatus placed in the streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, easements, rights-of-way or other public places within the corporate limits of municipality, except that the municipality may impose a utility tax consistent with the terms of this section. The municipality agrees that any and all municipal utility taxes, including those in effect on the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be applied equitably and equally to the company and the municipality. If the municipality enacts or has in place a municipal utility tax contrary to these provisions, said tax will not apply to the company. 
Section 8. The company shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the municipality from and against any and all claims, damages, liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses of any kind, whether suffered or incurred by the company or the municipality or some other person, and by reason of any negligent act or omission of the company, its officials, employees or agents; arising out of this Ordinance provided notice in writing is given to the company together with all information, documents and/or evidence in possession of the municipality, its officials, employees or agents relating to any such claim and the municipality, its officials, employees or agents, fully cooperates with the Company in defense of such claim. 
Section 9. All rights, privileges and authority given and granted by this Ordinance are granted for a term of ten years from and after the acceptance of this Ordinance as hereinafter provided (the "initial term"). 
Section 10. No right, privilege or authority given or granted by this Ordinance shall become effective until written acceptance of this Ordinance by the company shall be filed with the city clerk of said municipality. Such acceptance shall be filed within 90 days from the passage of this Ordinance and when filed, shall together, with operation by the company under the terms of this Ordinance, constitute full consideration for the rights, privileges and authority hereby given and granted. 
Section 11. All Ordinances, parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed effective upon the effective date of this Ordinance. A special use permit for the extension of utility lines must be submitted by the company. The municipality shall not unreasonably deny any such application for the extension of utility lines. 
Section 12. If any section (or portion thereof) of this Ordinance is declared null and void by any court of competent jurisdiction, such offending section (or portion thereof) shall be removed from this Ordinance and the remainder of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. The parties shall meet and attempt, in good faith, to replace the offending section (or portion thereof) giving due consideration to the purposes and intent of the original provision. 
Section 13. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Ordinance, if the company shall fail to honor its obligation under the settlement agreement between the company and the municipality dated October 7, 1996, this Ordinance shall be null and void and shall be automatically repealed and terminated. 
Section 14. The parties acknowledge the existence of claims by IPC to serve geographical locations within the corporate limits of municipalities, including Mascoutah, with which claims Mascoutah disagrees. The parties agree that this Franchise Ordinance shall not constitute a waiver, estoppel or admission of the validity or invalidity of such claims. 
(Ord. No. 96-137, 10-21-96)  
ARTICLE II. - AMERENIP 
 
Sec. 15-2-1. - Franchise for gas utility system. 
Section 1. It is the intent of the parties by this Ordinance to extend for an additional term, subject to the terms and conditions here stated, the authorization to AmerenIP, its successors and assigns, to construct, operate and maintain a gas utility system within the City as originally authorized by Ordinance No. 454 approved on March 21st, 1960. The parties acknowledge that by so doing they are continuing an existing relationship authorizing the services of a utility for the provision of gas energy and other purposes within the City for the benefit of its citizens and residents as well as other consumers of gas energy located within its corporate limits. 
Section 2. There is hereby given and granted to AmerenIP, its successors and assigns (hereinafter referred to as the "Company"), the right, privilege and authority to construct, operate, maintain and/or extend within the corporate limits, as the same now exists or may hereafter be extended, of the City of Mascoutah (hereinafter referred to as "Municipality"), a gas utility system for the transmission, distribution and/or sale of gas energy and other purposes (the "System"), together with the right, privilege and authority to lay, erect, construct, install, operate and/or maintain all necessary mains, pipes, valves, equipment and/or other apparatus as may be necessary or convenient for the System, in, upon, along, over, under, through and/or across each and all of the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, easements, rights of way and/or other public places. 
Section 3. All mains, pipes, valves and apparatus shall, so far as practicable, be placed underground and shall be so located and laid as not to interfere with any pipes, conduits, sewers, drains, pavements or other public improvements existing at the time of such location, and said Company shall forthwith repair any damage caused to such improvements to the satisfaction of the official or officials of said Municipality having charge of the supervision thereof. There shall be no unnecessary obstruction to the streets, avenues, alleys and public places of said Municipality in the laying, installation, operation or maintenance of any of said mains, pipes, valves or apparatus. All facilities of Company in said Municipality shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
When any street, avenue, or other public place shall be graded, curbed, paved or otherwise changed so as to make the resetting or relocation of any pipes or other equipment placed or installed under this Ordinance necessary, the Company shall make such resetting or relocation, at the Company's cost and expense. Municipality shall provide the Company with a suitable location for the resetting or relocation of such pipes or other equipment, and the Company's obligation shall be limited to resetting or relocating pipes or other equipment of the same type and configuration as the displaced pipes or other equipment. Company shall make such resetting or relocation within a reasonable time after receiving written notice of the need for the same from the authorized representative of the Municipality, and the establishment by the Municipality of the permanent grade at the new location. 
Section 4. The rates to be charged by the Company for gas service rendered under this Ordinance shall be such as are approved form time to time by the Illinois Commerce Commission of the State of Illinois and/or such other duly constituted governmental authority as shall have jurisdiction thereof. All Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission of the State of Illinois applicable to the rights, privileges and authority granted by this Ordinance, in the event of conflict herewith, shall govern. 
Section 5. As a further consideration for the rights, privileges and authorities granted by this ordinance, the Company shall furnish municipality compensation in the amount of $25,215, payable annually, within 30 days of the anniversary date of this ordinance. The Standard Compensation for this ordinance would normally be paid on the following graduated scale: Year 1 - $25,215; Year 2 - $22,750; Year 3 - $20,285; Year 4 - $17,820; and Year 5 and all remaining years - $15,350. The Municipality understands that the Company, in order to agree to the compensation at this level, will activate the Excess Municipal Franchise Compensation Adjustment provisions as permitted under the Rider EF tariff, now in effect and as amended from time to time. This will allow the Company to recover from the customers of said Municipality taking service from the Company within the boundaries of said Municipality, the difference between the annual franchise payments and the standard compensation amounts. Municipality may request a revision to the standard compensation amount after five years form the date of passage of this ordinance if Municipality has a reasonable belief that its population has increased or decreased by 3% or more. Municipality must request the revision at least 60 days prior to the next anniversary date. If Company confirms that the number of customers served by the System within Municipality's corporate limits has increased or decreased by 3% or more, the standard compensation amount will be revised by that percentage for the next and succeeding payments. Municipality may request similar revisions to the standard compensation amounts under these criteria in additional five year periods throughout the term of this ordinance. 
Section 6. If, at any time, during the term of this contract, Municipality permits another entity or person to provide gas distribution or similar services, and Company reasonably believes the other entity or person is granted more favorable treatment, terms, or conditions, then Company shall notify Municipality of such treatment, terms, or conditions. Alternatively, if Municipality reasonably believes the other entity or person grants Municipality more favorable treatment, terms, or conditions, then Municipality shall notify Company of such treatment, terms, or conditions. Upon receipt of such notice, Municipality and Company shall negotiate in good faith to amend this ordinance to provide Company or Municipality such more favorable treatment, terms or conditions on an equivalent basis. Such amendment shall take into consideration all circumstances that distinguish between Company and the entity or person receiving the more favorable or less favorable treatment, terms, or conditions. 
Section 7. The rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall inure to and be vested in Company, its successors and assigns, successively, subject to all of the terms, provisions and conditions herein contained, and each of the obligations hereby imposed upon Company shall devolve and be binding upon its successors and assigns, successively, in the same manner. 
Section 8. This Ordinance shall confer no right, privilege or authority on Company, its successors or assigns, unless Company shall within ninety (90) days after due notice to the Company of the enactment of this Ordinance, file with the City Clerk an acceptance of the terms and provisions hereof; provided, however, that if such acceptance be not so filed within said period of ninety (90) days, all rights, privileges, and authority herein granted shall become null and void. 
Section 9. All rights, privileges and authority given and granted by this Ordinance are granted for a term of 20 years from and after the acceptance of this Ordinance as hereinafter provided (the "Initial Term"), and thereafter on a year-to-year basis (each a "Subsequent Term") unless either the Company or Municipality notifies the other in writing of its desire to terminate this Ordinance at least six (6) months prior to the expiration of the Initial Term or any Subsequent Term. 
Section 10. The Municipality acknowledges that Company is vested in rights, permissions and authority independent of this Ordinance. Neither acceptance of this Ordinance nor compliance with its provisions shall impair in any way or waive any right, permission or authority which Company may have independent of this Ordinance. In addition, neither use by Company of public property or places as authorized by this Ordinance nor service rendered by Company in said Municipality shall be treated as use solely of the rights, permission and authority provided for by this Ordinance and in no way shall indicate non-use of any right, permission or authority vested in the Company independent of this Ordinance. In the event the Municipality vacates any streets, avenues, alleys, easements, rights of way, bridges or other public places during the term of this Ordinance, Municipality agrees to reserve unto Company the rights, privileges and authority herein given and granted to the Company in upon, under, along, over and across each and all of such vacated premises which are at that time in use by the Company. 
Section 11. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance or with any of its provisions are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 12. This Ordinance shall not relieve Company of the obligation to comply with any ordinance now existing in the Municipality or enacted in the future requiring Company to obtain written permits or other approval from the Municipality prior to commencement of construction of facilities within the streets thereof, except Company shall not be required to obtain permits or other approval from the Municipality for the maintenance, upgrading and repair of its facilities. Except in cases of emergency, prior to engaging in any excavation activity that is expected to create an obstruction or other hazardous condition in any street avenue, alley or public place, the Company shall notify Municipality of the location and extent of the planned excavation. In cases of emergency, Company shall notify Municipality of the location and extent of any such activity as soon as practicable after the emergency has been abated. 
Section 13. If any provision of this Ordinance, or the application of such provision to particular circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance, or the application of such provision to circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. 
Section 14. The Company shall be exempt from any special tax, assessment, license, rental or other charge during the term of this Ordinance, on all mains, pipes, valves, equipment and other apparatus placed under the streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, easements, rights of way or other public places within the corporate limits of Municipality. 
Section 15. This Ordinance shall take effect and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted and renewed shall vest in Company upon its filing of an acceptance with the City Clerk according to the terms prescribed herein. This Ordinance shall be in full force from and after its passage, approval and ten (10) day period of publication in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, §§ 1—15, 5-17-10)  
ARTICLE III. - CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS ENTERTAINMENT I, LLC 
 
Sec. 15-3-1. - Franchise for cable system. 
Section 1. Definitions. 
a.  "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, P.L. 98-549, 47 U.S.C. §521 Supp., as it may be amended or superseded. 
b.  "Cable System," "Cable Service," and "Basic Cable Service" shall be defined as set forth in the Cable Act. 
c.  "Franchise" means the authorization granted hereunder of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a Cable System within the Service Area. 
d.  "Gross Revenues" means any revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, actually received by the Grantee from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services within the Service Area, provided, however, that such phrase shall not include any taxes, fee or assessment of general applicability collected by the Grantee from Subscribers for pass-through to a government agency, including, without limitation, FCC User Fee, franchise fee, or sales or utility taxes; (2) bad debt; (3) credits, refunds and deposits paid to Subscribers; and (4) any exclusion available under applicable state law credits, refunds or deposits made to Subscribers or unrecovered bad debt. 
e.  "Service Area" shall mean the geographic boundaries of the Grantor. 
f.  "Streets" means the public streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, alleys, all other rights-of-way and easements, and the public grounds, places or water within the geographic boundaries of Grantor. 
g.  "Subscriber" means any person lawfully receiving any Cable Service from the Grantee. 
Section 2. Granting of Franchise. The Grantor hereby grants to Grantee a non-exclusive Franchise for the use of the Streets and dedicated easements within the Service Area for the construction, operation and maintenance of the Cable System, upon the terms and conditions set forth herein. Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prohibit the Grantee from offering any service over its Cable System that is not prohibited by federal or state law. 
Section 3. Term. The Franchise shall be for a term of ten (10) years, commencing on the Effective Date of this Franchise as set forth in Section 16. This Franchise will be automatically extended for an additional term of five (5) years from the expiration date as set forth in Section 16, unless either party notifies the other in writing of its desire to not exercise this automatic extension (and enter renewal negotiations under the Cable Act) at least three (3) years before the expiration of this Franchise. If such a notice is given, the parties will then proceed under the federal Cable Act renewal procedures. 
Section 4. Use of the Streets and Dedicated Easements. 
a.  Grantee shall have the right to use the Streets of the Grantor for the construction, operation and maintenance of the Cable System, including the right to repair, replace and enlarge and extend the Cable System, provided that Grantee shall utilize the facilities of utilities whenever practicable. 
b.  The facilities of the Grantee shall be installed underground in those Service Areas where existing telephone and electric services are both underground at the time of system construction. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of system construction, the Grantee may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are required to be placed underground by the Grantor, the Grantee shall likewise place its facilities underground. 
c.  Grantee shall have the right to remove, trim, cut and keep clear of the Cable System, the trees in and along the Streets of the Grantor. 
d.  Grantee in the exercise of any right granted to it by the Franchise shall, at no cost to the Grantor, promptly repair or replace any facility or service of the Grantor which Grantee damages, including but not limited to any Street or sewer, electric facility, water main, fire alarm, police communication or traffic control. 
Section 5. Maintenance of the System. 
a.  Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care in the maintenance and operation of the Cable System so as not to endanger the life, health or property of any citizen of the Grantor or the property of the Grantor 
b.  All construction practices and installation of equipment shall be done in accordance with all applicable sections of the National Electric Safety Code. 
c.  The Cable System shall be designed, constructed and operated so as to meet those technical standards adopted by the FCC relating to Cable Systems contained in part 76 of the FCC's rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be amended regardless of the transmission technology utilized. 
Section 6. Service. 
a.  The Grantee shall make Cable Service distributed over the Cable System available to every residence within the Service Area where there is a minimum density of at least forty (40) residences per linear strand mile of cable (excluding any home subscribing to any satellite service) as measured from Grantee's closest trunk line or distribution cable that is actively delivering Cable Service as of the date of such request for service. If such residence is located within 125 feet of Grantee's feeder cable, the Cable Service will be provided at Grantee's published rates for standard installation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend the Cable System into any portion of the Service Area where another operator is providing Cable Service, or into any annexed area which is not contiguous to the present Service Area of the Grantee. Grantee shall not be obligated to provide Cable Service into any area which is financially or technically infeasible. Grantee at its discretion may make Cable Service available to businesses within the Service Area. Cable Service offered to Subscribers pursuant to this Agreement shall be conditioned upon Grantee having legal access to any such Subscriber's dwelling unit or other units wherein such Cable Service is provided. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Grantee's ability to offer or provide bulk rate discounts or promotions. 
b.  The Grantor shall promptly provide written notice to the Grantee of its annexation of any territory which is being provided Cable Service by the Grantee or its affiliates. Such annexed area will be subject to the provisions of this Franchise upon sixty (60) days' written notice from the Grantor, subject to the conditions set forth below and subsection (a) above. The Grantor shall also notify Grantee in writing of all new street address assignments or changes within the Service Area. Grantee shall within ninety (90) days after receipt of the annexation notice, pay the Grantor franchise fees on revenue received from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in any area annexed by the Grantor if the Grantor has provided a written annexation notice that includes the addresses that will be moved into the Service Area in an Excel format or in a format that will allow Grantee to change its billing system. If the annexation notice does not include the addresses that will be moved into the Service Area, Grantee shall pay franchise fees within ninety (90) days after it receives the annexed addresses as set forth above. All notices due under this section shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the addresses set forth in Section 11 with a copy to the Director of Government Relations. In any audit of franchise fees due under this Agreement, Grantee shall not be liable for franchise fees on annexed areas unless and until Grantee has received notification and information that meets the standards set forth in this section. The provisions of this section, including the payment of franchise fees, shall be subject to Illinois law governing annexations (55 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/5-1095). 
c.  Grantee shall provide Basic Cable Service and one free outlet to each of the following public facilities located within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of existing service lines of the Grantee and within the jurisdictional limits of the Grantor: City Hall, City Community Building, Public Service Buildings, Fire Department, Police Department, and public schools. No monthly service fee shall be charged for such outlet. Grantee shall provide Basic Cable Service to new construction hereafter for similar public facilities; provided they are within one hundred twenty five (125) feet of the existing service lines of Grantee. 
Section 7. New Development. 
a.  The City shall amend its building code and/or applicable ordinances, if necessary, to require developers to provide the Grantee with all materials and information, including copies of plat maps of new residential and/or commercial developments, at the same time as the developer provides such items to all other utilities. 
b.  In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, on request of Grantee the developer or property owner shall give Grantee reasonable notice of the particular date on which open trenching will be available to Grantee for installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals. 
Section 8. Consumer Protection. Grantee shall comply with the customer service and privacy protection provisions pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501 (Article XXII of the Illinois Public Utilities Act). 
Section 9. Insurance/Indemnity. 
a.  The Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the Franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows: 
Workers' Compensation 	Statutory Limits 
Commercial General Liability 	[$1,000,000] per occurrence, 
Combined Single Liability (C.S.L.) 
[$2,000,000] General Aggregate 
	
Auto Liability including coverage 
on all owned, non-owned 
hired autos Umbrella Liability 	[$1,000,000] per occurrence C.S.L. 
	
Umbrella Liability 	[$1,000,000] per occurrence C.S.L. 
 
b.  The Grantor shall be added as an additional insured, arising out of work performed by Charter, to the above Commercial General Liability, Auto Liability and Umbrella Liability insurance coverage. 
c.  The Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with current certificates of insurance evidencing such coverage upon request. 
d.  Grantee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold the Grantor, including its agents and employees, harmless from any claims or damages resulting from the actions of Grantee in constructing, operating or maintaining the Cable System. Grantor agrees to give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify Grantor within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not be obligated to indemnify Grantor for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of Grantor or for the Grantor's use of the Cable System. 
Section 10. Revocation. 
a.  Prior to revocation or termination of the Franchise, the Grantor shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke the Franchise on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the Grantee, including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the Franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have sixty (60) days from such notice to either object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection and provide any explanation or to cure the alleged noncompliance. If Grantee has not cured the breach within such sixty (60) day time period or if the Grantor has not otherwise received a satisfactory response from Grantee, the Grantor may then seek to revoke the Franchise at a public hearing. The Grantee shall be given at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of such public hearing, specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke the Franchise. 
b.  At the hearing, the Grantor shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses, after which it shall determine whether or not the Franchise shall be revoked. The public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript and a certified copy of the findings shall be made available to the Grantee within ten (10) business days. The Grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the Grantor de novo. 
c.  Upon revocation of the Franchise, Grantee may remove Cable System from the Streets of the Grantor or abandon the Cable System in place. 
Section 11. Equal Protection. If any other provider of cable services or video services (without regard to the technology used to deliver such services) is lawfully authorized by the Grantor or by any other state or federal governmental entity to provide such services using facilities located wholly or partly in the public rights-of-way of the Grantor, the Grantor shall, within thirty (30) days of a written request from Grantee, modify this Franchise to ensure that the obligations applicable to Grantee are no more burdensome than those imposed on the new competing provider. If the Grantor fails to make modifications consistent with this requirement, Grantee's Franchise shall be deemed so modified thirty (30) days after the Grantee's initial written notice. As an alternative to the Franchise modification request, the Grantee shall have the right and may choose to have this Franchise with the Grantor be deemed expired thirty (30) days after written notice to the Grantor. Nothing in this Franchise shall impair the right of the Grantee to terminate this Franchise and, at Grantee's option, negotiate a renewal or replacement franchise, license, consent, certificate or other authorization with any appropriate government entity. 
Section 12. Confidentiality. If Grantee provides any books and records to the Grantor, the Grantor agrees to treat as confidential such books, records or maps that constitute proprietary or confidential information. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the Grantor agrees that, to the extent permitted by state and federal law, it shall deny access to any of Grantee's books and records marked confidential to any person. 
Section 13. Notices, Miscellaneous. 
a.  Unless otherwise provided by federal, state or local law, all notices, reports or demands pursuant to this Franchise shall be in writing and shall be deemed to be sufficiently given upon delivery to a Person at the address set forth below, or by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, nationally or internationally recognized courier service such as Federal Express [at] the designated mail address provided below. Grantee shall provide thirty (30) days written notice of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions using any reasonable written means. As set forth above, notice served upon the Grantor shall be delivered or sent to: 
Mayor 
City of Mascoutah 
3 West Main Street 
Mascoutah, IL 62258 
and every notice served upon Grantee shall be delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to: 
Attention: 	Vice President/GM 
Charter Communications 
941 Charter Commons Drive 
Town & Country, MO 63107 
	
With a copy to: 	Charter Communications 
12405 Powerscourt Drive 
St. Louis, MO 63131 
Attention: Vice President of Government Affairs 
 
b.  All provisions of this Franchise shall apply to the respective parties, their lawful successors, transferees and assigns. 
c.  If any particular section of this Franchise shall be held invalid, the remaining provisions and their application shall not be affected thereby. 
d.  In the event of any conflict between this Franchise and any Grantor ordinance or regulation, this Franchise will prevail. 
Section 14. Force Majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes but is not limited to, severe or unusual weather conditions, fire, flood, or other acts of God, strikes, work delays caused by failure of utility providers to service, maintain or monitor their utility poles to which Grantee's Cable System is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
Section 15. Franchise Fee. 
a.  Grantee shall pay to the Grantor annually an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the Gross Revenues for such calendar quarter. 
b.  Each year during which the Franchise is in force, Grantee shall pay Grantor no later than forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter the franchise fees required by this section, together with a financial statement showing total Gross Revenues derived from the Cable System during such quarter. 
c.  The Grantor and Grantee shall comply with the auditing provisions established pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.05. 
Section 16. Effective Date. The Franchise granted herein will take effect and be in full force from such date of acceptance by Grantee recorded on the signature page of this Franchise. This Franchise shall expire on March 31, 2026 unless extended in accordance with Section 3 of this Franchise or by the mutual agreement of the parties. 
Section 17. Acceptance and Entire Agreement. The Grantor and the Grantee, by virtue of the signatures set forth below, agree to be legally bound by all provisions and conditions set forth in this Franchise. The Franchise constitutes the entire agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee. No modifications to this Franchise may be made without an appropriate written amendment signed by both parties. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, 4-18-16)  
Chapter 16 - HEALTH CODE  
ARTICLE I. - GARBAGE 
 
Sec. 16-1-1. - Service established. 
A fee is hereby established for garbage and rubbish collection in this city, as follows: 
(a)  Manufactured or mobile homes. Manufactured homes or mobile homes occupied as a residence and each separate unit in an apartment building or multiple dwelling shall be considered a separate residence and shall be determined by the number of water meters, electric meters, or occupancy permits, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Business establishments. For each business establishment, church and school a separate agreement shall be entered into by the owner of such business establishment or the authorities of such school or church, and the garbage collector, for the payment direct to the collector of an amount to be agreed upon by them for such service. 
(c)  Senior citizens. Senior citizens, 65 years of age or older and who are the head of a household shall be entitled to a special rate to be determined per contracts negotiated with various waste haulers, upon proof of age to the waste hauler in lieu of the rate specified. 
(d)  Fees. 
(1)  Fees for service shall be determined per contracts negotiated with various waste haulers. These fees are articulated in said contracts, which are maintained and available in the city manager's office. 
(2)  Fees for service shall not be charged on vacant rental property, vacant residences for sale, or vacant residences verified by low utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 956, 4-3-95; Ord. No. 02-127, 12-16-02; Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 16-1-2. - Utility bills. 
All fees and charges in section 16-1-1 shall be assessed by the contracted waste hauler on a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. No. 02-127, 12-16-02; Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 16-1-3. - Landscape waste restriction. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and without consent to: 
(a)  Mix landscape waste that is intended for collection or for disposal at a landfill with any other municipal waste. 
(b)  Put landscape waste into a container intended for collection or disposal in a landscape waste composting facility unless such container is biodegradable. 
(c)  Accept landscape waste as an owner or operator of a sanitary landfill for final disposal without providing and maintaining for that purpose a separate landscape waste composting facility. 
(Ord. No. 02-127, 12-16-02) 
Landscape waste is defined as accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-19-1 et seq.  
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 16-2-1. - Agreement/terms and conditions. 
As stated above, the city manager will maintain a copy of the current agreement with the current waste hauler. 
(Ord. No. 02-127, 12-16-02) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-19-1 et seq.  
ARTICLE III. - SERVICES RENDERED 
 
Sec. 16-3-1. - Exclusive service. 
Customer grants to the waste hauler currently under contract as the contractor with the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all of customer's waste materials and agrees to abide by the various provisions identified within said contract.  
ARTICLE IV. - TERM - RESERVED 
TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
ARTICLE I 
SERVICES RENDERED 
Customer grants to the waste hauler currently under contract as the contractor with the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all of customer's waste materials and agrees to abide by the various provisions identified within said contract. 
ARTICLE II 
TERM - RESERVED  
ARTICLE V. - YARD WASTE DROP OFF SITE 
 
Sec. 16-5-1. - Definitions. 
[For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.] 
Facility. The facility is identified as the yard waste drop off site located at 511 South 10 th Street in the City of Mascoutah. 
Resident. All persons who reside within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah or own residential property within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah. All persons who own or operate a business within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah. 
Yard waste. All garden residues, leaves, shrubbery and tree trimmings, grass clippings, Christmas trees, and all others identified as permitted in section 16-5-2(e). 
(Ord. No. 17-22, § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 16-5-2. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  For use by City of Mascoutah residents, businesses and property owners only. 
(b)  Yard waste dropped off at the facility must be yard waste collected from your residential property only. 
(c)  Yard waste items must be placed in proper designated areas. 
(d)  No smoking is allowed in the facility. 
(e)  Yard waste items permitted to be dropped off include: 
(1)  Compostable items. 
a.  Leaves. 
b.  Flower trimmings. 
c.  Garden trimmings. 
d.  Grass clippings. 
(2)  Tree and wood material. 
a.  Sticks. 
b.  Shrubbery trimmings. 
c.  Tree trimmings. 
d.  Tree limbs no longer than ten feet in length. 
e.  Christmas trees free of all ornaments. 
(f)  Items not permitted to be dropped off include: 
(1)  Bags of any type. 
(2)  Tree stumps. 
(3)  Plastic pots. 
(4)  Trash or garbage. 
(5)  Construction or demolition waste. 
(6)  Painted, pressure treated wood, railroad ties or landscaping timbers. 
(7)  Sod, dirt or rocks. 
(8)  Wood chips. 
(9)  Manufactured materials of any type. 
(g)  Commercial landscapers and yard maintenance service providers are not permitted to use the facility. 
(Ord. No. 17-22, § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 16-5-3. - Facility access permit. 
(a)  Residents wishing to have access to the facility for yard waste drop-off are required to obtain an access card. 
(b)  Application for access card must be filed with the city manager's office. Applicant must provide the following information: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Property address. 
(3)  Mailing address (if different from property address). 
(4)  Phone number. 
(5)  E-mail address. 
(6)  Driver's license number (must include copy with application for address verification). 
(c)  Only one access card will be issued per property. 
(d)  Fee for access card is $25.00 per year. 
(e)  Fee for lost or misplaced access cards is $10.00. 
(f)  All access cards will be active from March 1 st through the last day of February of the following year. Residents will be required to renew their access cards for the next twelve month period. A reminder letter will be mailed or e-mailed at the beginning of each year. 
(Ord. No. 17-22, § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 16-5-4. - Hours of operation. 
The facility will be accessible every day from dawn to dusk unless otherwise posted due to maintenance or weather related issues, such as flooding. 
(Ord. No. 17-22, § 1, 11-20-17)  
Sec. 16-5-5. - Penalties. 
Unacceptable uses of the facility include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Use of your access card by someone not of your property. 
(2)  Dropping off of any items not permitted at the facility. 
(3)  Damage to gates, signs, or any other property at the facility. 
(4)  Failure to place permitted items in proper designated areas. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section can and shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-1-20. Continued unacceptable use of the facility will result in loss of access to the facility for the remainder of the twelve month period or beyond (to be determined by the city manager or designee). 
(Ord. No. 17-22, § 1, 11-20-17)  
Chapter 20 - LIBRARY  
ARTICLE I. - LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 20-1-1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a public library for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the city. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/1-2.  
Sec. 20-1-2. - Appointment; compensation. 
The mayor shall, with the approval of the city council, proceed to appoint a board of nine trustees for the public library, chosen from the citizens at large with reference to their fitness for such office. Not more than one member of the city council shall be (at any one time) a member of the library board. 
Trustees of the library board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties from library funds. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1; See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-5.  
Sec. 20-1-3. - Term. 
The mayor shall, before the July 1st of each year, appoint three trustees to take the place of the retiring trustees who shall hold office for three years and until their successors are appointed. By and with the advice and consent of the city council, the mayor may remove any trustee as provided in chapter 1, article III of this Code. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.1.  
Sec. 20-1-4. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be declared in the office of a trustee by the board when the trustee declines or is unable to serve, or is absent without cause from all regular board meetings for a period of one year, or is convicted of a misdemeanor for failing, neglecting, or refusing to discharge any duty imposed upon a trustee or becomes a nonresident of the city, or who fails to pay the library taxes levied by the corporate authorities. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-4.  
Sec. 20-1-5. - Oath of office; organization; meetings. 
(a)  Within 60 days after their appointment, the new trustees shall take their oath of office and meet to organize the board. The oath shall consist of the following: 
"I, ___________ do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of trustee according to the best of my ability." 
(b)  The first action taken at the organizational meeting of the board shall be the election of a president and a secretary and such other officers as the board may deem necessary, and the board shall further provide in the bylaws of the board as to the length of the terms in office. The trustees shall determine the time and place of all official meetings of the board at which any legal action may be taken and shall post notice thereof at the public library maintained by the board and at not less than one public place within the corporate confines of the area of library service one day in advance thereof. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-6.  
Sec. 20-1-6. - Custodian of funds. 
The library treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds of the library board of trustees. The cost of any bond necessary to satisfy the requirements of Chapter 75, Section 5/4-9 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes shall be borne by the library.  
Sec. 20-1-7. - Powers and duties. 
The board of library trustees shall carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter in establishing, supporting and maintaining a public library or libraries for providing library service and, in addition to, but without limiting other powers conferred by this chapter shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their own guidance and for the government of the library as may be expedient, not inconsistent with this chapter. 
(b)  To have the exclusive control of the expenditure of all moneys collected for the library and deposited to the credit of the library fund. 
(c)  To have the exclusive control of the construction of any library building and of the supervision, care and custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for that purpose. 
(d)  To purchase or lease real or personal property, and to construct an appropriate building or buildings for the use of a library established hereunder, using, at the board's option, contracts providing for all or part of the consideration to be paid through installments at stated intervals during a certain period not to exceed 20 years with interest on the unpaid balance at any lawful rate for municipal corporations in this State, except that contracts for installment purchases of real estate shall provide for not more than 75 percent of the total consideration to be repaid by installments, and to refund at any time any installment contract entered into pursuant to this paragraph by means of a refunding loan agreement, which may provide for installment payments of principal and interest to be made at stated intervals during a certain period not to exceed 20 years from the date of such refunding loan agreement, with interest on the unpaid principal balance at any lawful rate for municipal corporations in this state, except that no installment contract or refunding loan agreement for the same property or construction project may exceed an aggregate of 20 years. 
(e)  To remodel or reconstruct a building erected or purchased by the board, when such building is not adapted to its purposes or needs. 
(f)  To sell or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property that it deems no longer necessary or useful for library purposes, and to lease to others any real property not immediately useful, but for which plans for ultimate use have been or will be adopted, however, the corporate authorities shall have the first right to purchase or lease. 
(g)  To appoint and to fix the compensation of a qualified librarian, who shall have the authority to hire such other employees as may be necessary, to fix their compensation, and to remove such appointees, subject to the approval of the library board, (but these powers are subject to Division 1 of Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code in municipalities in which that Division is in force). The board may also retain counsel and professional consultants as needed. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/10-1-1) 
(h)  To contract with any public or private corporation or entity for the purpose of providing or receiving library service or of performing any and all other acts necessary and proper to carry out the responsibilities and the provisions of this chapter. This contractual power includes, but is not limited to participating in interstate library compacts and library systems, and contracting to supply library services and for the expenditure of any Federal or State funds made available to the municipality or to the State of Illinois for library purposes. 
(i)  To join with the board or boards of any one or more libraries in this state in maintaining libraries, or for the maintenance of a common library or common library services for participants, upon such terms as may be agreed upon by and between the boards. 
(j)  To enter into contracts and to take title to any property acquired by it for library purposes by the name and style of "The Library Board of Trustees of the City" and by that name to sue and be sued. 
(k)  To exclude from the use of the library any person who willfully violates the rules prescribed by the board. 
(l)  To extend the privileges and use of the library; including the borrowing of materials on an individual basis by persons residing outside of the city. If the board exercises this power, the privilege of library use shall be upon such terms and conditions as the board shall, from time to time, by its regulations, prescribe and for such privileges and use, the board shall charge a nonresident fee at least equal to the cost paid by residents of the city, with the cost to be determined according to the formula established by the Illinois State Library. The nonresident fee shall not apply to privilege and use provided under the terms of the library's membership in a library system operating under the provisions of the Illinois Library System Act or under the terms of any reciprocal agreement with a public or private corporation or entity providing a library service or to a nonresident who is an individual or as a partner, principal stockholder, or other joint owner owns taxable property or is a senior administrative officer of a firm, business, or other corporation owning taxable property within the municipality upon the presentation of the most recent tax bill upon that taxable property, provided that the privilege and use of the library is extended to only one such nonresident for each parcel of such taxable property. 
(m)  To exercise the power of eminent domain subject to the prior approval of the corporate authorities under the provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 75, Sec. 5/5-1 and 5/5-2. 
(n)  To join the public library as a member in the Illinois Library Association and the American Library Association, non-profit, non-political, (501-C-3) associations, as designated by the federal Internal Revenue Service, having the purpose of library development and librarianship; to provide for the payment of annual membership dues, fees and assessments and act by, through, and in the name of such instrumentality by providing and disseminating information and research services, employing personnel and doing any and all other acts for the purpose of improving library development. 
(o)  To accumulate and set apart as reserve funds, portions of the unexpended balances of the proceeds received annually from taxes or other sources for the purpose of providing self-insurance against liabilities relating to the public library. 
(p)  To invest funds pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 30, Section 235/1, et seq. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-7.  
Sec. 20-1-8. - Additional powers and duties. 
In addition to all other powers and authority now possessed by it, the board of library trustees shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To lease from any public building commission created pursuant to the provisions of the Public Building Commission Act, as now or hereafter amended, any real or personal property for library purposes for a period of time not exceeding 20 years. (See 50 ILCS Sec. 20/1 et seq.) 
(b)  To pay for the use of this leased property in accordance with the terms of the lease and with the provisions of the Public Building Commission Act, as now or hereafter amended. 
(c)  Such lease may be entered into without making a previous appropriation for the expense thereby incurred. However, if the board undertakes to pay all or any part of the costs of operating and maintaining the property of a public building commission as authorized in subparagraph (d) of this section, such expenses of operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual budget of such board annually during the term of such undertaking. 
(d)  In addition, the board may undertake, either in the lease with a public building commission or by separate agreement or contract with a public building commission, to pay all or any part of the costs of maintaining and operating the property of a public building commission for any period of time not exceeding 40 years. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-7.1.  
Sec. 20-1-9. - Selection and use of library materials. 
The board of library trustees shall establish, and review at least biennially, a written policy for the selection of library materials and the use of library materials and facilities. No employee may be disciplined or dismissed for the selection of library materials when the selection is made in good faith and in accordance with the written policy required to be established pursuant to this section. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-7.2.  
Sec. 20-1-10. - Free to public. 
The library established shall be free for the use of the inhabitants of the city, always subject to such rules and regulations as the library board of trustees may adopt, in order to render the use of the library and reading room to the greatest benefit to the greatest number. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-7.  
Sec. 20-1-11. - Annual report. 
Within 30 days after the expiration of each fiscal year of the municipality, the library board of trustees shall make a report of the condition of their trust on the last day of the fiscal year to the city council. This report shall be made in writing and shall be verified under oath by the secretary or some other responsible officer of the library board of trustees. The report shall contain the following: 
(a)  An itemized statement of the various sums of money received from the Library Fund and from other sources. 
(b)  An itemized statement of the objects and purposes for which those sums of money have been expended. 
(c)  A statement of the number of books and periodicals available for use and the number and character thereof circulated. 
(d)  A statement of the real and personal property acquired by legacy, purchase, gift or otherwise. 
(e)  A statement of the character of any extensions of library service which have been undertaken. 
(f)  A statement of the financial requirements of the library for the ensuing fiscal year for inclusion in the budget of the corporate authority and of the amount of money which, in the judgment of the library board of trustees, it will be necessary to levy for library purposes in the next annual tax levy ordinance. 
(g)  A statement as to the amount of accumulations and the reasons therefore. 
(h)  A statement as to any outstanding liabilities including those for bonds still outstanding or amounts due for judgments, settlements, liability insurance, or for amounts due under a certificate of the board. 
(i)  Any other statistics, information and suggestions that may be of interest. 
A report shall also be filed at the same time with the Illinois State Library. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07) 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/4-10.  
Sec. 20-1-12. - Donations. 
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of such library shall have the right to vest the title of the money or real estate so donated in the library board of trustees to be held and controlled by the board when accepted, according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property, and as to such property, the board of trustees shall be held and considered as special trustees. 
State Law reference— See 75 ILCS Sec. 5/1-6.  
Sec. 20-1-13. - Disturbance prohibited—Penalty. 
Any person who shall create any disturbance while in the rooms of the public library, or who shall be guilty of any conduct calculated to annoy or disturb others in said library and who shall not cease said conduct when requested to do so by the librarian or other person in charge, shall be subject to arrest under the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 20-1-14. - Injury to or failure to return books—Penalty. 
No person shall maliciously cut, injure, deface, tear, or destroy any book, newspaper, periodical, or picture belonging to the public library. No person shall fail to return any book or books taken from the library at the time when, by the rules of the library, the same should be returned. The person shall promptly pay the fine provided for by the rules and regulations governing the library, as the same have been or may be established by the library board of trustees.  
Sec. 20-1-15. - Reference. 
The city council does hereby include by reference, all provisions of Chapter 75; Paragraph 5/4, et seq. of the Illinois Compiled Statutes applicable to the city library that are not provided heretofore.  
Chapter 21 - LIQUOR  
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-1-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein defined are used in this Chapter in the sense given them in the following definitions: 
Alcoholic liquor includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent or less of alcohol by volume. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.05) 
Beer means a beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.04) 
Caterer retailer means a person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption, either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon under contract. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.34) 
Close means to shut up so as to prevent entrance or access by any person; and the entire suspension of business. 
Club means a corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotions of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local liquor commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this chapter, two copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten days of the election of any additional member, his or her name and address; and provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at the annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.24) 
Corporation means any corporation, domestic or foreign, qualified to do business in the State of Illinois under the "Business Corporation Act" of Illinois. (Rule 100.10(b)) 
Distilled spirits. See "spirits". 
Event means a single theme. (Rules and Regulations 100.10(o)) 
Hotel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 25 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith, and such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen or dining room equipment and capacity. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.25) 
Manager or agent means any individual employed by any licensed place of business, provided said individual possess the same qualifications required of the licensee. Satisfactory evidence of such employment will be furnished the commission in the form and manner as such commission shall from time to time prescribe. (Rule 100.10(f)) 
Mayor means the local liquor control commissioner as provided in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 235, entitled "Dramshop" and all references to liquor commissioner shall refer to the mayor unless otherwise provided. 
Meal means food that is prepared and served on the licensed premises and excludes the serving of snacks. (Rules and Regulations 100.10(n)) 
Original package means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.06) 
Package liquor store means any public place where packaged liquors are offered for sale in the original, unopened container for consumption away from the premises. 
Partner is any individual who is a member of a co-partnership. "Co-partnership" means an association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners of a business for profit. (Rules and Regulations 100.10(d)(e)) 
Premises/place of business means the place or location where alcoholic beverages are manufactured, stored, displayed, offered for sale or where drinks containing alcoholic beverages are mixed, concocted and served for consumption. Not included are sidewalks, street, parking areas and grounds adjacent to any such place or location. (Rules and Regulations 100.10(g)) 
Private function means a prearranged private party, function, or event for a specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served in a room or rooms designated and used exclusively for the private party, function or event. 
Public place means any premises enclosed or unenclosed or partly enclosed and partly unenclosed wherein any service or goods, chattels or merchandise are offered for sale to the public or any such premises used as a clubhouse, club room or meeting place. The terms "public place" and "public premises" shall be interchangeable for the purposes of this chapter. 
Resident means any person (other than a corporation) who has resided and maintained a bona fide residence in the State of Illinois for at least one year and in the city, village and county in which the premises covered by the license are located for at least 90 days prior to making application for such license. (Rule 100.10(a)) 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually are served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.23) 
Retailer means a person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.17) 
Sale means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.21) 
Sell at retail and sale of retail refer to any mean sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.18) 
Special event means an event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious or non-profit organization. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.30) 
Special events retailer means an educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious, or non-profit organization which sells or offers for sale beer or wine, or both, only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by a special event retail license. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.17.1) 
Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.02) 
To sell includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.22) 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as above defined. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3.03) 
(Ord. No. 667, 3-29-76)  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 21-2-1. - License required. 
No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale at retail, or conduct any place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor within the limits and territory of this city without having a license to do so, issued by the mayor of this city in the manner hereinafter provided, and a valid license for such purpose issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commissioner of the State of Illinois. The mayor may appoint assistants to assist in administering the duties of the office of Liquor Commissioner. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-2) 
A similar valid license issued by the Mayor of this municipality is hereby required for and with respect to each building, location and premises, within the aforesaid territory of this municipality, at or upon which alcoholic liquor is to be sold or kept or offered for sale at retail. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-2-2. - Applications. 
The mayor is authorized to grant and issue licenses to individuals, firms, and corporations to sell at retail and to keep and offer for sale at retail alcoholic liquors within the limits and territory of this municipality upon the conditions and in the manner provided by this chapter and by the Act of the General Assembly of Illinois, and not otherwise. Such license shall be in writing, signed by the mayor and attested by the municipal clerk, with the seal of his office affixed thereto. 
Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant must submit to the mayor an application in triplicate, in writing and under oath, stating the following: 
(a)  The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the date of incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and the name of the person who will be managing the establishment for which the license is sought, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the address and name of such person. 
(b)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(c)  The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed. 
(d)  The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the business of that character or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued. 
(e)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(f)  Whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in the application and the disposition of such application. 
(g)  That applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in the aforesaid Act of the general assembly or in this chapter or resolution and amendments thereto. 
(h)  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant by any state, or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor. 
(i)  That he will not violate any of the laws of the State of Illinois or of the United States, or any of the provisions of this chapter or resolution and amendments thereto in the conduct of his place of business. 
In the case of a partnership or corporation, the information and statements required by this section shall be furnished as to each partner, and with respect to a corporation, the information and statements required by this section shall be furnished as to the president of the corporation, the secretary of the corporation, the directors of the corporation, and with respect to the person who is to manage the establishment for which a license is sought. 
If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by at least one member of such partnership, firm, association or club, or by the president and secretary of such corporation. 
One copy of the application shall be retained by the mayor, one copy given to the chief of police; the chief of police shall endorse on the copies his approval or disapproval of the application and may make further comments regarding that application. The copies shall be returned to the mayor and the endorsement and comment of the chief of police shall be considered by him as an aid in deciding whether the license should be issued or refused. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-1.  
Sec. 21-2-3. - Examination of applicant. 
The mayor shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the mayor under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf. Specifically, the applicant will be required to be fingerprinted in the police department. Fingerprinting information will be forwarded to the state police for review. The fee for fingerprinting is $38.00. 
(Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 2-17-04) 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-5; See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-7.  
Sec. 21-2-4. - Prohibited licensees. 
No retail license shall be issued by the mayor to the following: 
(a)  A person who is not a resident of this county. 
(1)  A person who is not a resident of the United States. 
(b)  A person who is not 21 years of age. 
(c)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law if the mayor determines, after investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust. 
(d)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of ill-fame. 
(e)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality. 
(f)  A person whose license has previously been revoked for cause. 
(g)  A person who, at the time of the application for renewal for any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon first application. 
(h)  A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such co-partnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason. 
(i)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than the requirement for citizenship and residence. 
(j)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in the State of Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the "Business Corporation Act of 1983" to transact business in Illinois. 
(k)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee. 
(l)  Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor license. 
(m)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(n)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of this Code or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(o)  A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not rent nor have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued. 
(p)  Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor control commissions, any mayor, or member of a city council or commission, and no such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the state liquor control commission and the mayor. 
(q)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee. 
(r)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1.1 of, or as proscribed by section 28-3 of the "Criminal Code of 1961", approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
(s)  A person to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period; except those persons who are eligible to receive a license under the Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act. 
(t)  A co-partnership to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(u)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20 percent of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period. 
(v)  Any premises for which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(Ord. No.04-03, § 1, 2-17-04) 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-2.  
Sec. 21-2-5. - Term; fee submitted in advance. 
Retail liquor licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for a 12-month period upon the payment of the license fee as hereinafter set forth unless sooner revoked or suspended. The 12-month period shall be from May 1st to April 30th of the following year. 
The license fee shall be payable in advance by the applicant for a license at the time the application for a license is submitted to the mayor as hereinbefore provided. In the event the license is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. The fees shall be deposited in the municipal general fund. The application for a license shall be filed with the municipal clerk. 
Licenses shall state thereon the names of the licensees and the address and description of the premises for which they are granted and the dates of their issuance and expiration. 
With respect to a corporation operating an establishment for which a liquor license has been issued, should the manager of said establishment change after the issuance of said liquor license, the corporation must submit the new manager's name and shall be submitted within 30 days. Continuation of the license will be contingent upon a background check of the new manager as set out in this chapter, and all fees shall be waived should the license be changed only as a result of a change of managers. If, for some reason, the manager is not acceptable, the licensee shall have 30 days to submit a new name before revocation. Failure to provide new information shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of said license. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-2-6. - Classification; fee; limitation. 
Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the city shall pay an annual license fee. Such licenses shall be divided into the following classes: 
(a)  Class "A" license, which shall authorize the retail sales on the premises of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as other retail sales of such liquor. No live music shall be permitted on the premises or recorded music utilizing external or free standing speakers. Premises occupancy shall be limited to 50 patrons or less. The annual fee for such license shall be $500.00. Class "A" licenses may be issued for a period of 24 hours on the payment of a fee of $10.00. This special 24-hour class "A" license is meant to enable nonrecurring events (i.e., picnics, homecomings, etc.) to have a license and the requirements regarding live or recorded music and occupancy limits shall not apply. 
(b)  Class "B" licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption only by a "restaurant" or "hotel" as defined in section 21-1-1 of this Code. The annual fee for such license shall be $500.00. 
(c)  Class "C" licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises only, by a closed "club", as defined in section 21-1-1 of this chapter. The annual fee for such license shall be $400.00. 
(d)  Class "D" licenses: Grocery (package liquor), which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, such sales to be made in the original package only. The annual fee for such license shall be $500.00. 
(e)  Class "E-1" licenses shall authorize the retail sale or dealing at retail in alcoholic liquor by a church, religious organization, or a not-for-profit organization as defined in section 21-1-1 that holds events where the sale of alcoholic liquor takes place less than four times per year. The annual fee for such license shall be $200.00. 
(f)  Class "E-2" licenses shall authorize the retail sale or dealing at retail in alcoholic liquor by a church, religious organization, or a not-for-profit organization as defined in section 21-1-1 that holds events where the sale of alcoholic liquor takes place more than four times per year or year-round. The annual fee for such license shall be $400.00. 
(g)  Class "F" licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified only, by a "nite club" defined as a tavern business engaged in the sale of liquor and entertainment, including live music, recorded music with external or free standing speakers or facilities capable of accommodating 50 persons or more. The annual fee for such license shall be $500.00. 
(h)  A caterer retailer license shall authorize the holder of a class "A", "B", "C", "D" or "E" license who desires to serve alcoholic liquors for consumption either on-site or off-site as an incidental part of food service for an annual fee of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 841, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 11-07, § 1, 5-16-11)  
Sec. 21-2-7. - Nature of license. 
A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issued unless sooner revoked as in this chapter authorized and provided, and shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors and administrators of any estate of the deceased licensee and the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the court having jurisdiction of such estate and may exercise the privileges of such deceased, insolvent, or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. (See Attorney General's Report No. 703; 01-08-48) 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-1.  
Sec. 21-2-8. - Limitation of licenses. 
(a)  Annexing license holders. The restrictions contained in this chapter shall in no way affect taverns and other business(es) holding retail liquor licenses, duly licensed by the county, which are located in the territory annexed to the municipality. Licenses may be issued to them or renewed by the duly constituted authorities upon annexation; provided that thereafter, all of the restrictions and contingencies contained herein shall apply. 
(b)  Destroyed or damaged business. No license shall be held in existence by the mere payment of fees by any person, firm or corporation for a period longer than 90 days without a tavern or liquor business for the same being in complete and full operation. However, if a tavern or liquor business has been destroyed or damaged by fire or act of God and cannot be rebuilt or repaired within the 90-day period, then, in that event, the mayor shall extend the period of time for which a liquor license may be held by the mere payment of fees without the tavern or liquor business being in full and complete operation for an additional 90 days. 
If either of the above stated periods of time passes without the particular tavern or liquor business returning to complete and full operation, the license for that particular business shall expire and not be subject to renewal, unless all other requirements of this chapter shall have been met. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-2-9. - Dramshop insurance. 
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file with the application a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois, certifying that the applicant has the following minimum coverages: 
(A) 	Bodily Injury Liability 	$30,000 for each person 
		$50,000 each occurrence 
(B) 	Property Damage 	$30,000 each occurrence 
(C) 	Loss of Support Coverage 	$30,000 each occurrence 
 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-15.  
Sec. 21-2-10. - Display of license. 
Every licensee under this chapter shall cause his license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-24.  
Sec. 21-2-11. - Record of licenses. 
The mayor shall keep a complete record of all licenses issued by him and shall supply the clerk, treasurer and chief of police a copy of the same. Upon issuance or revocation of a license, the mayor shall give written notice to these same officers within 48 hours. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 21-3-1. - Closing hours. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for retail any alcoholic liquor in the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Businesses licensed hereunder shall have the right to do business on Sundays and legal holidays if they so desire. Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., it shall be unlawful to: 1) keep the premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold open for business, 2) admit the public to such premises, or 3) permit any patron, customer, or any member of the public to remain or loiter therein. All patrons or customers shall leave the premises at the specified closing time, and shall not remain on the premises thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 782, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 2-17-04) 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-3-2. - Happy hour restrictions. 
(a)  All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at the establishment. 
(b)  No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall: 
(1)  Serve two or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine by the bottle or carafe; 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the general public; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in subsection (c)(7) of this section; 
(4)  Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink on that day; 
(5)  Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or 
(6)  Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licenses premises, any of the practices prohibited under paragraphs (b)(1) through (5). 
(c)  Nothing in subsection (b) shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from: 
(1)  Offering free food or entertainment at any time; 
(2)  Including drinks or alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package; 
(3)  Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package; 
(4)  Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of any function, meeting, convention or trade show; 
(5)  Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel; 
(6)  Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including but not limited to buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such manner and delivered to two or more persons at one time; or 
(7)  Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole, or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not regularly scheduled. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the retailer's license as provided by article IV of this Code. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-28.  
Sec. 21-3-3. - Prohibited locations. 
No license shall be issued for the sale of any alcoholic liquor at retail within 100 feet of any church, school (other than an institution of higher learning), hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on the premises within 100 feet of any church or school where such church or school has been established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-11.  
Sec. 21-3-4. - Change of location. 
A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the law of this state and the Code of this municipality. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec- 5/7-14.  
Sec. 21-3-5. - Stores selling school supplies, lunches, etc. 
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such minors. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-12.  
Sec. 21-3-6. - Transporting, etc., in motor vehicles. 
No person shall, within this municipality, transport, carry, possess, or have any alcoholic liquor in, upon, or about any motor vehicle in or on any public street, alley or place, except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.  
Sec. 21-3-7. - Open liquor—Cup-to-go prohibited. 
The licensee shall not knowingly permit any person to leave his premises with open liquor or in a "cup-to-go".  
Sec. 21-3-8. - Liquor in vehicles; underage. 
The presence in a vehicle other than a public vehicle of any alcoholic liquor shall be prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of and is being carried by all persons occupying such vehicle at the time of which such alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following circumstances: 
(a)  If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants therein; or 
(b)  If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over 21 years of age.  
Sec. 21-3-9. - Restricted residential areas. 
It shall be unlawful to establish a retail liquor business within the municipality in violation of the restrictions of the zoning code. (See chapter 40 of the Revised Code)  
Sec. 21-3-10. - Election days. 
All such licensees may sell alcoholic liquor at retail, by the drink or in the original package for consumption either on or off the premises licensed on the day of any national, state, county or municipal election, including primary elections during the hours the polls are open within the political area in which such election is being held and on Sundays; subject to all the remaining terms, conditions and opening hours and closing hours as set forth in this chapter.  
Sec. 21-3-11. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do or commit any of the following acts within the city, to-wit: 
(a)  Drink any alcoholic liquors on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way without special permission granted by the mayor. 
(b)  Drink any alcoholic liquors on any private property without permission of an owner thereof. 
(c)  Appear on or in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, including parks and recreation areas, in an intoxicated condition.  
Sec. 21-3-12. - Unlawful entertainment. 
No licensee, his agent, servant or employee shall permit or allow any lewd or lascivious act or any topless and/or bottomless employee and/or employees [topless being defined as naked and substantially without clothing or covering of the body from the waist to the neckline and bottomless being defined as naked and substantially without clothing or covering of the body from the waist downward], or entertainment to be performed within the licensed premises by an entertainer employed therein, or by any employee or guest. 
Nor shall any licensee, his agent, servant or employee permit or allow any employee or guest or any other person whomever to solicit or encourage the purchasing of any alcoholic liquor or beverage of any description, or the giving of any gratuity or gift by any patron or guest to or for the benefit of such employee or guest. 
The following kinds of conduct on premises in this municipality licensed to sell alcoholic liquor are prohibited: 
(a)  The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts. 
(b)  The actual or simulated exhibition, touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals. 
(c)  The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals. 
(d)  The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals, vulva, or anus. 
(e)  The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live performance of which are prohibited by the regulations quoted above.  
Sec. 21-3-13. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the codes regulating the condition of the premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. 
State Law reference— See 410 ILCS Sec. 650/1, et seq.  
Sec. 21-3-14. - Diseased employees. 
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any contagious disease, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. 
State Law reference— See 410 ILCS Sec. 650/10.  
Sec. 21-3-15. - Health permit. 
Every licensee shall have, at all times, a valid operating permit from the county health department which regulates health standards.  
Sec. 21-3-16. - Peddling. 
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in this municipality. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-3-17. - Gambling. 
It is unlawful to keep, place, maintain, or operate any gambling device or instrument in and upon the premises used or occupied as a place where alcoholic liquor is sold or given away. However, placement and use of a video gaming terminal, if done in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/) as currently enacted and hereafter amended, shall not be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-6-12) 
State Law reference— See 720 ILCS Sec. 5/28-1. 
Cross reference— Gambling and video gaming terminals, ch. 7, art. XI et seq.  
Sec. 21-3-18. - Disorderly house. 
Any person licensed under this chapter shall not suffer or permit any disorder, drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games, or riotous or disorderly conduct in any house or premises kept or occupied by him for the sale of liquor. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-3-19. - Prohibited sales—Generally. 
No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, or mentally ill. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec- 5/6-16.  
Sec. 21-3-20. - Persons selling liquor. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to attend any bar or to sell, draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-3-21. - Underaged; entry on licensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to enter upon premises where alcoholic liquors, spirits, beer or wine are sold by the holder of a class "E" license unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. No holder of a class "E" license, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall permit any person under the age of 18 years not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian to enter the licensed premises. For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any holder of a class "E" license, or his agent or employee, may refuse to permit entry onto the licensed premises of any person under the age of 18 years who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of the fact that the person accompanying such person under the age of 18 years is that person's parent or legal guardian. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec- 5/4-1.  
Sec. 21-3-22. - Unlawful purchase of liquor. 
Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-20.  
Sec. 21-3-23. - Identification required. 
If a licensee or his agents or employees believe or have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. 
Proof that the defendant/licensee or his employees or agent demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or in any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based thereon. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-20.  
Sec. 21-3-24. - Transfer of identification card. 
No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this Chapter. 
The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of 21 years is forbidden. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-20.  
Sec. 21-3-25. - Posting warning. 
In every licensed business where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be supplied by the municipal clerk, and which shall read as follows: 
UNDERAGE LIQUOR WARNING 
"YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $750 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THIS MUNICIPALITY IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR."  
Sec. 21-3-26. - Exclusionary provision. 
The possession and dispensing or consumption by an underaged person of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by an underaged person under the direct supervision and approval of the parent or parents of such underaged person in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by this chapter. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-20.  
Sec. 21-3-27. - Inspections. 
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which a license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of the chief of police, any police officer, or the liquor commissioner for the purpose of making an inspection of such premises or any part thereof. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec- 5/4-4.  
Sec. 21-3-28. - Books and records—-Available upon reasonable notice and maintained in state records. 
It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control by the mayor having jurisdiction over the licensee. Such books and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained in the State of Illinois. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-10.  
Sec. 21-3-29. - Restrictions on licensee. 
In addition to the restrictions on licensing, the holder of a license is subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  It is unlawful for any license to accept, receive or borrow money or anything of value directly or indirectly from any manufacturer or distributor of alcoholic liquor. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-5) 
(b)  No licensee licensed under the provisions of this Code shall deny or permit his agents or employees to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all citizens. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-17) 
(c)  No licensee shall sell liquor to any persons on credit, or in payment for services rendered but this does not apply to clubs and hotels and liquor purchased for consumption off the premises. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-19) 
(d)  No licensee shall fill or refill in whole or in part any original package of alcohol with the same or other liquor and no liquor shall be sold except in original packages. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-22) 
(e)  No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or delivered in any building belonging to or under the control of a municipality except in connection with the operation of an established food service facility or at a site specifically provided for in the Act and where dram shop insurance coverage is provided. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-15) 
(f)  An established place of business is a prerequisite to the issuance of a license. Revocation of a license when a licensee ceases to operate the business before the license expires is within the authority of the commissioner on the grounds of nonuse. 
State Law reference— See Goode V. Thomas 31 Ill. App. 3d 674, 1975.  
Sec. 21-3-30. - Selling false identification. 
Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any other person is guilty of violating this Code. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-16.  
Sec. 21-3-31. - False identification. 
Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent, written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of violating this Code. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-16.  
Sec. 21-3-32. - Underaged drinking on streets. 
Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic beverage in his possession on any street or highway or in any public place, or in any place open to the public is guilty of violating this Code. This section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order of his or her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-16.  
Sec. 21-3-33. - Residential drinking. 
Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this Code where he or she knowingly permits a gathering at a residence which he or she occupies of two or more persons where any one or more of the persons is under 21 years of age and the following factors also apply: 
(a)  The person occupying the residence knows that any such person under the age of 21 years is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under 21 years is not otherwise permitted by this Code. 
(c)  The person occupying the residence knows that the person under the age of 21 years leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition. 
For the purposes of this section where the residence has an owner and a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is occupied only by the tenant or lessee. 
(Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 2-17-04) 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-16.  
Sec. 21-3-34. - Renting hotel rooms for drinking. 
Any person who rents a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years shall be guilty of violating this Code. 
(Generally Ord. No. 667; 03-29-76) 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/6-16.  
ARTICLE IV. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 21-4-1. - Owner of premises permitting violation. 
If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person shall knowingly permit the licensee to use said licensed premises in violation of the terms of this Code, said owner, agent or other person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to the same punishment. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/10-2.  
Sec. 21-4-2. - Acts of agent or employee—Liability; knowledge. 
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Code by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/10-3.  
Sec. 21-4-3. - Revocation of license after conviction. 
Whenever any licensee shall be convicted of any violation of this Code, the license of said licensee may, in the discretion of the mayor, be revoked and forfeited and all fees paid thereon shall be forfeited, and it shall thereafter be unlawful and shall constitute a further violation of this Code for said licensee to continue to operate under such license. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/10-4.  
Sec. 21-4-4. - Revocation of license when employee convicted. 
Whenever any officer, director, manager, or other employee in a position of authority of any licensee under this Code shall be convicted of any violation of this Code while engaged in the course of his employment or while upon the premises described by the license, the license shall be revoked and the fees paid thereon forfeited, both as to the holder of the license and as to the premises, as if said licensee had himself been convicted. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/10-5.  
Sec. 21-4-5. - Misbranding. 
Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell or in any way dispose of any alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or brand known to the trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the package or other containers of the alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any such act to be done, shall forfeit the alcoholic liquor and the packages and containers to the State and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties provided for violation of this Code. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/10-6.  
Sec. 21-4-6. - Abatement of place used in violation. 
Every lot, parcel or tract of land, and every building, structure, tent, railroad car, boat, wagon, vehicle, establishment or place whatsoever, together with all furniture, fixtures, ornaments and machinery located thereon, wherein there shall be conducted any unlawful sale of any alcoholic liquor, or whereon or wherein there shall be kept, stored, concealed or allowed any alcoholic liquor intended for illegal sale or to be sold, disposed of or in any other manner used in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided by the laws of this State for the abatement of public nuisances. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/10-7.  
Sec. 21-4-7. - Use of premises for one year after revocation. 
When any license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted for the same premises for a period of one year thereafter. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-13.  
Sec. 21-4-8. - Revocation of licenses. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses granted under this Code. 
(a)  In addition to and not limited by the specific penalties set out for violations of specific articles of this Code, the local liquor control commissioner may suspend for 30 days or revoke any liquor license issued under this Code for any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquors by any licensee, his agent, servant or employee. 
(b)  To suspend or revoke any liquor license if the licensee makes any false statement or misrepresentation in the application for a license. 
(c)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this Code or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the state commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith. 
(d)  To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the General Not for Profit Corporation Act or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this State under a certificate of authority issued under that Act has violated this Code by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license. 
(e)  To receive complaint from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this Act, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(f)  The local liquor control commissioner shall also have the power to levy fines in accordance with section 21-4-10 of this Code. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/4-4.  
Sec. 21-4-9. - Complaint by residents. 
Any five residents of the municipality shall have the right to file a complaint with the liquor commissioner, stating that a licensee under this Code has been or is violating the provisions of this Code or any amendments hereto, or of any of the statutes of this State of Illinois, enacted with reference to the control of liquor. Such complaint shall be made in writing and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. 
The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which such belief is based. If the liquor commissioner is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation, and that from the facts alleged, there is reasonable cause for such belief, he shall set the matter for hearing, and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-7.  
Sec. 21-4-10. - Revocation or suspension of local license; notice and hearing. 
The liquor commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Act, any valid ordinance adopted by the municipality, any applicable rule or regulation established by the liquor commissioner or the state commission which is not inconsistent with law. 
(a)  Fine as opposed to suspension or revocation. In addition to suspension and/or revocation, the liquor commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000.00 for each violation; each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. No more than $15,000.00 in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the municipal treasury, as the case may be. (See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-5) 
(b)  Revocation and suspension: Notice. However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commissioner with a three-day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings shall be open to the public and the liquor commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings. If the liquor commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. 
(c)  Hearing. The liquor commissioner shall, within five days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order within the five days upon the license. The findings of the commissioner shall be predicted upon competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 2-17-04) 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-5.  
Sec. 21-4-11. - Appeals from order of liquor commissioner. 
Except as provided in this section, any order or action of a local liquor control commissioner levying a fine or refusing to levy a fine on a licensee, granting or refusing to grant a license, revoking or suspending or refusing to revoke or suspend a license or refusing for more than 30 days to grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license may within 20 days after notice of such order or action by appealed by any resident of the municipality under the jurisdiction of the liquor commissioner or any person interested, to the state commission. 
In any case where a licensee appeals to the state commission from an order or action of the liquor commissioner having the effect of suspending or revoking a license, denying a renewal application, or refusing to grant a license, the licensee shall resume the operation of the licensed business pending the decision of the state commission and the expiration of the time allowed for an application for rehearing. If an application for rehearing is filed, the licensee shall continue the operation of the licensed business until the denial of the application or, if the rehearing is granted, until the decision on rehearing. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-9.  
Sec. 21-4-12. - Subsequent violations in a year. 
In any case, in which a licensee appeals to the state commission a suspension or revocation by a local liquor control commissioner that is the second or subsequent such suspension or revocation placed on that licensee within the preceding 12-month period, the licensee shall consider the suspension or revocation to be in effect until a reversal of the liquor commissioner's action has been issued by the state commission and shall cease all activity otherwise authorized by the license. The state commission shall expedite, to the greatest extent possible, its consideration of any appeal that is an appeal of a second or subsequent suspension or revocation within the past 12-month period. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-9.  
Sec. 21-4-13. - Appeal limitations for subsequent violation. 
Any appeal of the decision and findings of the liquor commissioner in section 21-4-12 shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of said liquor commissioner. The official record shall be a "certified official record" of the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter. A copy of this record shall be filed by the liquor commissioner within five days after notice of the filing of such appeal is received by the municipality from state commission. 
State Law reference— See 235 ILCS Sec. 5/7-9.  
Chapter 23 - MOBILE HOUSING CODE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 23-1-1. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this Code shall have the following meanings: 
Affidavit means an oath in writing, sworn before and attested by an individual who has authority to administer an oath. 
Applicant means any person making application for a license or permit. 
Immobilized mobile home means a mobile home served by individual utilities, resting on a permanent perimeter foundation which extends below the established frost depth with the wheels, tongue and hitch removed and the home secured in compliance with the Mobile Home Tiedown Act, Chapter 210; Sec. 120/1 et seq. of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(a)  The foundation shall extend into the ground below the frost line so as to attach and become a part of the real estate. Materials such as concrete, mortared concrete block, or mortared brick extending into the ground below the frost line shall satisfy the requirements for a permanent foundation. (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/2.10) 
License means a license certificate issued by the city allowing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this Code and the rules and regulations issued hereunder. 
Licensee means any person having a license or permit under this chapter. 
Mobile home means a structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or subsequent location at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons. The term "mobile home" shall only include manufactured homes constructed after June 30, 1976, in accordance with the Federal "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974". Provided that any such structure resting on a permanent foundation with wheels, tongue and hitch permanently removed shall not be construed as a "mobile home", but shall be an "immobilized mobile home". A mobile home should not be confused with a "camping trailer" or "recreational vehicle". (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/2.1) 
Mobile home, dependent means a mobile home which does not have a toilet and bath or shower facilities. (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/2.3) 
Mobile home, double-wide consists of two mobile units joined at the side into a single home, but kept on their separate chassis for repeated transportation to a site. 
Mobile home, independent means a mobile home which has self-contained toilet and bath or shower facilities. (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/2.4) 
Mobile home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Mobile home module means a factory-fabricated building unit transported to a building site, mounted on a permanent foundation supporting the outside perimeter walls, and is designed for residential use. 
Mobile home pad means that part of an individual mobile home space or lot beneath the mobile home, including the concrete portion of the pad. 
Mobile home park means a tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of land upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for two or more independent mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude the tracts of land from common licensure as a mobile home park if they are maintained and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized mobile home nor a motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being a part of a mobile home park. (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/2.5) 
Mobile home sales area means a parcel of land used for the display, sale, and repair of new or used mobile homes. 
Mobile home space means a portion of a mobile home park designed for the use or occupancy of one mobile home. 
Mobile housing unit includes all forms of housing units listed in this section and as regulated in this Code. 
Owner or operator means the licensee. 
Permanent habitation means a period of two or more months. (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/2.2) 
Permit means a certificate issued by the city, permitting the construction, alteration, or reduction in number of spaces of a mobile home park under the provisions in this Code. 
Person means any individual, group of individuals, association, trust, partnership, corporation, person doing business under an assumed name, county, municipality, the State of Illinois, or any political subdivision or department thereof or any other entity. 
Revocation means to declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant or licensee by this city for an indefinite period of time. 
Site means the lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent habitation. (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/2.7) 
Space shall be synonymous with "mobile home space". 
Suspension means to declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant or licensee by this city for a temporary period of time with an expectation of resumption.  
Sec. 23-1-2. - State requirements adopted by reference. 
The Mobile Home Park Act and the Mobile Home Tiedown Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 210, as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly are hereby adopted by the city. The applicable provisions as they pertain to mobile homes and immobilized mobile homes shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city.  
Sec. 23-1-3. - Illinois Department of Public Health Regulations. 
The "Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks", as approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health are hereby adopted by the city, the applicable provisions as they pertain to mobile homes and immobilized mobile homes shall be controlling within the city.  
Sec. 23-1-4. - National safety standards. 
No mobile home, immobilized mobile home or manufactured home shall be located in the city unless the unit has the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 metal seal affixed or the Illinois Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing Safety Act yellow seal affixed thereto.  
Sec. 23-1-5. - Skirting. 
Skirting shall be used to conceal all underpinning, plumbing, and support piers whether on a permanent foundation or otherwise. All skirting shall be installed on all mobile housing units within 60 days of the placement of the unit.  
Sec. 23-1-6. - Fire detectors. 
All mobile housing units located in the city shall be equipped with a fire detector. All fire detectors shall be approved by the fire chief or his designated representative prior to installation. (See 425 ILCS Secs. 60/1-60/4)  
Sec. 23-1-7. - Inspection. 
Each mobile housing unit located in the city shall be subject to reasonable inspection by an official or officials designated by the city council.  
Sec. 23-1-8. - Off-street parking. 
Every owner of a mobile housing unit shall provide for a dustless, off-street parking area of 400 square feet.  
Sec. 23-1-9. - Owner occupied. 
All mobile housing units shall be used and occupied by the owner or his immediate family as a residence. If the unit is not located in a licensed mobile home park, then the lot should be owned by the owner-occupant of the mobile housing unit.  
ARTICLE II. - IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOMES 
 
Sec. 23-2-1. - Immobilized mobile homes. 
All immobilized mobile homes located in the city shall be classified as real estate; therefore, it is mandatory for all persons owning, operating, renting, or leasing an existing mobile home outside a mobile home park to remove or cause to have removed the wheels or any other transportation device from the mobile home. The owner or lessor shall permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that conforms to the definition of an immobilized mobile home in this Code. All existing mobile homes, when replaced, shall comply with the immobilization provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 23-2-2. - Permit—Fee. 
All persons seeking to locate or replace a mobile home or an immobilized mobile home outside a mobile home park shall obtain a building (zoning occupancy) permit from the code enforcement officer. No utility services shall be connected to the unit until the city has issued the appropriate permits. The fee to locate or relocate a mobile home or immobilized mobile home shall be $25.00.  
Sec. 23-2-3. - Lot size. 
The minimum lot size for the location of an immobilized mobile home unit shall be 7,000 square feet. All immobilized mobile homes shall be located in the city, according to the requirements and restrictions of this Code. They shall not exceed 40 percent coverage of the lot unless otherwise provided in the zoning code.  
Sec. 23-2-4. - Dependent mobile homes. 
No dependent mobile home, as defined in section 23-1-1, shall be permitted in the city unless in a licensed travel-trailer park. At no time shall anyone use a dependent mobile home as a permanent residence or dwelling.  
Sec. 23-2-5. - Concrete pads. 
All immobilized mobile homes shall be placed on either a reinforced concrete pad at least 14 feet wide by 60 feet in length (14' × 60'), two reinforced concrete runners four feet wide and 60 feet in length (4' × 60'), or on concrete piers approved by the code enforcement officer. The concrete pads shall consist of four inches of reinforced concrete or six inches of concrete. A concrete footing is optional. All piers and footings for immobilized mobile homes shall comply with this Code. Expandable units shall be provided with approved piers or their equivalent at each corner of the units.  
Sec. 23-2-6. - Limit of units. 
There shall be only one immobilized mobile home or mobile home per lot in the city.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 23-3-1. - Compliance with statutes, applicability of article. 
Every mobile home park hereafter established in the city shall, at a minimum, conform to the requirements of: 
(a)  "An Act to Provide for, License, and Regulate Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks". (See 210 ILCS Sec. 115/1 et seq.) 
(b)  "Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks", Illinois Department of Public Health, Consumer Protection Division, as now or hereafter amended, and 
(c)  This Code. 
(d)  Zoning code, if any. 
(e)  County department of public health. 
In case of conflict between any provisions of the above, the more stringent requirement shall prevail.  
Sec. 23-3-2. - Planning. 
Any person seeking to establish, operate, alter, or expand a mobile home park shall obtain a permit to construct or a license to operate a mobile home park. 
"Construct or operate a mobile home park", as used in this Code shall include, but not necessarily be limited to supplying or maintaining common water, sewer, or other utility supplies or services, or the collection of rents directly or indirectly from two or more independent mobile homes. (All plans shall be submitted to the city council or plan commission for approval prior to the granting of a permit.)  
Sec. 23-3-3. - Local government requirements. 
A permit does not relieve the applicant from complying with this Code or other ordinances applicable thereto.  
Sec. 23-3-4. - Permits. 
The plan commission shall review each application and plan documents submitted. When the application and plan documents are found to be in compliance with the "Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks", as promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health, the city council may issue the proper permit to construct or alter a mobile home park to the applicant. Permits shall be valid for one year from date of issue.  
Sec. 23-3-5. - Inspection of mobile home park. 
Upon completion of the proposed construction of a mobile home park or the proposed alteration of a mobile home park, the applicant shall notify the code enforcement officer in order that an inspection of the complete facilities can be made.  
Sec. 23-3-6. - Violation proceedings. 
Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city manager. However, the city manager or his representative shall first serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way or ways in which such licensee has failed to comply with the statutes, or any rules or regulations promulgated by the city pertaining thereto. The notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, unsanitary or objectionable condition, specified in such notice within five days or within a longer period of time as may be allowed by the city council. If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice within the time specified or such extended period of time, the city manager or his representative may revoke or suspend such license.  
Sec. 23-3-7. - Permit required. 
Each mobile home that locates on a lot in a mobile home park shall secure an initial building (zoning) permit from the city. All future locations on the same lot shall be exempt from the fee.  
Secs. 23-3-8, 23-3-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 23-3-10. - Plan document. 
In order to obtain a permit to construct or an original license to operate a mobile home park, the applicant shall file with the code enforcement officer a written application and plan documents and such plan documents shall be prepared by a registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the State of Illinois, with registration seal affixed. Two copies of the plan document shall accompany the application filed with the code enforcement officer to obtain a permit to construct or alter a mobile home park or an original license to operate a mobile home park, not previously licensed by the department. These plans shall include, but not be limited to the design and construction criteria set forth herein.  
Sec. 23-3-11. - Application. 
(a)  Every applicant shall file with the city a written application and plan documents for the proposed construction or alteration of a mobile home park. 
(b)  The application shall be completed by the applicant and the engineer or architect and shall include: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the application. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of incorporation must be filed with the application. 
(2)  The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the mobile home park is to be located. 
(3)  The plot plans of the mobile home park, building plans and specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in existing facilities. 
(4)  An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained in the application shall be attached. 
(5)  Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee of $200.00 for a permit to construct, or an application fee of $50.00 for a permit to alter to increase the size of the park.  
Sec. 23-3-12. - Location. 
(a)  Sites selected for mobile home development shall be well-drained and free from topographical or geological hindrances and from other conditions unfavorable to a proper residential environment. The mobile home development shall not be located near swamps, marshes, or other breeding places of insects, rats and mice. When a good, natural drainage is not available, storm drainage shall be provided by developer/applicant and such drainage shall not endanger any water supply or surface watercourse. 
(b)  The city manager may authorize a site survey to ascertain that the proposed location complied with the above requirements.  
Sec. 23-3-13. - Roadways and parking. 
(a)  All streets and driveways in every park shall be constructed in compliance with the subdivision code. 
(b)  All streets in parks constructed shall have a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet and a minimum road width of 32 feet for the purpose of this Code, and shall be considered private streets to be maintained by the park owner or operator. If a mobile home park has more than 50 units, a wider street may be required by the city council. 
(c)  Sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed abutting a street in a mobile home park and shall be a minimum of four feet in width; provided, however, there shall be no minimum width requirement for sidewalks for each individual lot. No portion of a mobile home shall block, in any way, the pedestrian traffic on the walkways.  
Secs. 23-3-14—23-3-16. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-3-17. - Lot size. 
The minimum lot size for a mobile home pad shall be 7,000 square feet, with a minimum frontage of 50 feet.  
Sec. 23-3-18. - Miscellaneous restrictions. 
(a)  No mobile home unit parked in a mobile home park shall be immobilized. 
(b)  Not more than one mobile home unit shall be parked in one space. 
(c)  No travel-trailer shall be permitted in any mobile home park, unless a special area has been approved for that purpose by the city council.  
Secs. 23-3-19, 23-3-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FEES 
 
Sec. 23-3-21. - License fee. 
The annual license fee per mobile home park shall be $50.00, and shall be due and payable on or before May 1st of each year. The city clerk shall notify the owner or operator of the annual fee at least 30 days prior to May 1st.  
Chapter 24 - MOTOR VEHICLE CODE  
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 24-1-1. - Illinois Vehicle Code; definitions adopted. 
The Illinois Vehicle Code, Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 625, Chapter 1, entitled "Title and Definitions", as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly is hereby adopted by the city, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3-2.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 24-2-1. - Obedience to police. 
Members of the police department, special police, auxiliary police and marshals assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this article or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman. Except in cases of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-203.  
Sec. 24-2-2. - Scene of fire. 
The fire department officer in command or any fireman designated by him may exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for so long as the fire department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police department.  
Sec. 24-2-3. - Signs and signals. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the corporate authorities or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois except upon direction of a police officer. All signs and signals established by direction of the governing body shall conform to the Illinois State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. Schedule "V" - Signs and Signals shall be an integral part of this section. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS 5/11-301.  
Sec. 24-2-4. - Unauthorized signs. 
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street, any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street, any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall be so placed, maintained, allowed to remain, or be displayed upon either public or private property in such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device, sign or signal.  
Sec. 24-2-5. - Interference with signs or signals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.  
Sec. 24-2-6. - Advertising signs. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the city any sign, signal, marking or device other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the city council or the Illinois State Department of Public Works and Buildings, which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal in view of any street or highway, and it shall be unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful traffic-control device. It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any flashing or rotating beacon of light in view of any street or highway. 
Cross reference— Offenses, ch. 27; street regulations, ch. 33.  
Sec. 24-2-7. - Animals or bicycles. 
Any person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-206.  
Sec. 24-2-8. - Lamps and other equipment on bicycles. 
(a)  Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department which shall be visible from all distances of 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use any siren upon a bicycle. 
(c)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately control movement of and stop and hold such bicycle. 
(d)  No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that is not equipped with a reflex reflector or conforming to specifications prescribed by the state on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet. 
(e)  No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with side reflectors. Such reflectors shall be visible from each side of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet and shall be essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle provided. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by reflective materials which shall be at least three-sixteenths of an inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of such bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. Such reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the state. 
(f)  No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector. 
(g)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall upon conviction, be fined in accordance with section 1-1-20 of the City Code. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-1507.  
ARTICLE III. - STOP AND THROUGH STREETS 
 
Sec. 24-3-1. - Through streets. 
The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as "through streets" are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer. See Schedule "A" for applicable through and stop streets. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1, 5-1-06; Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, 7-17-06)  
Sec. 24-3-2. - One-way streets or alleys. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance in any direction other than that so designated. See Schedule "B" for the designated one-way streets and alleys. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-208.  
Sec. 24-3-3. - Stop streets. 
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance at one or more entrances thereto and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event, the directions of the police officer shall be complied with. See Schedule "A" for designated stop intersections. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 7-2-07) 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-302.  
Sec. 24-3-4. - Yield right-of-way streets. 
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, in obedience to such sign, shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection. (See Schedule "C")  
Sec. 24-3-5. - Posting signs. 
Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop and yield right-of-way streets, all one-way streets and alleys and all stop intersections. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-304.  
ARTICLE IV. - ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE 
 
Sec. 24-4-1. - Illinois Vehicle Code; rules of the road adopted. 
The Illinois Vehicle Code, Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 625, Section 11-100 et seq., entitled "Rules of the Road", as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly is hereby adopted by the city and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city except for the following changes, deletions and omissions: 
(a)  Omissions: 
(1)  Omit sections 11-207, 11-208.1, 11-208.2, 11-209.1, 11-302, 11-303, 11-310(f), 11-313, 11-401 to and including 11-416, 11-500 to and including 11-502, 11-602, 11-603, 11-604, 11-606(b), 11-608, 11-1419, and 11-1422. 
(b)  Changes and additions: 
(1)  Change 11-904(a) to read: "Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs as authorized by this Code." 
(2)  Change 11-1416(a) to read: "Any person who shall willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully driving and traveling upon or along any highway within this State or who shall offer for barter or sale, merchandise on said highway so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation of this Code." 
(c)  General speed restrictions. The speed limits on the various streets shall be approved by the city council, but shall not exceed 20 miles per hour in a school zone and not to exceed 25 miles per hour on a residential street; otherwise, 30 miles per hour on an arterial street unless otherwise posted. Schedule "D" shall list the applicable streets that have specific speed limits thereon. (See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-604) 
(d)  Special speed limit while passing schools. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during school days when school children are present. 
This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted upon streets and maintained by the city or state wherein the school zone is located. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3-2; See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-605.  
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND WEIGHT 
 
Sec. 24-5-1. - Illinois Vehicle Code; equipment of vehicles adopted. 
The Illinois Vehicle Code, Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 625, Section 5/12100 et seq., entitled "Equipment of Vehicles", as passed, approved, and amended by the Illinois General Assembly is hereby adopted by the city and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/1-3-2.  
Sec. 24-5-2. - Illinois Vehicle Code; size, weight and load permits. 
The Illinois Vehicle Code, Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 625, Sec. 5/15-100 et seq. and Chapter 625 Sec. 25/4-25/4 as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly is hereby adopted by reference by the city as if set out at length in this Code and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 979, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 24-5-3. - References to ordinance. 
When referring to a violation of this chapter, the violation shall be referred to by using the same section and paragraph number as Chapter 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-100 et seq., Chapter 12 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS Sec. 5/12-100 et seq., Chapter 15 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS Sec. 5/15-100 et seq., and 625 ILCS Sec. 25/4 - 25/4a. 
(Ord. No. 979, 9-18-95)  
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING RULES 
 
Sec. 24-6-1. - Time limit parking. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of the amount of time designated by law and so posted.  
Sec. 24-6-2. - Parking for sale, repair or peddling prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of: 
(a)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(b)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except when emergency repairs are necessary; or 
(c)  Peddling merchandise.  
Sec. 24-6-3. - Private property. 
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property.  
Sec. 24-6-4. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(A)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control devices, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
(a)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(b)  On a sidewalk. 
(c)  Within an intersection. 
(d)  On a crosswalk. 
(e)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
(f)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(g)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(h)  On any railroad tracks. 
(i)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(j)  On any controlled-access highway. 
(k)  In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers. 
(l)  In any alley that is open and maintained. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers): 
(a)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(b)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(c)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(d)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway. 
(e)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly sign-posted). 
(f)  At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking. 
(3)  Parking a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers): 
(a)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(b)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking; 
(c)  In yellow zones. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  Schedules "E", "F" and "G" shall list all applicable no-parking zones. 
(d)  Truck parking prohibited. No second division vehicle licensed for a "F" classification or higher shall be parked on any street, alley or any public parking lot not so designated for public parking of vehicles described herein in the city except temporary parking for loading and unloading purposes. Vehicle described in this paragraph shall include either the tractor or trailer of such unit. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/3-815.  
Sec. 24-6-5. - Parking for the handicapped. 
(a)  Designated parking. Certain parking spaces within the confines of the city shall be designated for use by handicapped persons' vehicles only and will be posted with appropriate signs to that effect. 
(b)  Use of designated handicapped parking. The use of designated handicapped parking locations, duly posted and signed shall to that effect, be open to any vehicle which bears the appropriate handicapped Illinois Registration Plate or decal issued by the Secretary of State for the State of Illinois, or a valid handicapped parking permit issued by another governmental agency or which bears a handicapped card furnished in accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 625; Section 5/11-1301.1, et. seq. furnished by the city. 
(c)  Application for Illinois Handicapped Registration Plate. The issuance of an Illinois Handicapped Motor Vehicle Registration Plate or decal shall be made with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois at any facility provided and approved for that purpose by the secretary of state. (See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/11-1301.2) 
(d)  Penalty. Any vehicle parked in violation of this article in a posted designated handicapped space which does not bear an Illinois Handicapped Registration Plate or decal, or a valid handicapped parking permit issued by another governmental agency of a city handicapped registration card will be ticketed and the vehicle will be removed in accordance with departmental policies and in accordance with Section 5/11-1302, Chapter 625 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. The registered owner of the vehicle as ascertained by the registration plates of the vehicle will be presumed to be in control of the vehicle and will be fined $250.00. The same registered owner will be held liable for the cost of removal of the vehicle and must pay that cost, plus storage charges, if any, prior to the release of the vehicle. 
(e)  Handicapped parking areas. Those places designated as "Handicapped Parking Spaces" are listed in Schedule "H". 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 1, 6-5-17)  
Sec. 24-6-6. - Load limits. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established "gross load limit" on city streets listed in Schedule "J". The term "gross load limit" shall mean the total weight of a vehicle and the load it is carrying. The specified streets and the load limits are hereby listed in Schedule "J". 
(b)  Restrictions. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon any street where the operation is prohibited by this section and where such signs of prohibition are posted, except that a vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making deliveries or picking up loads. 
(c)  Exceptions. This chapter shall not include pickup trucks, trucks operated by the city maintenance and repairs on the street or the operation of a vehicle owned by the U.S. government or State of Illinois while on lawful business of these agencies.  
Sec. 24-6-7. - Towing cars away. 
The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any car, boat, trailer, or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any public street or other public place for a period of 24 hours. 
Vehicles towed away shall be stored on any city property or in a public garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof after payment of the expense incurred by the city in removing and storing such vehicle(s).  
Sec. 24-6-8. - Parking violations. 
Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked, may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for such illegal parking by paying to the city $5.00 for each such offense and $10.00 for the second offense within six months. Such payment may be made at the City Hall and a receipt shall be issued for all money so received and such money shall be promptly turned over to the treasurer to be credited to the general fund. The members of the police department are hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved for at least five days. 
Provided, this section shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where police and fire department apparatus or other emergency equipment is kept or housed or so as to block an emergency entrance in a hospital. Nor shall this section apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only; nor to any person who refuses to remove a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any member of the police department. 
(a)  Removal—Time limit. Any vehicle illegally parked for a period in excess of 24 hours may be removed by a towing service authorized by the police department of the municipality. In any emergency, any vehicle may be removed by any means when authorized by the police department of the municipality. 
(b)  City parking lots. No person shall park a motor vehicle on a city parking lot unattended for more than five consecutive days. 
(c)  Parking violation ticket. The parking violation ticket shall be as follows:  
Sec. 24-6-9. - Prima facie proof. 
The fact that a vehicle which is illegally parked or operated is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the vehicle at the time of such violation.  
Sec. 24-6-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, adopted November 17, 2014, repealed § 24-6-10, which pertained to snow routes. Refer to Chapter 33, Article 8, Snow Removal for similar provisions.  
Sec. 24-6-11. - Parking tickets—State statute. 
The city council intends to utilize Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 625; Section 5/6-306.5 and the procedure set forth therein. 
The appropriate authorities are hereby authorized to utilize the statute and the procedure set forth therein.  
Sec. 24-6-12. - Seventy-two-hour parking. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon any street or alley of the city for more than 72 hours continuously except physicians on emergency calls or emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 661)  
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 24-7-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Code, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
Abandoned vehicle shall mean all motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair, rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. 
Antique vehicle means any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years of age or older. 
Component part means any part of a vehicle other than a tire having a manufacturer's identification number or an identification number issued by the secretary of state. 
Derelict vehicle means any inoperable, unregistered, or discarded motor vehicle, regardless of title, having lost its characteristic as a substantial property and left unattended without justification on the owner's, lienholder's or other legally entitled person's land contrary to the public policy expressed in this Code. 
Highway means any street, alley or public way within this municipality. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driving under its own motor power. This definition shall include parts of any inoperable vehicles such as body engine, transmission, wheels, etc. This definitions shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driving under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations as long as the repairs are made within 30 days after the vehicle becomes inoperable. After 30 days the criteria for determining inoperable status shall also apply to vehicles temporarily incapable of being driven in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. 
Remove means to remove, deface, cover, or destroy. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to or exempt from registration, excepting, however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 8334, 11-21-88) 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-201.  
Sec. 24-7-2. - Abandonment. 
(a)  Highway. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or part thereof on any highway in this municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth herein. 
(b)  Private property. The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property other than a highway in view of the general public anywhere in this municipality is unlawful, except on property of the owner, or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. 
(c)  Owner's property. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property shall be authorized for removal by the police department, after a waiting period of seven days or more, or may be removed immediately if determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle under Ch. 65 Sec. 5/11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. A violation of this section is subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-1-20 of the City Code. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-201.  
Sec. 24-7-3. - Possession of vehicle by other party; towing. 
Where an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this municipality who is not the owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the police department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the municipality. Upon receipt of such notification, the police department or designated representative shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow, as set forth in section 24-7-5, until the vehicle is claimed by the owner, lienholder, or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof or until it is disposed of as provided in this chapter. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-202.  
Sec. 24-7-4. - Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles—Towing or hauling away. 
(a)  When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway in an urban district for ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by the police department. 
(b)  When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent to the highway by a towing service may be authorized by the police department. 
(c)  When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is authorized by the police department, the owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing costs. 
(d)  The remaining provisions of Section 4-203 of Chapter 95 1/2, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of this municipality. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-203.  
Sec. 24-7-5. - Police responsibilities. 
When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided herein, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing by color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-204.  
Sec. 24-7-6. - Unknown owner. 
When the police department does not know the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois to be searched by a directed communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership information. 
The police department authorizing the impoundment shall cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois State Police for stolen or wanted information of the vehicle. The information determined from these record searches shall be used by the police department in sending notification by certified mail to the owner, lienholder or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition to be made and setting forth public sale information. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-205.  
Sec. 24-7-7. - Identifying and tracing vehicle. 
When the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the Illinois State Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois State Police shall be immediately forwarded to the police department having custody of the vehicle for notification purposes as set forth in section 24-7-6 of this chapter. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-206.  
Sec. 24-7-8. - Reclaimed vehicles—Expenses. 
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided in section 24-7-9, the owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled person under this section until all towing and storage charges have been paid. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-207.  
Sec. 24-7-9. - Disposal of unclaimed vehicle. 
Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle seven years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided herein, the police department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an automatic parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor under Chapter 5 of Chapter 95½, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder, or other person known by the police department or towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle. 
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by he postal authorities to the police department due to the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice shall not be required.  
Sec. 24-7-10. - Disposal of unclaimed vehicles without notice. 
(a)  New car. When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided for in section 24-7-9 of this Code without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined. 
(b)  Old car. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is impounded as specified by this Code, it shall be kept in custody for a minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner and lienholder and contacting the registered owner and lienholder by the U.S. Mail, public service or in person for a determination of disposition; and an examination of the Illinois State Police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. (At the expiration of the ten-day period without the benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, the chief of police shall authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk.) 
(c)  Antique vehicle. A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be sold to a person desiring to restore it. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-209.  
Sec. 24-7-11. - Police record for disposed vehicle. 
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled person or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction shall be maintained by the police department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-210.  
Sec. 24-7-12. - Public sale proceeds. 
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of this municipality is authorized to be towed away by the police department and disposed of as set forth in this Code, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition, after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges, shall be deposited in the municipal treasury. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-211.  
Sec. 24-7-13. - Liability. 
A law enforcement officer or agency, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner or his legal representative, lienholder, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this Code. 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-213.  
Sec. 24-7-14. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates or aids and abets in the violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-1-20 of this Code. 
(b)  The person shall be required by the court to make a disposition on the abandoned or unclaimed vehicle and pay all towing and storage charges pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 834) 
State Law reference— See 625 ILCS Sec. 5/4-214; See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-40-3. 
CITATION FORM 
NO. _____ 	
DATE _____ 	TIME _____ 
LICENSE NO. _____ 	STATE _____ 
LICENSE EXPIRES _____ 	MAKE OF VEHICLE _____ 
OFFICER _____ 	
 
YOU ARE CHARGED WITH THE VIOLATION MARKED BELOW: 
1. 	Overparked, Two Hour Zone 	$25.00 
2. 	Double Parked 	$25.00 
3. 	Parked at Fire Plug 	$25.00 
4. 	Blocking Driveway or Alley 	$25.00 
5. 	Parked Where Official Signs Erected 	$25.00 
6. 	Improper Parking 	$25.00 
7. 	Yellow Line 	$25.00 
8. 	Each Additional Hour Violation 	$25.00 
9. 	Parking on Sidewalk 	$25.00 
 
NAME _____ 
ADDRESS _____ 
CITY ___________ STATE ___________ ZIP CODE _____ 
You may settle and compromise a claim for illegal parking by paying the sum set forth above for the first particular violation and the same sum shall apply for the same particular offense for the second and each subsequent violation within 5 days after the time set out above. If not paid within this time limit, an Illinois Traffic Citation will be issued and an assessment of not less than $75.00 will be collected. 
FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE 
After detaching your Ticket Stub, place the fine in the envelope and deposit it at the City Hall.  
SCHEDULE "A" STOP INTERSECTIONS 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 24-3-3 of this Chapter the following streets are hereby designated as stop intersections: 
I. ONE-WAY AND TWO-WAY STOPS. 
Through Streets 	Stop Streets - Direction 
Arbor Glen Lane & Eisenhower St. 	Northbound Arbor Glen only 
August St. 	Streamstone Ln. (East Bd.) (#02-111) 
Autumn Lakes Lake 	Wilderness Way 
Beechcraft Blvd. 	Citation Ct. 
Beechcraft Blvd. 	Gulfstream Way 
Beller and Hayden Dr. 	Beller 
Benelli St. 	Ruger Ct. 
Benelli St. 	Colt Ct. 
Bernard St. 	E. State St. (Both) 
Browning St. 	Benelli St. 
Browning St. 	Remington St. 
E. Church St. 	N. Bernard St. (Both) 
E. Church St. 	N. Lebanon Ave. (Both) 
E. Church St. 	N. Market St. (Both) 
W. Church St. 	City Hall Alley (North Bd.) 
W. Church St. 	N. First St. (Both) 
W. Church St. 	N. Second St. (Both) 
W. Church St. 	N. Fourth St. (Both) 
W. Church St. 	N. Fifth St. (Both) 
N. County Rd. 	Antique Ln. (West Bd.) (#97-11) 
N. County Rd. 	City Cemetery South Dr. (East Bd.) 
N. County Rd. 	W. Fuesser Rd. (West Bd.) 
N. County Rd. 	W. Harnett St. (West Bd.) 
N. County Rd. 	N. High School lot (East Bd.) 
N. County Rd. 	Larkspur Dr. (West Bd.) 
N. County Rd. 	W. Madison St. (West Bd.) 
N. County Rd. 	Perrottet Dr. (West Bd.) 
N. County Rd. 	Timberbrook Dr. (East Bd.) 
N. County Rd. and Sanderling Dr. 	Sanderling Dr. 
County Rd. 	Weatherby 
Daniel Drive 	Hod Court 
Daniel Drive 	Kiln Court 
Daniel Drive 	Mortar Street (Both) 
Daniel Drive 	Mason Street (Both) 
Dere Bere Drive 	Cheryl Dr. (East Bd.) 
Dere Bere Drive 	Michelle Dr. (East Bd.) 
Donaphin St. 	August St. (Both) (#02-111) 
Douglas Ave. 	Nathan Ave. (South Bd.) 
N. Eighth St. 	W. Church St. (Both) 
N. Eighth St. 	W. Green St. (Both) 
Eisenhower St. 	S. County Rd. (South Bd.) 
Eisenhower St. 	Van Buren St. (South Bd.) 
Falling Leaf Way 	Autumn Lakes Lane (Both) 
Falling Leaf Way 	Wilderness Way 
Falling Leaf Way 	Royal Forest Drive 
Falling Leaf Way 	Fallen Timber Lane 
Falling Leaf Way 	Timberbrook Drive 
Fallen Timber Lane 	Royal Forest Drive 
N. First St. 	W. Green St. (Both) 
N. First St. 	W. Oak St. (Both) 
N. First St. 	W. Patterson St. (Both) 
Fountain View Dr. 	St. Christopher Ct. (East Bd.) (#03-109) 
N. Fourth St. 	Bel-Aire Dr. (Both) (#99-115) 
N. Fourth St. 	W. Oak St. (Both) 
Fuesser Rd. 	Beechcraft Blvd. 
Fuesser Rd. 	Fox Run (North Bd.) 
Fuesser Rd. 	Gulfstream Way 
Fuesser Rd. 	Hunters Trail (North Bd.) 
Fuesser Rd. 	Nathan Ave. (North Bd.) 
Grand Prairie Dr. & State Route 4 	Eastbound Grand Prairie Dr. only 
Grant Dr. 	W. Green St. (West Bd.) 
Grant Dr. 	Lincoln Blvd. (East Bd.) 
Grant Dr. 	W. Poplar St. (West Bd.) 
E. Green St. 	N. Lebanon Ave. (Both) 
Gulfstream Way 	Cirrus Dr. 
Gulfstream Way 	Piper Ln. 
Harnett St. 	Mascoutah Plaza Dr. (South Bd.) (#03-109) 
W. Harnett St. 	Dere Bere (South Bd.) 
W. Harnett St. 	N. First St. (Both) 
W. Harnett St. 	Glenn Dr. (South Bd.) 
W. Harnett St. 	N. Grant Dr. (North Bd.) 
W. Harnett St. 	N. Jackson St. (Both) 
W. Harnett St. 	Knipp Ave. (Both) 
E. Harnett St. 	N. Lebanon Ave. (North Bd.) 
W. Harnett St. 	Lincoln Blvd. (Both) 
E. Harnett St. 	N. Market St. (North Bd.) 
W. Harnett St. 	N. Ninth St. (North Bd.) 
W. Harnett St. 	N. Railway Ave. (North Bd.) 
W. Harnett St. 	N. Wilmagen (North Bd.) 
Hayden Dr. and State Rt. 4 	Hayden Dr. 
Hunter's Trail 	Browning St. 
Hunters Trail 	Canvasback Dr. (West Bd.) (#02-120) 
Hunters Trail 	Pheasant Bend (Both) (#02-120) 
N. Independence St. 	E. Church St. (Both) 
S. Independence St. 	E. State St. (Both) 
Indian Prairie Dr. and Winchester St. 	Indian Prairie Dr. 
Indian Prairie Dr. and Weatherby St. 	Indian Prairie Dr. North + South) 
N. Jackson St. 	Etling Dr. (East Bd.) 
N. Jackson St. 	Hackberry Dr. (West Bd.) 
N. Jackson St. 	Linden Place (West Bd.) 
N. John St. 	E. Church St. (Both) 
N. John St. 	E. Patterson St. (Both) 
S. John St. 	E. State St. (Both) (#97-111) 
S. John St. 	E. South St. (Both) (#00-121) 
Kankakee Trail 	Winnebago Way (Both) 
Lear Lane 	Cirrus Dr. 
S. Lebanon Ave. 	E. Filmore St. (Both) 
S. Lebanon Ave. 	E. George St. (Both) 
S. Lebanon Ave. 	E. South St. (Both) 
S. Lebanon Ave. 	E. State St. (Both) 
N. Lincoln Blvd. 	Etling Dr. (West Bd.) 
Madison Ave. 	Grant Dr. (Both) 
Madison Ave. 	Jackson St. (Both) 
Madison Ave. 	Lincoln Blvd. (North Bd.) 
Mallard Dr. 	Fox Run (South Bd.) (#02-120) 
Mallard Drive 	Pheasant Bend 
Mallard Dr. 	Pheasant Bend (West Bd.) 
Mallard Dr. 	Quail Point (South Bd.) (#02-120) 
Mallard Dr. 	Whimbrel Run (South Bd.) 
Mallard Dr. 	Widgeon Dr. (South Bd.) (#02-120) 
N. Market St. 	E. Green St. (Both) 
N. Market St. 	E. Oak St. (Both) 
S. Market St. 	E. George St. (Both) (#01-109) 
S. Market St. 	E. South St. (Both) (#97-111) 
Mascoutah Plaza Dr. 	Fountain View Dr. (South Bd.) (#03-109) 
Mine Rd. 	E. South St. (East Bd.) 
Mine Rd. 	E. State St. (East Bd.) 
Mortar Street 	Mason Street 
Nathan Ave. 	Aaron Ct. (West Bd.) 
Nathan Ave. 	Adam Ct. (West Bd.) 
Nathan Ave. 	Kristina Ct. (West Bd.) (#97-111) 
N. Ninth St. 	W. Church St. (Both) 
Onyx Dr. 	Topaz Ct. (North Bd.) 
Onyx Dr. 	Tanzanite Ln. (North Bd.) 
Perrottet Dr. 	BeBe Dr. (North Bd.) 
Perrottet Dr. 	Concord Circle E.+W. (North Bd.) 
Perrottet Dr. 	Joseph Dr. (North Bd.) 
Perrottet Dr. 	Landmark Dr. (North Bd.) 
Pheasant Bend 	Whimbrel Run (North Bd.) 
Pheasant Bend 	Widgeon Dr. (North Bd.) (#02-120) 
Pheasant Bend 	Widgeon Drive (Both) 
E. Phillips St. 	S. Lebanon Ave. (Both) 
E. Phillips St. 	S. Market St. (Both) 
W. Poplar St. 	N. Eighth St. (North Bd.) 
W. Poplar St. 	Elementary School Dr. (South Bd.) 
W. Poplar St. 	N. First St. (Both) 
W. Poplar St. 	N. Fourth St. (Both) 
E. Poplar St. 	N. Lebanon Ave. (Both) 
E. Poplar St. 	N. Market St. (Both) 
W. Poplar St. 	N. Ninth St. (South Bd.) 
W. Poplar St. 	N. Second St. (Both) 
Quail Point 	Canvasback Dr. (East Bd.) (#02-120) 
Quail Point 	Pheasant Bend (East) (#99-101) 
Quapaw Court 	Kankakee Trail (North Bd.) 
N. Railway Ave. 	Corrington Pl. (East Bd.) (#97-111) 
S. Railway Ave. 	George St. (Both) 
N. Railway Ave. 	Green St. (Both) 
S. Railway Ave. 	L&N Ave. (West Bd.) (#98-111) 
S. Railway Ave. 	Market St. (Both) 
N. Railway Ave. 	Oak St. (Both) 
N. Railway Ave. 	Patterson St. (East Bd.) 
S. Railway Ave. 	Phillips St. (Both) 
S. Railway Ave. 	South St. (Both) 
S. Railway Ave. 	Union St. (East Bd.) 
N. Second St. 	W. Oak St. (Both) 
N. Second St. 	W. Patterson St. (Both) 
N. Sixth St. 	Chevelle Dr. (West Bd.) 
N. Sixth St. 	W. Church St. (Both) 
N. Sixth St. 	Douglas Ave. (West Bd.) 
N. Sixth St. 	Illiniwek Dr. (East Bd.) 
N. Sixth St. 	W. Green St. (Both) 
N. Sixth St. 	Fuesser Rd. (Both) 
N. Sixth St. 	W. Harnett St. (Both) 
N. Sixth St. 	Park Dr. (East Bd.) 
N. Sixth St. 	W. Poplar St. (Both) 
S. Sixth St. 	W. State St. (Both) 
South St. & 10th St. 	Eastbound South St. only 
W. South St. 	S. Fourth St. (Both) 
W. South St. 	Lake St. (North Bd.) 
W. South St. 	Maple St. (North Bd.) 
W. South St. 	S. Second St. (South Bd.) 
W. State St. 	S. First St. (South Bd.) 
E. State St. 	S. Independence St. (Both) 
W. State St. 	St. Clair St. (South Bd.) 
Tanzanite Ln. 	Opal Ct. (West Bd.) 
Tanzanite Ln. 	Turqoise Ct. (West Bd.) 
N. Tenth St. 	Antique Ln. (East Bd.) 
N. Tenth St. 	W. Church St. (Both) 
N. Tenth St. 	Coachlight Dr. (East Bd.) 
S. Tenth Street 	Daniel Drive (Both) 
N. Tenth St. 	W. Green St. (Both) 
N. Tenth St. 	Laura St. (East Bd.) 
N. Tenth St. 	Madison Ave. (Both) 
N. Tenth St. 	Park Dr. (West Bd.) (#97-111) 
N. Tenth St. 	Perrottet Dr. (East Bd.) 
S. Tenth St. 	W. South St. (West Bd.) 
S. Tenth St. 	W. State St. (West Bd.) 
Timberbrook Drive 	Fallen Timber Lane 
State Rt. 4 	E. Church St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 and Dollar General Lane 	Dollar General Lane (West) 
State Rt. 4 	Filmore St. (East Bd.) 
State Rt. 4 	Fuesser Rd. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	E. George St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	E. Green St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	E. Harnett St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	L&N Ave. (Both) (#98-111) 
State Rt. 4 	E. Oak St. (West Bd.) 
State Rt. 4 	Onyx Dr. (West Bd.) 
State Rt. 4 	E. Patterson St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	Perrin Rd. (West Bd.) 
State Rt. 4 	E. Phillips St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	E. Poplar St. (East Bd.) 
State Rt. 4 	E. South St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	E. State St. (Both) 
State Rt. 4 	Verner St. (West Bd.) 
State Rt. 4 	Warner St. (West Bd.) 
State Rt. 4 and Grand Prairie Dr. 	Grand Prairie Dr. 
State Rt. 161 	N. County Rd. (North Bd.) 
State Rt. 161 	Christ Rd. (South Bd.) 
State Rt. 161 	Machine Shop Rd. (South Bd.) 
State Rt. 161 	N. Sixth St. 
State Rt. 177 	August St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Bernard St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	City Hall Alley (South Bd.) 
State Rt. 177 	Church St. (West Bd.) 
State Rt. 177 	County Rd. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Eighth St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Eisenhower St. (East Bd.) 
State Rt. 177 	Fifth St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	First St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Forth St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Grant Dr. (South Bd.) 
State Rt. 177 	Independence St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	John St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Lebanon Ave. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Legion Dr. (North Bd.) 
State Rt. 177 	Market St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Mine Rd. (North Bd.) 
State Rt. 177 	Ninth St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	St. Clair St. (North Bd.) 
State Rt. 177 	Second St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Seventh St. (Both) 
State Rt. 177 	Tenth St. (Both) 
Weatherby St. 	Benelli St. 
Weatherby St. 	Beretta St. 
Weatherby St. 	Hunter's Trail 
Weatherby St. 	Remington St. 
Weatherby St. and N. Sixth St. 	Weatherby St. 
Weatherby St. and Hunter's Trail 	Weatherby St. East + West 
Weatherby St. and Kankakee Trail 	Kankakee Trail 
Weatherby St. and Ottawa Ct. 	Ottawa Ct. 
Weatherby St. and Chickasaw Ct. 	Chickasaw Ct. 
Weatherby St. and Wyandot Ct. 	Wyandot Ct. 
Weatherby St. and N. Tenth St. 	N. Tenth St. 
Westbound Mooreland Circle & northbound Mooreland Circle 	Westbound Mooreland Circle 
Whetstone Ln. 	Streamstone Ln. (North Bd.) (#02-111) 
Whetstone Ln. 	Redstone Ct. (North Bd.) (#02-111) 
Whetstone Ln. 	Bluestone Ct. (North Bd.) (#02-111) 
Whimbrel Run 	Teal Ct. (East Bd.) 
Wild Meadow Ln. & Mooreland Circle 	North and south bound Mooreland Circle 
Winchester St. 	Benelli St. 
Winchester St. and N. Sixth St. 	Winchester St. 
Winchester St. and N. Tenth St. 	All ways 
Winding Oaks Lane & South St. 	(stop on westbound South St. only) 
Winding Oaks Lane & Arbor Glen Lane 	(stop on westbound Winding Oaks Lane only) 
 
II. TWO OR THREE-WAY STOPS 
S. Railway St. (North Bd.) 	at 	South St. (Both) 
Christ Rd. (East Bd.) 	at 	Machine Shop Rd. (Both) (#97-111) 
Christ Rd. (West Bd.) 	at 	Christ Rd. (Both) (#97-111) 
Douglas Ave. (Both) 	at 	Nathan Ave. (South Bd.) 
N. Tenth St. (Both) 	at 	Hackberry Dr. (East Bd.) 
Whetstone Ln. (East Bd.) 	at 	August St. (North Bd.) (#02-111) 
 
III. FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECIONS 
N. Independence St. 	and 	E. Green St. 
N. Independence St. 	and 	E. Oak St. 
N. Independence St. 	and 	E. Patterson St. 
N. John St 	and 	E. Green St. 
Mallard Dr. 	and 	Hunters Trail (#02-120) 
W. Poplar St. 	and 	N. First St. 
Railway Ave. 	and 	Church St. 
Railway Ave. 	and 	Poplar St. (#97-111) 
Railway Ave. 	and 	State St. 
Railway Ave. 	and 	State Rt. 177 
S. Sixth St. 	and 	W. South St. 
N. Tenth St. 	and 	W. Harnett St. 
N. Tenth St. 	and 	Larkspur Dr. 
N. Tenth St. 	and 	W. Poplar St. 
S. Tenth St. 	and 	W. South St. 
State Rt. 161 	and 	State Rt. 4 (Signal) 
State Rt. 177 	and 	Sixth St. (Signal) 
State Rt. 177 	and 	State Rt. 4 (Light) 
 
IV. SCHOOL STOP OR CROSSWALKS 
Railway St. 	and 	Main St. 
Sixth St. 	and 	Main St. 
 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 08-09, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 08-18, § 1, 11-3-08; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 10-12, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 15-20, § 1, 11-16-15; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 9-6-16; Ord. No. 16-27, § 1, 11-21-16; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-21-17; Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 5-1-17; Ord. No. 17-10, § 1, 6-5-17)  
SCHEDULE "C" YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS 
In accordance with the provision of Section 24-3-4 the following streets are hereby designated as yield right-of-way intersections: 
Through Streets 	Yield Streets 
S. Independence St. 	E. George St. (East Bd.) 
S. Independence St. 	E. Phillips St. (East Bd.) 
Maple St. 	W. George St. (Both) 
S. Market St. 	E. State St. (Both) 
S. Second St. 	W. State St. (Both) 
N. Seventh St. 	W. Church St. (Both) 
S. Sixth St. 	Anna St. (West Bd.) 
W. State St. 	S. Fourth St. (Both) 
  
SCHEDULE "D" SPEED ZONES 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 24-4-1 the following speed zones are hereby established: 
Street - mph 		Location 
Fuesser R. - 30 mph 	From 	Lake Rd. to East City limits (#901) 
Harnett St. - 20 mph 	From 	Sixth St. to Ninth St. (1971 Code) 
Harnett St. - 25 mph 	From 	Ninth St. to Lake Rd. 
L&N Ave. - 30 mph 	From 	Rt. 4 to S. Railway Ave. (#98-111) 
Lake Rd. - 30 mph 	From 	Rte. 177 to Antique Ln. (#997) 
Lake Rd. - 35 mph 	From 	Antique Ln. to Rte. 161 (#96-113) 
Main St. - 25 mph 	From 	Railway St. to Jefferson 
Park Drive - 15 mph 	From 	6th St. to 10th St. 
Perrottet Dr. - 25 mph 	From 	N. County Rd. to End of Street (#871) 
Poplar St. - 20 mph 	From 	Ninth St. to Fifth St. 
Poplar St. - 30 mph 	From 	Fifth St. to Jefferson 
Sixth St. - 20 mph 	From 	Poplar St. to City Limit 
 
(Ord. No. 09-13, § 1, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 7-15-13)  
SCHEDULE "E" NO-PARKING STREETS 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 24-6-4(C) the following streets are hereby declared to be "no-parking" areas; to wit: 
I. No Parking 
Street - Side 		Location 
Beller Drive (Both) 	From 	Hayden Drive 
City Hall St. 	From 	Main St. to Church St. (Reserved—City Vehicles) 
County Rd. (West) 	From 	Main St. to Harnett St. (#695) 
S. Eighth St. (Both) 	From 	Main St. South 120 feet (#840) 
S. Eighth St. (East) 	From 	W. State St. North 100 feet (#840) 
Falling Leaf Way (both) 	From 	Timberbrook Drive North 35 feet 
Falling Leaf Way (both) 	From 	Timberbrook Drive South 35 Feet 
E. Green St. (North) 	From 	Independence St. to John St. (7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., when school is in session) 
Harnett St. (South) 	From 	10 th St. to County Rd. 
Harnett St. (North) 	From 	6 th St. to Jefferson St. (Route 4) 
Main St. (Both) 	From 	3701 west and 3651 east of 6th St. (#944) 
Main St. (North) 	From 	2nd St. west 350 ft. (#933) 
Main St. (South) 	From 	Second St. to Jefferson St. 
W. Main St. (North) 	From 	Ninth St. to Church St. 
Mine Road (West) 	From 	Main Street South to city limits 
W. Oak St. (North) 	From 	10 and 100 block (#628) 
Park Drive (Both) 	From 	Tenth Street East 1,080 feet 
Poplar St. (South) 	From 	6 th St. to 10 th St. 
N. Railway St. (West) 	From 	Main St. to Green St. 
S. Railway St. (Both) 	From 	Main St. to State St. 
Route 4 (Both) 	From 	Route 161 north to City limits (#902) 
N. Second St. (East) 	From 	Green St. to Patterson St. 
N. Sixth St. (Both) 	From 	Main St. to City limits 
S. Sixth St. (Both) 	From 	Main St. to South 80 ft. (#944) 
S. Sixth St. (East) 	From 	W. South St. to Elm St. (#658) 
S. Sixth St. (West) 	From 	Main St. to W. State St. (#628) 
W. South St. (South) 	From 	Sixth St. to 10th St. (#660) 
Tenth St. (East) 	From 	Church St. to Green St. (#871) 
Tenth St. (both) 	From 	Hackberry St. to Winchester St. 
Tenth St. (East) 	From 	Harnett St. to Park Dr. 
Tenth St. (West) 	From 	Main St. to Green St. (#871) 
Timberbrook Drive (both) 	From 	N County Rd 270 feet 
L&N Ave. (Both) 	From 	Jefferson St. to Railway St. (#97-114) 
 
II. Specific Parking: Time Parameters 
Street - Side 		Location 
County Rd. 	From 	Main St. to Harnett St. (8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.) 
County Rd. (East) 	From 	Main St. to Harnett St. - Parallel only (#695) 
North County Rd. (Both) 	From 	Harnett St. to Fuesser Rd. (#00-114) 
Jefferson St. (Both) 	From 	North to South City Limits - Parallel only (#854) 
Lincoln Blvd. (Both) 	From 	1300 Block (7:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m.) (When high school is in session) a limit of 2 hours (#99-126) 
Lincoln Blvd. (Both) 	From 	1200 Block (7:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m.) (#955) 
Madison St. 	From 	County Rd. to Lincoln St. (8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.) 
Main St. 	From 	County Rd. to Grant Dr. (8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.) 
N. Market St. (East) 	From 	10 Block (45° angle) (#628) 
Poplar St. 	From 	First St. to Sixth St. (7:30 a.m—4:00 p.m.) 
 
III. Angle Parking Only 
On the east side, north of the existing alleyway in the ten (00) block of S. Market St. will be provided, parking at a 45° angle only with the right front tire of any automobile so parking touching the curb. Handicap parking shall for this space not be enforced during weekends or after 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
(Ord. No. 97-102; Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, 1-22-08; Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 3-16-09; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 16-10, § 1, 5-2-16; Ord. No. 16-19, § 1, 11-19-16; Ord. No. 17-10, § 2, 6-5-17; Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 5-21-18; Ord. No. 18-11, § 1, 6-4-18; Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-2-18)  
SCHEDULE "F" LIMITED TIME PARKING 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 24-6-1 the following streets are hereby declared to be limited parking areas with regard to time: 
I. TWO-HOUR PARKING LIMIT 
Street - Side 		Location 
Lebanon St. (Both) 	From 	Church St. to State St. (#671) 
Main Street (North) 	From 	Jefferson Street to First Street 
Market St. (Both) 	From 	Church St. to State St. (#671) 
Municipal Owned Parking Lots 		
 
IIA. TWO-HOUR PARK LIMIT FROM 8:00 A.M. TO 5:00 P.M. MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY 
Street - Side 		Location 
County Rd. (East) 	From 	Main St. to Harnett St. (#717A) 
 
IIB. TWO-HOUR PARK LIMIT FROM 8:00 A.M. TO 4:00 P.M. MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY 
Street - Side 		Location 
_______ 		
 
Mascoutah Reservoir Parking Lot from September 1 through June 1 of the following year (99-109) 
III. NO-PARKING FRIDAYS FROM 6:00 A.M. TO 8:00 A.M. 
Street - Side 		Location 
N. County Rd. (Both) 	From 	W. Main St. to Harnett St. (#871) 
Main St. (Both) 	From 	Mine Rd. to County Rd. (#871) 
 
IV. SCHOOL BUS LOADING ZONE (2:15 P.M.—3:45 P.M.) 
Street - Side 		Location 
Harnett St. (South) 	From 	6th St. to the East entrance (#884) 
 
V. TWO-HOUR PARKING FROM 7:00 A.M. To 4:00 P.M. 
0—100 block of S. County Rd. (inclusive) 
0—100 block of N. County Rd. (inclusive) 
200 & 300 block of Jackson St. (inclusive) 
1100 & 1200 block of W. Main St. (inclusive) 
1200 & 1300 block of Lincoln Blvd. (inclusive) 
1100 & 1200 block of W. Harnett St. (inclusive) 
1100 & 1200 block of W. Madison St. (inclusive) 
(Ord. No. 08-03, § 1, 1-22-08; Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 3-16-09)  
SCHEDULE "H" HANDICAPPED PARKING 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 24-6-5(E) the following are hereby designated as handicapped parking places: 
HANDICAPPED PARKING (SATURDAY 4:00 P.M.—7:00 P.M.; SUNDAY 7:00 A.M.—12:00 NOON) 
Street - Side 		Location 
Green St. (South Side) 	From 	168 feet east of Independence St. (#97-105) 
 
HANDICAPPED PARKING (MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY 7:00 A.M.—5:00 P.M.) 
Lebanon St. (East Side) 	20' × 8' near the stop sign at Main St. (#98-101; 01-19-98) 
  
SCHEDULE "J" LOAD LIMITS 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 24-6-6 and 625 ILCS 5/15-316 et seq. no vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the following streets: 
Street - Limit 		Location 
S. Railway Ave. - 10 tons 	From 	State Rte. 177 to L&N Ave. (#98-116) 
North County Rd. (Lake Rd.) - 10 tons 	From 	Ill. Rte. 177 to Southern Entrance to Concrete Plant (#99-106) 
  
Chapter 25 - NUISANCES  
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-1-1. - Specific nuisances enumerated. 
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health, peace and comfort of the city, for any person, firm or corporation within the limits of the city to permit the following; but the enumeration of the following nuisances shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(a)  Filth. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place, to the prejudice of others. 
(b)  Deposit of offensive materials. To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the carcass of any dead animal in any water course, lake, pond, spring, well or common sewer, street or public highway. 
(c)  Corruption of water. To corrupt or render unwholesome, or impure, the water of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others. 
(d)  Highway encroachment. To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying places. 
(e)  Manufacturing gunpowder. To carry on the business of manufacturing gunpowder, nitroglycerine, or other highly explosive substances, or mixing or grinding the materials therefore, in any building within 20 rods of any valuable building erected at the time such business may be commenced. 
(f)  Powder magazines. To establish powder magazines near incorporated towns, at a point different from that appointed according to law by the corporate authorities of the town, or within 50 rods of any occupied dwelling house. 
(g)  Noxious odors. To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals, or of the public. 
(h)  Unlawful advertising. To advertise wares or occupations by painting notices of the same on, or affixing them to fences or other private property, or on rocks or other natural objects without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper authorities. 
(i)  Bodies of water. To create any condition, through the improper maintenance of a swimming pool or wading pool, or by causing any action which alters the condition of a natural body of water, so that it harbors mosquitoes, flies or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public. 
(j)  Storing debris. To store, dump or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse, garbage, trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage cans or other containers in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents, nuisance birds or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious and dangerous to the health of individuals or the public. 
(k)  Discarded materials. To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery and materials to remain around any oil or gas well, or fail to fill any holes, cellars, slush pits and other excavations made in connection with any such well or to restore the surface of the lands surrounding any such well to its condition before the drilling of any such well, upon abandonment of any such oil or gas well. 
(l)  Underground wells. To permit any salt water, oil, gas or other wastes from any well drilled for oil, gas or exploratory purposes to escape to the surface, or into a mine or coal seam, or into any underground fresh water supply, or from one underground stratum to another. 
(m)  Harassment. To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about to sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property, or is about to buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person's attempt to sell, buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers to a person's sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real property. 
(n)  Business. To establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or unwholesome business within the city limits. 
(o)  Filthy premise conditions. To keep or suffer to be kept in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy condition, any chicken coop, cow barn, stable, cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any premises belonging to or occupied by him, or any railroad car, building, yard, grounds, and premises belonging to or occupied by him. 
(p)  Expectorate. To expectorate on any public sidewalk or street, or other public building or floor or walk of any public vehicle or hall. 
(q)  Litter on streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or allow trash, paper, cardboard, wire, dirt, rock, stone, glass, brick, lumber, wood or litter of material objects of any size or description to fall upon the streets of the city from any moving vehicle, or to be thrown from a moving vehicle, or to throw from a moving vehicle and to remain thereon. 
(r)  Accumulation of junk and trash. To deposit or pile up any rags, old rope, paper, iron, brass, copper, tin, aluminum, ashes, garbage, refuse, hazardous waste, plastic, brush, litter, weeds, slush, lead, glass bottles or broken glass upon any lot, piece or parcel of land or upon any public or private alley, street or public way within the city. 
(s)  Rodents. To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist that shall attract, harbor, or encourage the infestation of rodents. 
(t)  Bringing nuisances into the city. To bring into the city, or keep therein for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose, any dead or live animal or any matter, substance or thing which shall be a nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance in the city, or which may or shall be dangerous or detrimental to health. 
(u)  Offensive liquids. To keep nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or substance or any liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid, nor permit any such liquid to be discharged, placed, thrown or to flow from or out of any premise into or upon any adjacent premises or any public street or alley or permit the same to be done by any person connected with the premises under his control. 
(v)  Motor transport engines. To operate motor transport engines in the nighttime between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., in any place in which a majority of the buildings, within a radius of 400 feet are used exclusively for residence purposes, excluding state and federal highways. 
(w)  Generally. To commit any offense which is a nuisance according to the common law of the land or made such by statute of the state.  
Sec. 25-1-2. - Nuisances detrimental to health generally. 
No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premise, or part thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the city if such use, keeping, maintaining of any nuisance shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.  
Sec. 25-1-3. - Notice to abate. 
Whenever the police chief, code enforcement officer or his designated representative finds that a nuisance exists, he shall direct the city clerk to mail (certified) to the party responsible for the nuisance and to the party on whose property the nuisance exists a written notice ordering that the nuisance be abated within a reasonable time. The notice to abate shall contain: 
(a)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance. 
(b)  The location of the nuisance. 
(c)  A statement of what condition or state of affairs must be achieved in order for the nuisance to be deemed abated. 
(d)  A statement suggesting how such abatement might be accomplished. 
(e)  The date by which abatement might be accomplished. 
(f)  A statement indicating that if the nuisance is not abated by the date prescribed this municipality will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against the property, impose a fine, and/or lien.  
Sec. 25-1-4. - Abatement of nuisance by city; unknown owner. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police, code enforcement officer or a designated officials to proceed at once upon the expiration of the time specified in the notice to cause such nuisance to be abated, provided, however, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent, or person in possession or control of any premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found in unknown or cannot be found, the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. in either case, the expense of such abatement shall be paid by the person who may have created or suffered such nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty or fine.  
Sec. 25-1-5. - Failure to comply with notice. 
If the person notified to abate a nuisance shall neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements of such notice by abating such nuisance within the time specified, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. The city shall not be required to issue another notice where the condition or violation is at first abated, but later resumed and/or repeated.  
Sec. 25-1-6. - Liens. 
The cost of repair, demolition, vacation or enclosure shall be recoverable from the owner or owners of such real estate and shall be a lien thereon, which lien shall be subordinate to all prior existing liens and encumbrances; provided that, within 60 days after said cost and expense is incurred, the city or person performing the service by authority of the city, in his or its own names, shall file notices of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the County of St. Clair. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 
(a)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof. 
(b)  The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service. 
(c)  The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the city. 
Upon payment of said cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in said property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the City or person in whose names the lien has been filed, and said release shall be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien shall be enforced by proceedings to foreclosure as in case of mortgages or mechanic's liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within three years after the date of filing notice of lien. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-60-2 and 740 ILCS Secs. 55/221 and 55/222.  
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 
 
Sec. 25-2-1. - Definitions. 
"Weeds" as used in this Code shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
Burdock, Rag Weed (giant), Rag Weed (Common), Thistle, Cocklebur, Jimson, Blue Vervain, Common Milk Weed, Wild Carrot, Poison Ivy, Wild Mustard, Rough Pigweed, Lambsquarter, Wild Lettuce, Curled Dock, Smartweeds (all varieties), Poison Hemlock, Wild Hemp and Johnson Grass and all other noxious weeds.  
Sec. 25-2-2. - Height. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city. Any such plants or weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.  
Sec. 25-2-3. - Notice. 
The police chief, code enforcement officer or any other person so designated by the city manager may issue a written notice for removal of weeds or grass. Such weeds or grass shall be cut by the owner or occupant within five days after such notice has been duly served. 
(Ord. No. 12-13, § 1, 6-18-12)  
Sec. 25-2-4. - Service of notice. 
Service of the notice provided for herein may be effected by handing the same to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his household of the age of 15 years or older found on the premises or by mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided, that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner's address cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.  
Sec. 25-2-5. - Abatement. 
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the police chief, code enforcement officer or any other person so designated by the city manager may proceed to abate such nuisance The charge for cutting weeds shall be $150.00 per hour with a minimum charge of two hours. A bill for the weed cutting charges shall be served, or caused to be served, and shall be paid by the owner or occupant. The above charge reflects manpower, enforcement and administrative costs involved in enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-13, § 1, 6-18-12)  
Sec. 25-2-6. - Lien. 
Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien upon the premises. A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and expenses thereof incurred by the city shall be recorded in the following manner: 
(a)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof. 
(b)  The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service. 
(c)  The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the city and shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is incurred.  
Sec. 25-2-7. - Payment. 
Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known. Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien. All lien and release filing fees shall be paid by the owner of the property.  
Sec. 25-2-8. - Foreclosure of lien. 
Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be sold for non-payment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the name of the city after the lien is in effect for 60 days. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Secs. 5/11-20-6 and 5/11-20-7.  
ARTICLE III. - GARBAGE AND DEBRIS 
 
Sec. 25-3-1. - Accumulation prohibited. 
No person shall permit any garbage or trash to accumulate on their premises or private property. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real estate to refuse or neglect to remove the garbage or debris.  
Sec. 25-3-2. - Notice to person. 
The chief of police, code enforcement officer or his designated representative may issue a written notice for removal of garbage or debris. Such garbage or debris shall be removed by the owner or occupant within five days after such notice has been duly served.  
Sec. 25-3-3. - Service of notice. 
Service of notice provided for herein may be effected by handing of the same to the owner, occupant, or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his household of the age of 15 years or older found on the premises or by mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner's address cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.  
Sec. 25-3-4. - Abatement. 
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the police chief, code enforcement officer or the designated representative may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner or occupant.  
Sec. 25-3-5. - Lien. 
Charges for such removal shall be a lien upon the premises. A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and expenses thereof incurred by the city shall be recorded in the following manner: 
(a)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof. 
(b)  The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service. 
(c)  The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the city and shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is incurred.  
Sec. 25-3-6. - Payment. 
Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known. Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien.  
Sec. 25-3-7. - Foreclosure of lien. 
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the name of the city, after lien is in effect for 60 days. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of lien. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-20-13.  
ARTICLE IV. - INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE 
 
Sec. 25-4-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Code, the following term(s) shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
Inoperable motor vehicles" shall mean any motor vehicle which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.  
Sec. 25-4-2. - Declaration of nuisance. 
All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property in view of the general public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.  
Sec. 25-4-3. - Notice to owner. 
The police chief or his designated representative shall notify the owner of the motor vehicle, informing him that he shall dispose of any inoperable vehicles under his control. If the owner fails to dispose of said inoperable vehicle(s) after seven days from the issuance of the notice, the police chief may authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the inoperable vehicle or parts thereof.  
Sec. 25-4-4. - Exclusions. 
Nothing in this article shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a licensed business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-40-3.  
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING AS NUISANCE 
 
Sec. 25-5-1. - Building condition—Nuisance. 
The code enforcement officer or his designated representative shall report to the city council when any building or structure in the city is in a dangerous condition and constitutes a nuisance. Hereinafter, all references to code enforcement officer shall include "his designated representative".  
Sec. 25-5-2. - Time limit. 
The owner of such building shall repair or alter it so as to make it safe within 90 days from the time the notice is served upon him in the manner provided by law.  
Sec. 25-5-3. - Notification. 
The code enforcement officer, with the approval of the city council, shall place a notice on all "dangerous and unsafe buildings", which notice shall read as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a dangerous and unsafe building by the city officials. This notice shall remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, or person or persons in whose name or names such building was last assessed, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the county recorder of deeds. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with."  
Sec. 25-5-4. - Dangerous and unsafe building defined. 
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous and unsafe buildings". 
(a)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(b)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 31 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(c)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(d)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(e)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to cause injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(f)  Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(g)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(h)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(i)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
(j)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building Code, the Fire Prevention Code, or any other ordinances of the city. 
(k)  Those vacant buildings with unguarded openings shall be deemed to constitute a fire hazard and to be unsafe within the provisions of this Code. 
(l)  Those buildings which are uncompleted or abandoned.  
Sec. 25-5-5. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building Inspector in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition: 
(a)  If the "dangerous and unsafe building" is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(b)  If the "dangerous and unsafe building" can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Code, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(c)  In any case where a "dangerous and unsafe building" if 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Code, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a "dangerous and unsafe building" is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this Code, or any ordinance of the city, or statute of the State of Illinois, it shall be demolished. (See "non-conforming uses" of the zoning code)  
Sec. 25-5-6. - Dangerous and unsafe buildings—Nuisances. 
All dangerous and unsafe buildings within the terms of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as hereinbefore or hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 25-5-7. - Duties of the attorney. 
The city attorney shall apply to the circuit court for an order authorizing the demolition, repair, or vacation of dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted or abandoned buildings when notices have not been complied with and when requested to do so by the building inspector.  
Sec. 25-5-8. - Liens. 
The cost of repair, demolition, vacation, or enclosure shall be recoverable from the owner or owners of such real estate and shall be a lien thereon, which lien shall be subordinate to all prior existing liens and encumbrances; provided that within 60 days after said cost and expense is incurred, the city or person performing the service by authority of the city, in his or its own names, shall file notices of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 
(a)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification therefore. 
(b)  The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service. 
(c)  The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the city. 
Upon payment of said cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in said property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person in whose name(s) the lien has been filed and said release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics of lien. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within three years after the date of filing notice of lien. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-31-1.  
Chapter 27 - OFFENSES  
ARTICLE I. - CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED 
 
Sec. 27-1-1. - Words and phrases. 
For the meanings of words and phrases for the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 720, Section 5/2-5 through 5/2-22, as approved, adopted and amended are hereby adopted by the city, as fully as if set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-17-95; Ord. No. 04-15, § 1, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 27-1-2. - Criminal Code adopted. 
Those portions of the Criminal Code of 1961 as now or hereafter amended (720 ILCS Sec. 5/1-1 et seq.) that are misdemeanors or petty offenses are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this chapter. 
(a)  Exceptions/additions. 
1)  Based on a decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, the following exceptions apply to the curfew regulations for minors under the age of 17. 
a.  If the minor is accompanied by the minor's parent, legal guardian, custodian, sibling, stepbrother, or stepsister at least 18 years of age; 
b.  If the minor is accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age approved by the child's parent, guardian, or custodian; 
c.  If the minor is participating in, going to, or returning from: 
i.  Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform; 
ii.  A school recreational activity; 
iii.  A religious event; 
iv.  An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage; 
v.  An activity involving the exercise of the minor's rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article 1, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, or both; 
vi.  An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training or other care under the supervision of one or more adults. 
2)  A citation for violation of the curfew regulations may be issued by a police officer only if he/she reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in this section apply. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-17-95; Ord. No. 04-15, § 1, 7-19-04)  
Sec. 27-1-3. - Establishing guilt. 
The provisions adopted by reference in sections 27-1-1 and 27-1-2 shall be subject to all applicable definitions, defenses and presumptions provided for by state law; provided, however, that guilt need only be established by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-17-95)  
Sec. 27-1-4. - Penalties. 
Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $75.00 and not more than $750.00. With respect to violations of this chapter that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-17-95)  
Sec. 27-1-5. - References to ordinance. 
When referring to an ordinance violation, the ordinance violation shall be referred to by using the same section and paragraph number as Chapter 720 ILCS Sec. 5/1-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-17-95)  
Sec. 27-1-6. - Open burning. 
(a)  Leaf burning. It is unlawful to burn leaves within the city. 
(b)  Exceptions and regulations. 
(1)  Bonfires shall be defined as special event fires with only natural wood as fuel. Requirements: Bonfires require a "permit", which is acquired through the following process: applicant submits a written request to the city manager's office at least three work days in advance of the event. The city manager responds with a letter of permission. This letter is forwarded to the fire chief and the police department. This letter also must be kept by the applicant for presentation, if requested. No leaves, trash, or other materials shall be burned. 
(2)  Campfires shall be defined as small "cook fire oriented" activities suited for weenie roasts or gatherings around the campfire. Requirements: "Campfires" shall be located in a safe location with fuel material dimensions not to exceed two feet tall and 30 by 30 inches wide. Additionally, fires shall be attended at all times by an adult, and common sense should apply, especially under such conditions as high winds. No fire shall be left burning - fires are to be fully extinguished at the close of the evening activities. Campfires are only to burn natural wood and/or charcoal - no leaves, trash, or other materials shall be permitted. (No permit required.) 
(3)  Other burning. It is unlawful to burn any materials other than those identified in subsections (b)(1) and (2) above. Specifically, garbage, refuse, construction materials, or other waste products, are prohibited from any burning within the city. The burning ban also includes attempts to burn tree trunks, downed trees and any limbs. 
(4)  Exemptions. 
(a)  Public agencies are exempt from the burning limitations identified within this article and prior Ordinance No. 02-122. This includes but is not limited to Surface Water ditch clearing, fire department training operations, emergency events, and unavoidable operations' burning. It is understood that, by policy direction, the city will engage in composting/farm applications and other efforts to preclude green waste burning. Limb and trunk burning will take place at the city yard waste disposal area as circumstances require. 
(b)  Legitimate farmland burning activities are also exempt. 
(5)  Leaf control. Residents are responsible for leaves on their property and shall not cause leaves to be placed on adjacent properties nor in ditches or streets. Residents shall rake and clean to prevent leaf materials from hindering the city's drainage systems. 
(6)  Penalties. Any person who violates the prohibitions of this section on burning shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $200.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 02-124, 12-2-02)  
Sec. 27-1-7. - Unlawful discharge and use of weapons. 
For the purposes of this section: "Firearm" means any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas or escape of gas; excluding, however: 
(1)  Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paint ball gun or B-B gun which either expels a single globular projectile not exceeding .18 inch in diameter and which has a maximum muzzle velocity of less than 700 feet per second or breakable paint balls containing washable marking colors; 
(2)  Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce Commission; 
(3)  Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition; 
As defined and amended in Illinois Statutes: (430 ILCS 65/1.1) (from Ch. 38, par. 83-1.1) 
(4)  Each of the articles or instruments defined as a firearm is hereby declared to be a dangerous weapon and the use thereof in the manner stated in said section is declared to be against public safety and that such use is prohibited within the corporate limits of said City of Mascoutah. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
a.  Discharge or fire any shotgun, rifle, pistol, or firearm of any description within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah; or 
b.  Hunt any kind of animal, or bird or shoot any firearms with the intention of killing or injuring any animal or bird, within the City of Mascoutah without first having obtained a permit therefore. 
(5)  A permit for hunting animals or birds or to discharge or shoot a firearm, in the City of Mascoutah may be obtained from the city upon showing that the intended use is consistent with the public safety. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City of Mascoutah to arrest, with or without warrant, any person found violating any of the provisions of this section, and to seize and confiscate, with or without warrant, any article or instrument declared herein to be a dangerous weapon which he finds being used in violation of the of this section. Upon such seizure such officer will hold said articles or instruments until they are ordered destroyed by the court hearing the matter of the violation. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Any officer of the City of Mascoutah or State of Illinois or the United States while in the performance of his duties in enforcing any ordinance of said city or law of said State or United States. 
b.  Members of any organization or incorporation, engaged in target shooting at a dedicated range upon the grounds or property belonging to or under the control of such organization or corporation. 
c.  Any person in the lawful defense or protection of property or person. 
d.  Any organization or person who has obtained a special permit to allow discharge of a weapon from the city for an event to include, funerals, reenactments, "meat shoots", or other events deemed appropriate by the city, which are conducted with public safety as a priority, and proper supervision during the event. 
(Ord. No. 08-13, § 1, 8-4-08)  
Sec. 27-1-8. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the good order of society, or the peace of any private citizen, or congregation, by loud noise or music, vulgar or profane language, fighting, immoral conduct, or any other disorderly act or conduct in the public view. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-1-10)  
Chapter 28 - PERSONNEL CODE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 28-1-1. - Purpose. 
In accordance with the Code creating and establishing a personnel system, it is the purpose of these rules to establish normal procedures which will serve as a guide to administrative action concerning the various personnel activities and transactions. Nothing in this Code shall be construed so as to imply that this Code constitutes an employment contract between employees covered by said Code.  
Sec. 28-1-2. - Positions covered. 
These rules and regulations shall cover all nonunion city employees. Rules governing members of Laborers Local 742, Policemen's Benevolent Labor Committee, and the EMS Local 4412 are contained in the collective bargaining agreement entered into between the city and the union as amended, and not by this guide. 
(Ord. No. 99-116, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
Sec. 28-1-3. - Board of fire and police commissioners. 
The rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners, as amended, are hereby adopted as part of the Personnel Policy of the City of Mascoutah and govern procedures as to the testing of police officers, and establishing a hiring list for officers. The city manager, or his designee, is for all hiring, disciplining, suspension or dismissal of all police officers.  
Sec. 28-1-4. - Ambulance service. 
The Mascoutah Ambulance Service Policy and Procedures, as amended, are hereby adopted as part of the Personnel Policy of the City of Mascoutah and govern procedures as to members of the city ambulance service in addition to these rules and regulations.  
ARTICLE II. - PAY AND WORKING HOURS 
 
Sec. 28-2-1. - Salary and hourly rate of pay. 
The salary or hourly rate of pay of each covered city worker shall be established based upon the annual budget of the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
Sec. 28-2-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, adopted August 3, 2009, repealed § 28-2-2, which pertained to overtime.  
Sec. 28-2-3. - Overtime rate. 
Overtime shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half regular rate for all hours exceeding 40 hours in a work week or eight consecutive hours in a work day and the rate of two and one-half times regular rate for work on legal holidays as established by the city council.  
Sec. 28-2-4. - Work day. 
Employees assigned to regular day work, excluding police officers, shall work from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. with one hour off for lunch, Monday through Friday. Police officers shall work according to the shift assignment schedule prepared by the chief of police.  
Sec. 28-2-5. - Pay period. 
Bi-weekly periods will terminate on the Sunday prior to each pay date. Time cards, properly approved by the city manager, will be turned into the finance coordinator's office during the next office work day following the close of each pay period. Pay days will be on Friday following a bi-weekly pay schedule. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYMENT AND EXAMINATION 
 
Sec. 28-3-1. - Standard procedure for filling vacant city positions. 
Vacant city positions shall be filled in accordance with the following procedures based upon applications established for the position: 
(a)  The city manager shall hire and discharge all employees at such compensation as may be approved in the annual budget by the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk, city treasurer, city attorney, fire chief and assistant fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council at such compensation as may be set in the annual budget approved by the city council. 
(c)  Present employees shall have the first opportunity to fill any vacancies or any new positions which may occur in each department subject to testing requirements in section 28-3-4. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
Sec. 28-3-2. - Reference checks. 
As part of the pre-employment procedure, former supervisors, employers, and references provided by candidates shall be checked as a precaution against obtaining undesirable employees. Reference checks made by personal or telephone contacts shall be documented and made part of the applicant's file. These reference checks shall be completed prior to an offer of employment and the information shall be made part of the application file. All such information is to be handled as privileged information. The city retains the right to employ personnel on a best qualified basis.  
Sec. 28-3-3. - Disqualifications. 
An applicant shall be removed from further consideration if the applicant: 
(a)  Does not possess the minimum qualifications. 
(b)  Does not pass all city tests and examinations. 
(c)  Has established an unsatisfactory employment or personnel record as evidenced by reference check of such a nature as to demonstrate unsuitability for employment. 
(d)  Has made false statement of any material fact or practiced deception in his/her application. 
(e)  Is afflicted with any mental or physical disqualifying disease or defect that would prevent satisfactory performance of his/her duties. 
(f)  Is addicted to the habitual use of drugs or intoxicants.  
Sec. 28-3-4. - Testing. 
The person or board in charge of hiring an applicant may require one or more of the following: written test, performance test and interview, physical examination by a medical doctor, a drug test and any other appropriate test to determine skills, training experience and general ability to perform the job. A background check will be conducted on all potential new hires. 
(Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
ARTICLE IV. - LEAVES OF ABSENCE 
 
Sec. 28-4-1. - Vacations. 
Vacations with pay at the current straight time rate shall be granted to permanent, full-time employees. 
(a)  Schedules. 
(1)  From the anniversary day of employment until the end of the city's fiscal year, an employee shall be granted a prorated two-week (80-hour) vacation based on length of service. 
(2)  All employees with one year to five complete years of service shall be granted two work weeks (80 hours) of vacation each fiscal year. 
(3)  All employees with six years or more of service shall be granted two and one-half work weeks (104 hours) of vacation each fiscal year. 
(4)  All employees with ten years or more of service shall be granted three work weeks, (120 hours) of vacation each fiscal year. 
(5)  All employees with 15 years or more of service shall be granted four work weeks (160 hours) of vacation each fiscal year. 
(6)  All employees with 20 years of service shall be granted five work weeks (200 hours) of vacation each fiscal year. 
(7)  Employees who have over 21 years of service with the city shall receive an additional day of vacation over the existing schedule. (i.e., An employee with 26 years of service will receive one additional day of vacation, as would an employee with 21 years of service.) (Per Laborer's Local 742 contract). 
(b)  Vacation shall be earned during the work year and granted to employees once a year at the end of the city's fiscal year. No vacation time may be taken in advance or until earned. 
(c)  Vacation time must be used within 12 calendar months from the date it is granted. Vacation time not used within 12 months will be forfeited unless extension is approved by the city manager. Seniority controls if more than one employee desires the same period. 
(d)  When an employee terminates service with the city he/she shall receive compensation for unused vacation leave accumulated prorated to the date of termination. 
(e)  A new employee who leaves the service of the city before completing one year of service will receive no vacation pay. 
(f)  All earned vacation of employees who die in the service shall be paid in cash to the spouse or estate of said individual. 
(g)  Direct supervisors and/or the city manager are responsible for approving, in advance, the time the vacation is to be taken. Scheduling must be made at least 30 days prior to the start of vacation. 
(Ord. No. 917, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 98-109, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
Sec. 28-4-2. - Sick leave. 
All permanent, full-time employees are eligible for sick leave after one month of service. Sick leave with pay shall be granted for the following reasons: personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes beyond the employee's control; enforced quarantine of the employee in accordance with community health regulations, or to keep a doctor's or dentist's appointment. 
(a)  From the date of employment until the end of the city's fiscal year, an employee shall be granted a prorated sick leave credit based upon eight hours per month or 96 hours per year. 
(b)  Any absence from an employee's normal working shift shall be reported by the employee to the city clerk on or before the time he/she is expected to report for work. 
(c)  The city may require sufficient proof for the use of sick leave. All absences due to illness or injury which result in an absence of more than two days, shall be substantiated by a doctor's statement giving the nature of the illness or injury and attesting to the employee's physical incapacity to perform the duties of his/her position before sick leave pay will be granted. The city will not normally require a doctor's certificate for absences of two days or less, except in cases of suspected abuse. In case of absence in excess of ten days due to illness, a written release from a physician may be required by the city manager prior to return to work. 
(d)  An employee may not receive sick leave with pay and simultaneously receive compensation under worker's compensation laws or IMRF disability benefits. No pay may be received prior to earning sick leave credit. 
(e)  All permanent employees will be granted eight hours per month; or 96 hours sick leave per calendar year. 
Employees shall be entitled to accrued sick leave up to a maximum of not more than 396 hours. The city agrees to pay out sick leave up to 396 hours if an employee quits or retires. Employees who are terminated for cause shall be entitled to have their accumulated sick leave paid out. A new employee must be employed by the city for over one year to be paid out any sick leave accumulated. Any employee who retires from the city shall have his or her accumulated sick leave credited to his or her IMRF years of service. A maximum of one year pension credit for member at the rate of 1/20 of a month for each full day of sick leave accumulated under an established IMRF Sick Leave Plan. The city will provide information to the employees when requested. Regular sick leave will be posted on paycheck stubs. 
The employee shall notify his immediate supervisor or the city manager, no later than work time on the day when sick leave is required. An employee shall be allowed two days off for illness before he or she is required to present, upon returning to work after each illness, a doctor or dentist certification. Straight time will be paid for authorized sick leave used. If any absence [is] of more than ten days due to illness, a written release from the doctor, approving return to work, can be required. 
(f)  The city clerk shall maintain a current list of accumulated sick leave. 
(g)  Sick leave will be paid at the employee's straight time wage rate when authorized. 
(Ord. No. 15-02, § 1, 1-5-15)  
Sec. 28-4-3. - Injury leave. 
All employees of the city are eligible for compensation under the State of Illinois Workers' Compensation Act in cases involving job related injury. The City recognizes and will abide by the provisions of Chapter 5, Section 345/1 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes regarding policemen injured in the line of duty.  
Sec. 28-4-4. - Military leave. 
(a)  Definitions. Military duty means training and service performed by an inductee, enlistee, or reservist, or any entrant into a temporary component of the armed forces of the United States and time spent in reporting for and returning from such training in service or, if a rejection occurs, from the place of reporting for service. It also includes active duty training as a reservist in the armed forces of the United States or as a member of the National Guard of the United States where the call is for training only. 
(b)  Eligibility. Any permanent employee who has completed his/her probationary period and who leaves the city service for compulsory military duty shall be placed on military leave without pay, such leave to extend through a date of 30 days after his/her release from the service. Also a permanent employee who has completed his/her probationary period shall be granted leave of absence for the purpose of being inducted or otherwise entering military service. If not accepted for such duty, the employee shall be reinstated in his/her position without loss of seniority or status reduction in pay. 
(c)  Restoration. Any employee returning from military leave shall be entitled to restoration to his/her former position, provided he/she makes application within 30 days after his/her release under conditions other than dishonorable, (this will warrant review before reinstatement), and is physically and mentally capable of performing the duties of the position involved. In the event that the position he/she vacates no longer exists at the time he/she qualified for return to work, such persons shall be entitled to be re-employed in another existing position of the same class provided such employment does not necessitate the laying off of another person with greater seniority. 
(d)  Disposition of vacation and sick leave. A regular employee who leaves the service directly for such military leave without pay may elect to be paid for any accrued vacation as he/she may be entitled to if he/she were actually separating from the city service. If the employee elects not to be paid for such leave, the accrued leave credits shall be reinstated upon return of the employee. Employees returned to duty under this provision shall have unused sick leave credits restored for their use. 
(e)  Military reserve training. A regular employee who has completed his/her probationary period and who is a member of any reserve component of the United States Armed Forces will be allowed military leave without pay for required training or duty for a period not exceeding 15 working days during any one calendar year. In the event that the time of such training is optional, the time shall be designated at the discretion of the city. 
(f)  National Guard Service. All employees who are members of the National Guard shall be entitled to military leave without pay from the city duties at times during which they shall be engaged in field training ordered or authorized at times when they are called into the actual service of the state by the commander in chief. 
(g)  Leave options. An employee on military leave may use vacation leave or leave without pay.  
Sec. 28-4-5. - Civil leave. 
Any employee shall be given necessary time off without loss of pay when performing jury duty, performing emergency civilian duty in connection with national defense, and for the purpose of voting when the polls are not open at least two hours before or after the employee's scheduled hours of work. In the case of an employee performing jury duty, all fees received (other than meal or travel allowances) shall be returned to the city.  
Sec. 28-4-6. - Leave without pay. 
The city manager may recommend and the city council may grant a regular employee leave without pay for a period not to exceed one year when it is in the interest of the city to do so. The employee request shall be considered when he/she has shown by his/her record to be of more than average value to the city and where it is desirable to retain the employee even at some sacrifice. During the employee's approved leave of absence his/her position may be filled by limited-term appointment, temporary promotion, or temporary assignment of any employee. At the expiration of the leave without pay the employee has the right to, and shall be reinstated to, the position he/she vacated if the position still exists, or, if not, to any other vacant position in the same class. Approved leave without pay shall not constitute a break in service.  
Sec. 28-4-7. - Funeral leave. 
Up to three days leave with straight time pay shall be granted an employee to attend the funeral of a member of his/her immediate family. (Immediate family shall include wife or husband, children, brother, sister, mother, father.) One day leave with pay shall be granted an employee to attend the funeral of an uncle, aunt, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, mother-in-law or father-in-law. The city manager may grant additional funeral leave for good cause.  
Sec. 28-4-8. - Maternity leave. 
(a)  The following leave shall be available for maternity purposes: 
(1)  All sick leave accrued by the employee. 
(2)  All vacation leave available to the employee in accordance with section 28-4-1 of these rules and regulations. 
(3)  Leave without pay. 
(b)  Return from leave due to maternity. Employees may return to work after being absent for the purpose of giving birth when they are physically able to do so. Before an employee may return to work she must present a doctor's certificate indicating that she is physically able to perform her duties.  
ARTICLE V. - HOLIDAYS 
 
Sec. 28-5-1. - Holiday pay. 
All employees shall receive time off on recognized, scheduled holidays with eight hours straight time pay, regardless of what day the holiday falls. If a holiday occurs on Saturday, it will be observed on the preceding Friday and if the holiday occurs on Sunday, it will be observed the following Monday.  
Sec. 28-5-2. - Schedule. 
(a)  New Year's Day. 
(b)  President's Day. 
(c)  Memorial Day. 
(d)  Independence Day. 
(e)  Labor Day. 
(f)  Thanksgiving Day. 
(g)  The Friday following Thanksgiving Day. 
(h)  Christmas Day. 
(i)  Good Friday. 
(j)  Martin Luther King Jr. Day. 
(k)  One personal day. 
(Ord. No. 917, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
ARTICLE VI. - PENSION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 28-6-1. - Pension. 
All eligible employees shall become members of the Illinois Municipal Retirement Program or the Police Pension Program and the Rules and Regulations of each fund are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROBATION, VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY SEPARATION AND RETIREMENT 
 
Sec. 28-7-1. - Definition of probation period. 
The probation period is a working test period to observe closely the employee's work, to secure the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his/her position, and to reject any employee whose performance does not meet required work standards.  
Sec. 28-7-2. - Duration of probationary period. 
The probationary period of all employees, except police officers, in a new position shall be six months long. The probationary period for new police officers shall be one year.  
Sec. 28-7-3. - Dismissal of probationary employees. 
During the probationary period, the city manager may remove any employee, who is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily or whose work habits and dependability do not merit the employee's continuance in the city service.  
Sec. 28-7-4. - Types of separation. 
All separation of city employees shall be designated as one of the following types: resignation, lay-off, disability, death, retirement, probationary termination and dismissal.  
Sec. 28-7-5. - City equipment. 
At the time of separation and prior to final payment, all records, assets and other items of city property in the employee's custody shall be transferred to the city manager. Any amount due because of a shortage in the above shall be withheld from the employee's final compensation or collected through other appropriate action.  
Sec. 28-7-6. - Rights of employees. 
Permanent employees who separate from city employment shall receive payment for all earned salary and all earned vacation leave subject to deductions for any indebtedness pursuant to section 28-7-5 of these rules and regulations.  
Sec. 28-7-7. - Resignation. 
An employee may resign by submitting in writing the reasons therein and the effective date to the city manager as far in advance as possible, but a minimum of two weeks notice is required.  
Sec. 28-7-8. - Layoff. 
The city may lay off an employee when it is deemed necessary by reason of shortage of funds for work, the abolition of the position, or other material changes in the duties of the position, or for related reasons which are outside the employee's control and which do not reflect discredit upon the service of the employee. The duties performed by any employee laid off may be reassigned to other employees already working. No permanent employee shall be laid off while another person in a classified position is employed on a probationary or temporary basis in the same class. 
(a)  Order of layoff. The layoff of employees shall be made in inverse order. This determination will be based on length of service in the job classification and in the department or division or other organizational unit involved.  
Sec. 28-7-9. - Disability. 
An employee may be placed on disability when he cannot perform the required duties because of physical or mental impairment. Action may be initiated by the employee, his/her legal representative or the city, but in all cases it must be supported by medical evidence acceptable to the city and examination at its expense and performed by a physician of its choice when it feels that an employee should be placed on disability. (Refer to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund for further disability data.) Employees who become permanently disabled shall be considered permanently separated from the city service and as such shall not be eligible for employee benefits described herein.  
Sec. 28-7-10. - Death. 
Separation shall be effective as of the date of death. All compensation due in accordance with section 28-7-6 of these rules and regulations shall be paid to the estate of the employee, except for such sum by law which must be paid to the surviving spouse.  
Sec. 28-7-11. - Retirement. 
City employees shall retire at age 70 unless the city council approves an extension.  
Sec. 28-7-12. - Probationary termination. 
For rules governing probationary termination refer to section 28-7-3 of these rules and regulations.  
Sec. 28-7-13. - Discretionary action. 
Whenever employee performance, attitude, work habits or personal conduct at any time falls below a desirable level, supervisors shall inform employees promptly and specifically of such lapses and give counsel and assistance. If appropriate and justified, a reasonable period of time for improvement may be allowed before initiating disciplinary action. In some instances a specific incident may justify severe disciplinary action in and of itself, however, the action to be taken depends on the seriousness of the incident and the whole pattern of the employee's past performance and conduct. 
(a)  Reprimand. In situations where an oral warning has not resulted in the expected improvement, or where more severe initial action is warranted, a written reprimand may be issued to the employee, and a copy shall be placed in the employee's personnel folder. 
(b)  Suspension. An employee may be suspended without pay for up to 30 working days in a calendar year by the city manager for reasons of misconduct, negligence, inefficiency, insubordination, unauthorized absence or other justifiable reasons when alternate personnel actions are not appropriate. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city manager to suspend an employee with or without pay prior to a dismissal hearing as provided for in section 28-7-13 of the rules. 
(d)  Suspension of a police officer. A police officer may be suspended by the chief of police or city manager for reasons of misconduct, negligence, inefficiency, insubordination, unauthorized absence or other justifiable reasons when alternate personnel actions are not appropriate. The city manager or the police chief shall state in writing, the reasons for the suspension of a police officer. At least five days prior to the effective date of the suspension, the city manager shall send to the employee written notice of the reasons for the proposed action, proposed effective date of the action, and a statement concerning the employee's right to request a hearing. If an employee requests a hearing within five days of the sending of the notice of the suspension it shall be conducted prior to the suspension taking effect. The hearing shall be conducted by the city council. The employee shall have a right to cross-examine witnesses against him and introduce evidence in his/her favor. Formal rules of evidence need not apply but only relevant and material evidence shall be considered. After hearing the evidence, the city council shall promptly render a decision, a copy of which shall be furnished to the employee either by certified mail or in person. 
The chief of police may suspend a police officer not to exceed five days in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 65, Section 5/10-2.1-17 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.  
Sec. 28-7-14. - Dismissal of an employee other than a police officer. 
(a)  The city manager may dismiss an employee, other than a police officer for the good of the service. Reasons for dismissal may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Incompetence, inefficiency, negligence, gross impropriety. 
(2)  Theft or malicious destruction of city property. 
(3)  Conviction of a felony. 
(4)  Unauthorized absences or abuse of leave privileges. 
(5)  Acceptance of valuable consideration which was given with the expectation of influencing the employee in the performance of his/her duties. 
(6)  Falsification of records or use of official position for personal advantage. 
(7)  Insubordination that constitute a serious breach of discipline. 
(8)  Giving false or misleading information concerning attendance, hours worked or earned leave time. 
(9)  Positive drug test. 
(10)  Not reporting for work for six consecutive months. 
(b)  The employee shall be furnished written notice, either by certified mail or in person, containing the nature of the proposed action at least five working days prior to such action. The notice shall contain the nature of the proposed action, the reason for such action and a statement concerning the employee's right to request a hearing. If the employee requests a hearing within five days of the sending of the notice, a hearing shall be conducted by the city council prior to the dismissal of the employee. The hearing shall be scheduled no sooner than five working days after the request for the hearing has been received unless the employee agrees to an earlier date. 
(c)  After receiving notice, but prior to the hearing or the effective date of the dismissal, the employee may be retained on duty status, placed on leave, or suspended with or without pay at the discretion of the city manager. 
(d)  Formal rules of evidence need not be adhered to at the hearing, but only relevant and material evidence shall be considered. The employee shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses and to submit evidence. 
(e)  After hearing the evidence, the city council shall promptly render a decision. The city council after hearing the evidence, may suspend, demote or dismiss the employee, or take other appropriate disciplinary action, or take no disciplinary action against the employee. The city council may also order the payment of any regular pay the employee would have earned during the pendency of the action. The decision of the city council is final. 
(f)  If the employee fails to respond to the advance notice, the proposed action of the city manager shall be effective on the date specified with no need for further action.  
Sec. 28-7-15. - Dismissal of a police officer. 
(a)  The chief of police or city manager may dismiss any police officer for the good of the service in accordance with its rules and regulations and with the consent of the city council. Reasons for dismissal may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Incompetence, inefficiency, negligence, gross impropriety. 
(2)  Theft or malicious destruction of city property. 
(3)  Conviction of a felony. 
(4)  Unauthorized absences or abuse of leave privileges. 
(5)  Acceptance of valuable consideration which was given with the expectation of influencing the employee in the performance of his/her duties. 
(6)  Falsification of records or use of official position for personal gain. 
(7)  Insubordination that constitutes a serious breach of discipline. 
(8)  Giving false or misleading information concerning attendance, hours worked or earned leave time. 
(9)  Positive drug test. 
(10)  Not reporting for work for six consecutive months. 
(b)  Prior to dismissing a police officer, the city council shall conduct a hearing on the charges presented. The conduct of said hearing shall be governed by the rules and regulations set forth by the City Code.  
ARTICLE VIII. - INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 28-8-1. - Insurance. 
The city shall provide health and life insurance to full time, permanent employees. Employee contribution for dependent coverage will be required based on the approved rate structure. 
(Ord. No. 880, 10-5-02; Ord. No. 00-112, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-3-09)  
ARTICLE IX. - EQUAL EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sec. 28-9-1. - No discrimination policy. 
No person shall be discriminated against in any aspect of employment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap or disability, ancestry, marital status, political affiliation, or any other prohibited form of discrimination under federal or state law or government contact or grant regulations. 
All employees shall adhere to this non-discriminatory policy. 
Any and all affirmative action plans in effect shall also apply with regard to equal opportunity employment. 
Sexual harassment in the workplace is considered by employer to be a form of sex discrimination, and no employee shall engage in any form of sexual harassment in the workplace. 
Any employee, person or individual who feels in any way wronged, harassed, interfered with, or discriminated against should immediately contact the city manager. The city manager shall investigate the matter and take appropriate action in compliance with the law. No employee shall be retaliated against by the co-employees, supervisors or employer for making a complaint pursuant to this section.  
Sec. 28-9-2. - No harassment policy. 
The city does not tolerate harassment of our job applicants, employees or clients. Any form of harassment related to an employee's race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, age, citizenship status, disability or handicap, is a violation of this policy and will be treated as a disciplinary matter. Sexual harassment is unlawful. Under Illinois law, sexual harassment is defined as any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment, (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. The term harassment also includes, but is not limited to slurs, jokes, other verbal, graphic, or physical conduct relating to an individual's race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, age, citizenship status, disability or handicap. 
Violation of this policy by an employee shall subject that employee to disciplinary action up to and including immediate discharge. 
If you feel that you are being harassed based upon your race, color, sex, religion, national origin, age, citizenship status, disability or handicap, you should at once make your feelings known to the city manager. The matter will be investigated, and where appropriate, disciplinary action taken. If you do not feel that the matter can be discussed with the city manager, or if you are not satisfied with the way your report has been handled, arrange for a conference with the city council to discuss your complaint. Never assume that the city or the city manager is aware of the harassment. It is your responsibility to report incidents you know about. 
The policy refers not only to supervisor/subordinate actions, but also applies to actions between co-workers. Harassment of employees in connection with their work by non-employees may also be a violation of this policy. Any employee who becomes aware of any harassment of an employee by a non-employee should report such harassment to his/her supervisor. Appropriate action will be taken with respect to violation of this policy by a non-employee. If the non-employee is acting on behalf of another employee, that may include the dismissal of the instigating employee and contacting the appropriate authorities. If the non-employee is acting on their own behalf, it will consist of any number of appropriate actions, which may include, but not be limited to, contacting the authorities. 
Employees also may report violations of this policy to the Illinois Department of Human Rights or the Illinois Human Rights Commission. The department's Springfield, Illinois telephone number is (217) 785-5100, and the commission's number is (217) 785-4350. Once a complaint is filed with the department, an investigator will be assigned and will conduct a thorough investigation of the allegations before making a determination. No employee will be subjected to retaliation for making a good faith claim of harassment or discrimination. 
(Ord. No. 00-116, 9-5-00)  
ARTICLE X. - WEAPONS POLICY 
 
Sec. 28-10-1. - Purpose. 
The City of Mascoutah strives to maintain a safe workplace environment for its employees and visitors. Workplace safety is enhanced by adopting this "No-Weapons" policy. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-2. - Applicability. 
This policy applies to (a) all officials and employees at all times while on or in city property, whether on duty or off duty, or while performing any duties for or on behalf of the city, except as provided for in section 28-10-5 ("city officials"); and (b) all clients, guests, and other persons who are not city officials, including contractors and vendors, and their personnel at all times while on or in city property. See the definitions of "city officials", "city property", and "visitor" under section 28-10-3. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-3. - Definitions. 
City officials mean all officials and employees at all times while on or in city property, whether on duty or off duty, or while performing any duties for or on behalf of the city. 
City property means every building and property, or portion of a building or property, owned or leased by or other under the control of, the city. "City property" also means every city-owned or leased vehicle. 
Tools means devices commonly recognized as tools useful for city purposes, when being used for city purposes or kept in their usual storage location. 
Visitor means every person other than a city official, as described in phrase (b) under section 28-10-4. 
Weapon means: 
(a)  Knives, except that the following knives are not prohibited: (i) common kitchen knives such as dinner knives, steak knives, and carving knives, but only in kitchen and break room areas; and (ii) common folding pocket knives with no blade longer than three inches. 
(b)  Devices from which a projectile can be fired, but not including tools as defined in this policy. 
(c)  Electronic devices such as tasers, stun guns and other conducted electrical weapons. 
(d)  Firearms of all types and sizes, whether loaded or unloaded. 
(e)  Clubs and any other instrument or object that can be used in a club-like manner and the presence of which poses a reasonable risk to others, but not including tools as defined in this policy. 
(f)  Any device designed primarily for a destructive purpose, but not including tools as defined in this policy. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-4. - Weapons prohibited. 
(a)  City officials. Except as provided under section 28-10-5, no city official may wear, carry, store, transport, or otherwise possess a weapon at any time in or on city property or while performing any duties for or on behalf of the city. Examples of prohibited times and places include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Performing work for the city at any location including private residences (excluding the city official's residence) and commercial establishments and other customer or client locations; 
(2)  Driving or riding as a passenger in a city vehicle; 
(3)  Attending trade shows, conferences, or training on behalf of the city; 
(4)  Attending city directed or sponsored activities or events (intended for city employees only and not the general public) independent of venue; 
(5)  Riding any type of mass transit while on city business; 
(6)  Working off-site on behalf of the city (excluding the city official's residence); and 
(7)  Performing emergency or on-call work for the city after normal business hours and on weekends. 
(b)  Visitors. Except as provided under section 28-10-5, no visitor may wear, carry, store, transport, or otherwise possess a weapon in or on city property at any time (see parking lots below for further information). 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-5. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Police officers and other designated personnel. City police officers and other city employees who have been specifically designated or deputized may possess their work-authorized weapons. Police officers or similar law enforcement officers from other departments or agencies may possess their work-authorized weapons while engaged in official duties. 
(b)  Governmental. A state or federal governmental employee may possess his or her work-authorized weapons if engaged in official duties and required by law or regulation to possess a weapon. 
(c)  Parking lots. A city official or visitor may keep a weapon in his or her personal vehicle properly parked and locked in a city parking lot or parking area, so long as the weapon is kept in compliance with all applicable federal and State laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-6. - Inspections. 
City representatives may inspect or search any workplace area and any city property, at any time, for the presence of a weapon. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-7. - Violations. 
Any violation of this policy by a city official will subject a city employee to discipline, up to and including termination, and subject to arrest for any applicable state statutes. 
Any violation of this policy by a visitor will subject the visitor to removal from city property, prohibition from returning to any city property, and subject to arrest for any applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-8. - Concealed carrying prohibited. 
All city property is a "prohibited area" under Section 65 of the Illinois Firearms Concealed Carry Act and thus, concealed carrying in or on any City Property is not authorized by Illinois law. Accordingly, and in all events, concealed carrying is not an exception to this policy. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Sec. 28-10-9. - Responsibility. 
All city employees shall have the responsibility of familiarizing themselves with this Policy and adhering to it. 
Any city official who sees or perceives a violation of this policy must report that violation to his or her supervisor or, in the supervisor's absence, to the city manager or, in an emergency, to the police department. 
No person should take any action that will risk his or her safety or the safety of others. No person should attempt to restrain or forcibly evict an individual with a weapon from city premises. Instead, a person may inform that individual of this policy and ask for compliance. If that individual does not comply, then the person should contact the police department immediately. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-7-14)  
Chapter 29 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE  
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1-1. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Existing Structures Code of the City, hereinafter referred to as "this Code".  
Sec. 29-1-2. - Scope. 
This Code is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in all existing structures and on all existing premises by: 
(a)  Establishing minimum maintenance standards for all structures and premises for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for space, use and location; and for safe and sanitary maintenance of all structures and premises now in existence. 
(b)  Establishing minimum requirements for all existing buildings and structures for means for egress, fire protection systems and other equipment and devices necessary for life safety from fire. 
(c)  Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all structures. 
(d)  Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(e)  Providing for rehabilitation and reuse of existing structures and allowing differences between the application of the code requirements to new construction and the application of the code requirements to alterations and repairs.  
Sec. 29-1-3. - Intent. 
This Code shall be construed liberally and justly to insure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued use and maintenance of structures and premises.  
Sec. 29-1-4. - Other regulations. 
The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other codes or regulations which prescribe standards other than are provided herein.  
Sec. 29-1-5. - Application of other codes. 
Any repairs or alterations to a structure, or changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the plumbing code and mechanical code. (Section 29-1-1)  
Sec. 29-1-6. - Existing remedies. 
The provisions in this Code shall not be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe, and unsanitary.  
Sec. 29-1-7. - Workmanship. 
All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are required for compliance with this Code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as to secure the results intended by this Code.  
Sec. 29-1-8. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VALIDITY 
 
Sec. 29-1-9. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this Code are hereby declared to be severable.  
Sec. 29-1-10. - Saving clause. 
This Code shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date hereto, and any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.  
Sec. 29-1-11. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXISTING STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 29-1-12. - Other ordinances. 
As provided in division 1, this Code establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all structures and premises and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established by ordinance which may be additional or more stringent for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of structures, equipment or facilities.  
Sec. 29-1-13. - Alterations or repairs. 
Alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to that required of a new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all the requirements of the code for new construction provided such work conforms to that required by this Code. Alteration or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building. Alterations or repairs to an existing structure which are structural, or adversely affect any structural member or any part of the structure having a required fire resistance rating, shall be made with materials as required for a new structure.  
Sec. 29-1-14. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 29-1-15. - Approved materials and equipment. 
All materials, equipment and devices approved for use by the code official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.  
Sec. 29-1-16. - Modifications. 
When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out structural or mechanical provisions or this Code or of any approved rule, the code official may vary or modify such provision upon application of the owner or the owner's representative, provided that the spirit and intent of the law shall be observed and public welfare and safety assured. 
(a)  Records. The application for modification and the final decision of the code official shall be in writing and shall be officially recorded in the permanent records of the department.  
Sec. 29-1-17. - Used materials and equipment. 
Used materials, equipment and devices may be used provided they have been reconditioned, tested and placed in good and proper working condition and approved for use by the code official.  
Sec. 29-1-18. - Alternative materials and equipment. 
The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any such alternative has been approved. The code official may approve any such alternative provided the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this Code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.  
Sec. 29-1-19. - Research and investigation. 
The code official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any material or assembly, and if it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory proof of performance for the use intended, the code official may approve its use subject to the requirements of this Code. The costs of all tests, reports and investigations required under these provisions shall be paid by the applicant.  
Sec. 29-1-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 29-1-21. - Officer. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the code official to enforce the provisions of this Code as herein provided.  
Sec. 29-1-22. - Relief from personal liability. 
Any code official, officer or employee who acts in good faith and without malice in the discharge of duties that may accrue to persons or property as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act. Further, the code official shall not be held liable for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted by the code official in the enforcement of this Code. In any of these actions, the official or employee shall be defended or represented by the jurisdiction's attorney-at-law until the final termination of the proceedings.  
Sec. 29-1-23. - Official records. 
An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this Code, and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times and under reasonable regulations established by the code official to maintain the integrity and security of such records.  
Sec. 29-1-24. - Appointment of code official. 
The code official shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and shall be a person knowledgeable in all aspects of the building trades.  
Sec. 29-1-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF CODE OFFICIAL 
 
Sec. 29-1-26. - General. 
The code official shall enforce all the provisions of this Code except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by other regulations.  
Sec. 29-1-27. - Notices and orders. 
The code official shall issue all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to insure compliance with this Code's requirements for the safety, health, and general welfare of the public.  
Sec. 29-1-28. - Inspections. 
In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the code official is authorized to enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this Code provided that any owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the structure or premises be informed of the complaint lodged against said structure or premises prior to entry by the code official.  
Sec. 29-1-29. - Nonconforming conditions. 
If additional nonconforming conditions are encountered during the course of any approved alteration or repair which were not considered or known initially, the code official shall have the authority to require compliance with this Code of such additional conditions. The determination of what may be necessary to bring such conditions into compliance shall take into consideration the use of alternatives and equivalent approaches as provided for in this Code. The code official shall have the authority to approve construction changes in the field when conditions are encountered which make the originally approved work impractical, provided such changes in approved work can be readily determined to be in compliance with this Code and are requested by the owner or the owner's agent prior to such construction changes. Such changes shall be specifically documented by the owner or the owner's agent describing the change in work and the reasons and justification for the change, and shall be filed with the permit for the project.  
Sec. 29-1-30. - Right of entry. 
If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this Code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this Code is sought, the city may refuse issuance of an occupancy permit. Additionally, the administrative authority may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant, or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference. 
(Ord. No. 03-117, 10-20-03)  
Sec. 29-1-31. - Access by owner or operator. 
Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or employee, access to any part of such structure or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 29-1-32. - Credentials. 
The code official or the code official's authorized representative shall disclose proper credentials of their respective office for the purpose of inspecting any and all buildings and premises in the performance of duties under this Code.  
Sec. 29-1-33. - Coordination of enforcement. 
Inspection of premises, the issuance of notices and orders and enforcement, thereof shall be the responsibility of code official so charged by the jurisdiction. Whenever, in the opinion of a code official initiating an inspection under the Code, it is deemed necessary or desirable to have inspections by any other department, the code official shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such inspections so as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors, and to confer with the other departments for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. A department shall not, however, delay the issuance of any emergency orders which it determines must be issued.  
Sec. 29-1-34. - Rule making authority. 
The code official shall have power as may be necessary in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare, to establish rules to interpret and implement the provisions of this Code to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions; but such rules shall not have the effect of waiving working stresses or fire protection requirements specifically provided in this Code or violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety.  
Sec. 29-1-35. - Annual report. 
At least annually, the code official shall submit to the chief authority of the jurisdiction a written statement of operations in the form and content as shall be prescribed by such authority.  
Secs. 29-1-36, 29-1-37. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 29-1-38. - General. 
When a structure or part thereof is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure or part thereof is found unfit for human occupancy or use, or is found unlawful, it may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this Code and may be placarded and vacated. It shall not be reoccupied without approval of the code official. Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed out of service.  
Sec. 29-1-39. - Unsafe structure. 
An unsafe structure is one in which all or part thereof is found to be dangerous to life, health, property, or the safety of the public or its occupants by not providing minimum safeguards for protection from fire or because it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that it is likely to partially or completely collapse.  
Sec. 29-1-40. - Unsafe equipment. 
Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that it is found to be a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. Unsafe equipment may contribute to the finding that the structure is unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use.  
Sec. 29-1-41. - Structure unfit for human occupancy. 
A structure is unfit for human occupancy or use whenever the code official finds that it is unsafe, unlawful, or because of the degree in which it lacks maintenance or is in disrepair, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this Code, or because its location constitutes a hazard to its occupants or to the public.  
Sec. 29-1-42. - Unlawful structure. 
An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this Code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.  
Sec. 29-1-43. - Closing of vacant structures. 
If the structure or part thereof is vacant and unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official may post a placard of condemnation on the premises and may order the structure closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance to youngsters. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause it to be closed through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.  
Sec. 29-1-44. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - NOTICES AND ORDERS 
 
Sec. 29-1-45. - Notice to owner to person or persons responsible. 
Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this Code or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, or whenever the code official has condemned any structure or equipment under the provisions of division 8, notice shall be given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefore in the manner prescribed below. If the code official has condemned the property or part thereof, the code official shall give notice to the owner and to the occupants of the intent to placard and to vacate the property or to order equipment out of service.  
Sec. 29-1-46. - Form. 
Such notice prescribed in section 29-1-45 shall: 
(a)  Be in writing; 
(b)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(c)  Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued; 
(d)  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 29-1-47. - Service. 
Such service shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally; or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone in the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof; or known address with return receipt requested; or if the certified or registered letter is returned with receipt showing that it has not been delivered, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice, and at least one publication of such notice in a local newspaper of general circulation.  
Sec. 29-1-48. - Service on occupant. 
When a condemnation order is served on an occupant other than the owner or person responsible for such compliance, a reasonable time to vacate the property after noncompliance shall be stated. Owners or persons responsible for compliance must vacate at the time set for correction of defects if there is failure of compliance.  
Sec. 29-1-49. - Penalties. 
Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 29-1-60.  
Sec. 29-1-50. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repair required by such compliance order or notice of violation.  
Sec. 29-1-51. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - PLACARDING 
 
Sec. 29-1-52. - Placarding of structure. 
After the condemnation notice required under the provision of this Code has resulted in an order by virtue of failure to comply within the time given, the code official may post on the premises or structure or parts thereof, or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the words: Condemned as unfit for human occupancy or use, and a statement of the penalties provided for any occupancy or use or for removing the placard. The owner or the person or persons responsible for the correction of violations shall have removed themselves from the property on failure to comply with the correction order in the time specified, but other occupants shall be given a reasonable time to vacate.  
Sec. 29-1-53. - Prohibited use. 
Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or structure or part thereof, or shall use placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises shall be liable for the penalties provided by this Code.  
Sec. 29-1-54. - Removal of placard. 
The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code.  
Sec. 29-1-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - EMERGENCY ORDERS 
 
Sec. 29-1-56. - General. 
Whenever the code official finds that an emergency exists on any premises, or in any structure or part thereof, or on any defective equipment which requires immediate action to protect the public's health and safety or that of the occupants thereof, the code official may with proper notice and service in accordance with the provisions of sections 29-1-45 to 29-1-48 issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring the vacating of the premises or such action taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, such order shall be effective immediately, and the premises or equipment involved shall be placarded immediately upon service of the order.  
Sec. 29-1-57. - Hearing. 
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith. They may thereafter, upon petition directed to the property maintenance appeals board, be afforded a hearing as prescribed in this Code. Depending upon the findings of the board at such hearing as to whether the provisions of this Code and the rules and regulation adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the board shall continue such order or modify or revoke it.  
Sec. 29-1-58. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 29-1-59. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this Code, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 29-1-60. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $75.00 nor more than $750.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Sec. 29-1-61. - Prosecution. 
In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the code official may request the jurisdiction's legal representative to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty provided in section 29-1-60. Also the code official may ask the legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person: 
(a)  To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work; 
(b)  To restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such structure; 
(c)  To require the removal of work in violation; or 
(d)  To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of or not in compliance with, the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued.  
Sec. 29-1-62. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - RIGHT TO APPEAL 
 
Sec. 29-1-63. - Petition. 
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Code, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the property maintenance appeals board. Said person shall file, in the office of the property maintenance appeals board, a written petition within 20 days after the day the notice was served requesting such hearing and containing a statement of the grounds therefore.  
Sec. 29-1-64. - Property maintenance appeals board. 
In order to protect existing structures in the jurisdiction by vigorous enforcement of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a property maintenance appeals board, hereafter referred to as the board. The board shall consist of the City Council of the City of Mascoutah.  
Sec. 29-1-65. - Vote. 
The board shall hear all appeals relative to the enforcement of this Code, and by a concurring vote of the majority of its members may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify, the decision appealed from, and shall make such order or determination as in its opinion ought to be made. Failure to secure such concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the code official.  
Sec. 29-1-66. - Financial interest. 
A member of the board shall not participate in any hearings or vote on any appeal in which that member has a direct or indirect financial interest, or is engaged as a contractor, or is engaged in the preparation of plans and specifications, or in which that member has any personal interest.  
Sec. 29-1-67. - Records. 
The secretary of the board shall be the city clerk and he/she shall keep a record of each meeting so that the record shows clearly the basis for each decision made by the board.  
Sec. 29-1-68. - Meetings, quorum. 
All meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the mayor and at such times as the board may determine, provided that the establishment of the meeting date, time, and location are consistent with the overall intent of this division and are in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and other applicable state laws.  
Sec. 29-1-69. - Consulting or hiring of experts. 
The board shall have the right to consult or hire such experts as it deems necessary.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-2-1. - Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings indicated in this article.  
Sec. 29-2-2. - Interchangeability. 
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the singular.  
Sec. 29-2-3. - Terms defined in other codes. 
Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the building, plumbing or mechanical codes, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.  
Sec. 29-2-4. - Terms not defined. 
Where terms are not defined, through the methods authorized by this section, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context may imply.  
Sec. 29-2-5. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLIED MEANING OF WORDS AND TERMS 
 
Sec. 29-2-6. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Approved: Approved, as applied to a material, device, or method of construction, shall mean approved by the code official under the provisions of this Code, or approved by other authority designated by law to give approval in the matter in question. 
Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Building Code: The Building Code officially adopted by the legislative body of this jurisdiction, or such other code as may be officially designated by the legislative body of the jurisdiction for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures. 
Building inspector: The city official designated by the jurisdiction to enforce the zoning and subdivision codes of the City of Mascoutah, or a duly authorized representative. 
Central heating: The heating system permanently installed and adjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments from a source outside of these rooms. 
Code official: The code enforcement officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this Property Maintenance Code, or any duly authorized representative. 
Condemn: To adjudge unfit for use or occupancy. 
Condemnation: The act of judicially condemning. 
Dwellings: See City of Mascoutah Zoning Code. 
Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Enforcement officer: The code enforcement officer designated herein or otherwise charged with the responsibilities of administering this Code, or the officials authorized representative. 
Exterior property areas: The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
Family: An individual or married couple and the children thereof with not more than two other persons related directly to the individual or married couple by blood or marriage; or a group of not more than five unrelated (excluding servants) persons, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
Garbage: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Habitable space: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
Hotel: See City of Mascoutah Zoning Code. 
Infestation: The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
Junk vehicle: Any vehicle which is without a currently valid license plate or plates and is in either a rusted, wrecked, discharged, dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative, or abandoned condition. A junk vehicle shall be classified as to its condition in one of the two following categories: 
(a)  Restorable. A junk vehicle that is in a condition whereby repairs to same could be made to place it in operating condition without exceeding the estimated value when repaired. 
(b)  Wreck. A junk vehicle in such condition that it is economically unsound to restore same to operating condition considering the repairs to be made, age of the vehicle, market value of the vehicle if it were restored, or in such condition that the public officer determines that it warrants such classification. 
The code official shall make the final determination as to the classification to be assigned to any one particular vehicle. 
Let for occupancy or let: To permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure by a person who shall be legal owner or not be the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
Maintenance: Acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the condition of grounds, structures, and equipment; such that the condition does not fall below the standards established by this Code and other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances. 
Motel: See City of Mascoutah Zoning Code. 
Multi-family (multiple) dwellings: See "dwellings". 
Occupant: Any person over five years of age (including domestic service employees) living and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a building. 
Openable area: The part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which open directly to the outdoors. 
Operator: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such persons, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person: Includes a corporation or co-partnership as well as an individual. 
Plumbing: The practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances within the scope of the plumbing code. 
Plumbing fixture: A receptacle or device is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, liquidborne waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises. 
Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Public nuisance: Includes the following: 
(a)  The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law; 
(b)  Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances, considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures; 
(c)  Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; 
(d)  Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use; 
(e)  Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or are manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb or property; 
(f)  Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by this Code have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided; 
(g)  Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds, or; 
(h)  Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises. 
Renovation: A building and its facilities made to conform to present day minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety. 
Residential building: A building in which sleeping accommodations or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided; except when classified as an institution under the Building Code. 
Rooming house: A building or portion thereof designated or used exclusively for living quarters for one or more families. 
Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Rubbish: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Structure: That which is built or constructed, including without limitation because of, enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground. 
Supplied: Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator. 
Ventilation: The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
(a)  Mechanical. Ventilation by power-driven devices. 
(b)  Natural. Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks without wind-driven devices. 
Workmanlike: Whenever the words "workmanlike state of maintenance and repair" are used in this Code, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonable skilled manner. 
Yard: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the entire length of street, or rear or interior lot line. 
Written complaint form: The official form to be completed by the party lodging a complaint against a structure or premises thought to be in non-compliance with this Code.  
Sec. 29-2-7. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-3-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions for maintenance of exterior property, premises and structures. Premises shall comply with the conditions herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.  
Sec. 29-3-2. - Responsibility. 
The owner of the premises shall maintain such structures and premises in compliance with these requirements.  
Sec. 29-3-3. - Vacant structures and land. 
All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.  
Sec. 29-3-4. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PREMISES CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 29-3-5. - Sanitation. 
All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.  
Sec. 29-3-6. - Grading and drainage. 
All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Stagnant water shall be determined as any accumulation that has not dispersed within seven days of the last recorded local rainfall. 
Exception: Water retention areas and/or reservoirs approved by the code official.  
Sec. 29-3-7. - Insect and rat control. 
An owner of a structure or property shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests in all interior areas of the premises, except that the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the interior areas of the premises of a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the premises of other than a single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.  
Sec. 29-3-8. - Public areas. 
All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas for public use shall be kept in proper state of repair, free of all snow, ice, mud, overhanging trees and shrubs which obstruct walkways and other debris and shall be maintained free of hazardous conditions. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof by virtue of its state of repair shall constitute a danger to public health and safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portions thereof shall be replaced. Steps shall comply with the requirements for exterior stairs.  
Sec. 29-3-9. - Noxious weeds. 
All areas shall be kept free from weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public health and welfare as per Chapter 505 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.  
Sec. 29-3-10. - Exhaust vents. 
A person shall not construct, maintain, or operate pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers discharging gases, steam vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odor or other gaseous or particulate wastes so as to discharge directly upon abutting or adjacent public and private property or that of another tenant.  
Sec. 29-3-11. - Accessory structures. 
All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in compliance with sections 29-3-15 to 29-3-21, et seq. of this Code.  
Sec. 29-3-12. - Motor vehicles. 
Motor vehicles shall be subject to the following requirements of section 29-3-13.  
Sec. 29-3-13. - Residential areas. 
Except as provided in other regulations, not more than one currently unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked on any property in a residential district, and said vehicle shall not at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or shall it be in the process of being stripped or dismantled. A vehicle of any type shall not at any time undergo major overhaul, including body work, in a residential district unless such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area.  
Sec. 29-3-14. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXTERIOR STRUCTURE 
 
Sec. 29-3-15. - General. 
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to occupants from the adverse effects on the environment.  
Sec. 29-3-16. - Street numbers. 
Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have the number so assigned displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. The minimum size of the numbers and letters shall be four inches.  
Sec. 29-3-17. - Structural members. 
All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them.  
Sec. 29-3-18. - Exterior surfaces (foundations, walls and roof). 
Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rats. 
(a)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, so as not to be detrimental to public safety and welfare. 
(b)  Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface materials, including wood, composition, or metal siding, shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface coated when required to prevent deterioration. 
(c)  Roofs and drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and not have defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the building. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance to owners or occupants of adjacent premises, or that creates a public nuisance. 
(d)  Decorative features. All cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbells, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(e)  Signs, marquees, and awnings. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition. They shall be protected from the elements and against decay and rust by the periodic application of a weather-coating material such as paint or other protective treatment. 
(f)  Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(g)  Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, fire escape, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. Every stair, porch, fire escape shall be maintained free of hazardous conditions and other debris. 
Every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high shall have a handrail on at least one side of the stair, and every open portion of a stair, fire escape, porch, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the grade below shall have guardrails. Every handrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.  
Sec. 29-3-19. - Window and door frames. 
Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible, and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling or structure. 
(a)  Weathertight. Every window, door and frame shall be fitted reasonable in its frame and be weathertight. Weather stripping shall be used to exclude wind or rain from entering the dwelling or structure and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(b)  Glazing. Every required window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing materials which are without open cracks and holes. 
(c)  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. 
(d)  Insect screens. Every door, window or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes shall be supplied with approved screening and every swinging screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
(e)  Door hardware. Every exterior door and its hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks on all doors entering dwelling units shall be in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door. 
(f)  Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rats, rain and surface drainage water into the structure. 
(g)  Guards for basement windows. Every basement window which is openable shall be supplied with rat proof shields, or storm windows or other material affording protection against entry of rats.  
Sec. 29-3-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INTERIOR STRUCTURE 
 
Sec. 29-3-21. - General. 
The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or visitors, and to protect the occupants from adverse effects of the environment.  
Sec. 29-3-22. - Structural members. 
The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads.  
Sec. 29-3-23. - Interior surfaces. 
Floors, walls (including windows and doors) ceilings, and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. 
(a)  Lead based paint. Lead based paint with a lead content of more than 0.5 percent shall not be applied to any interior or exterior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit or child care facility, including fences and outbuildings at these locations. Existing interior and exterior painted surfaces of dwelling units and child care facilities that contain an excess of 0.5 percent lead shall be removed or covered with paneling or other suitable covering approved by the code official. 
(b)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.  
Sec. 29-3-24. - Free from dampness. 
In every building, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure.  
Sec. 29-3-25. - Sanitation. 
The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, refuse or garbage. Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under section 29-7-2.  
Sec. 29-3-26. - Storage. 
Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in public halls or stairways.  
Sec. 29-3-27. - Insect and rat harborage. 
All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat infestation, and where insects or rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.  
Sec. 29-3-28. - Exit doors. 
Every door available as a public exit as approved by fire official shall be capable of being opened easily from the inside and without the use of a key as approved by the fire official.  
Sec. 29-3-29. - Stairs, porches and railings. 
Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in the Building Code. 
(a)  Exit facilities. All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads. 
(b)  Handrails and guardrails. Every flight of stairs which is more than four risers shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the Building Code, and every open portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.  
Sec. 29-3-30. - Reserved.  
Sec. 29-3-31. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for the light, ventilation and space for the occupancy of a structure. All light, ventilation and space conditions shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.  
Sec. 29-3-32. - Responsibility. 
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such light and ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. 
"A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any premises which do not comply with the following requirements of this article."  
Sec. 29-3-33. - Access to public property. 
All structures shall be provided access to public property. Such access means shall be maintained unobstructed.  
Sec. 29-3-34. - Open space. 
An open space when used for the origin of light and ventilation shall be maintained and unobstructed.  
Sec. 29-3-35. - Alternative devices. 
In place of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, alternative arrangement of window, louvers, or other methods and devices that will provide the equivalent minimum performance requirements shall be permitted when complying with the Building Code.  
Sec. 29-3-36. - Light; general. 
All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient natural or artificial light so as not to endanger health and safety. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room, except in kitchen when artificial light is provided in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code listed in appendix A. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors not to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
(b)  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in every building, other than one and two family dwellings, shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each 200 square feet (18.60 m 2 ) of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). Every exterior stairway shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot candle (10.76 lux) at floors, landings and treads. 
(c)  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe use of the space and the appliances, equipment and fixtures.  
Secs. 29-3-37, 29-3-38. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DWELLING UNIT LIMITATIONS 
 
Sec. 29-3-39. - Separation of units. 
Dwelling units shall be separate and apart from each other.  
Sec. 29-3-40. - Common access. 
A habitable space, bathroom, or water closet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall not open directly into or be used in conjunction with a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room, or similar room used for public purposes.  
Sec. 29-3-41. - Below grade rooms. 
Basement rooms shall not be used to meet the minimum gross floor area requirements of a dwelling unit unless such rooms are in accordance with this Code.  
Secs. 29-3-42, 29-3-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - SPACE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 29-3-44. - Overcrowding. 
The maximum occupancy of any dwelling unit shall not exceed the following requirements. 
(a)  A minimum of 150 feet of floor space shall be required for the first occupancy and 100 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor space shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. 
(b)  Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
TABLE 29-3-44 
MINIMUM OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS 
Minimum occupancy area in square feet (square meters) 
Space 	1—2 occupants 	3—5 occupants 	6 or more 
Living room 	No requirements 	120 (11.16) 	150 (13.95) 
Dining room 	No requirements 	80 (7.44) 	100 (9.30) 
Kitchen 	50 (4.65) 	50 (4.65) 	60 (5.58) 
 
Combined living room/dining room spaces will be construed as meeting the requirements of this table if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is so located that it may function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(Ord. No. 97-112; 07-07-97)  
Sec. 29-3-45. - Prohibited use. 
It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen, nonhabitable space or public space.  
Sec. 29-3-46. - Minimum ceiling heights. 
Habitable rooms shall have a clear ceiling height over the minimum area required by this Code at not less than seven feet (2.13m), except that those portions of an attic or top half-story floor area having a clear ceiling height of five feet (1.52m) or more may be included if at least one-third of such floor area has a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet (2.13m). In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524mm) or more may be included.  
Sec. 29-3-47. - Correctional institutional occupancies. 
It is not intended that this Code regulate the space requirements of correctional institutions.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— There was no Article IV so Article V was renumbered. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 29-4-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum plumbing facilities and fixtures to be provided. All plumbing facilities and fixtures shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.  
Sec. 29-4-2. - Responsibility. 
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and fixtures in compliance with these requirements. 
"A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any premises which do not comply with the following requirements of this article."  
Sec. 29-4-3. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REQUIRED FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 29-4-4. - Dwelling units. 
Every dwelling unit shall include its own plumbing facilities which are in proper condition, can be used in privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. The following minimum plumbing facilities set forth in paragraph (a) through (c) shall be supplied and maintained in sanitary, safe working condition. 
(a)  Water closet and lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls, a room separate from habitable spaces, which affords privacy and water closet supplied with cold running water. A lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in another room, in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(b)  Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person in said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(c)  Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a sink apart from the lavatory required under paragraph (a), and such sink shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.  
Sec. 29-4-5. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TOILET ROOMS 
 
Sec. 29-4-6. - Privacy. 
Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and arranged to provide privacy.  
Sec. 29-4-7. - Direct access. 
Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall not be used as a passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A toilet room or bathroom in a dwelling unit shall be accessible from any sleeping room without passing through another sleeping room.  
Sec. 29-4-8. - Floors. 
Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with subfloors of moisture resistant material.  
Sec. 29-4-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PLUMBING FIXTURES 
 
Sec. 29-4-10. - General. 
All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and usable condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be of approved nonabsorbent material.  
Sec. 29-4-11. - Connections. 
Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable of performing the function for which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code or Plumbing Code.  
Sec. 29-4-12. - Maintained clean and sanitary. 
All plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed insects and rats or produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.  
Sec. 29-4-13. - Access for cleaning. 
Plumbing fixtures shall be installed to permit easy access for cleaning both the fixture and the area about it.  
Sec. 29-4-14. - Water conservation. 
Plumbing fixtures which are replaced shall be of water saving construction and use as may be required by local energy and plumbing codes.  
Sec. 29-4-15. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 29-4-16. - General. 
Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.  
Sec. 29-4-17. - Contamination. 
The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the overflow rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets, and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.  
Sec. 29-4-18. - Supply. 
The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable them to function satisfactorily.  
Sec. 29-4-19. - Water heating facilities. 
Where hot water is provided, water heating facilities shall be installed in an approved manner, properly maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with the hot water. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not less than 110;deg;F 43;deg;C.  
Sec. 29-4-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - SEWAGE SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 29-4-21. - General. 
Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.  
Sec. 29-4-22. - Maintenance. 
Every plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code or Plumbing Code.  
Sec. 29-4-23. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - STORM DRAINAGE 
 
Sec. 29-4-24. - General. 
An approved system of storm water disposal shall be provided and maintained for the safe and efficient drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Article VI was renumbered Article V. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-5-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. All mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.  
Sec. 29-5-2. - Responsibility. 
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. 
"A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any premises which do not comply with the following requirements of this article."  
Sec. 29-5-3. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HEATING FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 29-5-4. - Residential buildings. 
Every dwelling unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65;deg;F or 18.33;deg;C in all habitable rooms when the outside temperature drops to O;deg;F or -16.16;deg;C).  
Sec. 29-5-5. - Cooking and heating equipment. 
All cooking and heating equipment, components, and accessories in every heating, cooking, and water heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions, and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident hazards. All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code, or other laws or ordinances applicable thereto. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited, except for approved residential type food trays or salvers which are heated by a candle or alcohol lamp.  
Sec. 29-5-6. - Installation. 
All mechanical equipment shall be properly installed and safely maintained in good working condition, and be capable of performing the function for which it was designed and intended. 
(a)  Flue. All fuel-burning equipment shall be connected to an approved chimney, flue or vent unless otherwise approved by the fire official. 
(b)  Clearance. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(c)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(d)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space shall be provided the fuel-burning equipment.  
Sec. 29-5-7. - Fireplaces. 
Fireplaces, and other construction and devices intended for use similar to a fireplace, shall be stable and structurally safe and connected to approved chimneys.  
Sec. 29-5-8. - Climate control. 
When facilities for interior climate control (heating, cooling, and/or humidity) are integral functions of structures used as dwelling units or other occupancies, such facilities shall be maintained and operated in a continuous manner in accordance with the designed capacity.  
Sec. 29-5-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 29-5-10. - Installation. 
All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.  
Sec. 29-5-11. - Defective system. 
Where it is found, in the opinion of the code official, that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.  
Secs. 29-5-12, 29-5-13. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-6-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. All structures shall be constructed and maintained to prevent and avoid fire hazards, and in a manner conducive to fire safety. All fire safety facilities and equipment shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.  
Sec. 29-6-2. - Responsibility. 
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements and the Fire Prevention Code. 
"A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any premises which do not comply with the following requirements of this article."  
Sec. 29-6-3. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEANS OF EGRESS 
 
Sec. 29-6-4. - General. 
A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, or to a yard, court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade.  
Sec. 29-6-5. - Direct exit. 
Every dwelling unit shall have access directly to the outside or to an exit access corridor that leads directly to the outside.  
Sec. 29-6-6. - Locked doors. 
All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily openable from the inner side without the use of keys as approved by the fire official. Exits from dwelling units shall not lead through other such units, or through toilet rooms or bathrooms.  
Sec. 29-6-7. - Fire escapes. 
All required and all existing fire escapes shall be maintained in working condition and structurally sound.  
Sec. 29-6-8. - Exit signs. 
All exit signs shall be maintained illuminated and visible.  
Sec. 29-6-9. - Dual egress. 
Every building exceeding two stories in height above grade, not counting basements, shall be provided with not less than two approved independent exits from each floor above the second floor, fully accessible from each occupancy on the floor.  
Sec. 29-6-10. - Emergency escape. 
Every sleeping room located in a basement shall have at least one openable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue; or shall have access to two approved independent exits.  
Sec. 29-6-11. - Smoke detectors. 
The City of Mascoutah, by this Ordinance, adopts and incorporates by reference, Chapter 425, Sec. 60/1 et seq. Ill. Comp. Stat., 1992, regarding "Smoke Detectors" as if fully set forth herein.  
Sec. 29-6-12. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ACCUMULATIONS AND STORAGE 
 
Sec. 29-6-13. - Accumulations. 
Waste, refuse, or other materials shall not be allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes, or other means of egress.  
Sec. 29-6-14. - Flammable matter. 
Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse, such as waste paper, boxes and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored on residential premises except in reasonable quantities consistent with normal usage.  
Sec. 29-6-15. - Residential unit. 
A dwelling unit shall not be located within a structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110;deg;F or 43;deg;C or lower, except as provided for in the Building Code.  
Sec. 29-6-16. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE RESISTANCE RATINGS 
 
Sec. 29-6-17. - General. 
Floors, walls, ceilings, and other elements and components required to develop a fire resistance rating shall be maintained so that the respective fire resistance rating of the enclosure, separation, or construction is preserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 29-6-18. - General. 
All fire protection systems and equipment as required by the fire official shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times.  
Sec. 29-6-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-7-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the responsibilities of persons for the maintenance of structures, and the equipment and premises thereof.  
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY CONDITION 
 
Sec. 29-7-2. - Cleanliness. 
Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall keep that part of the structure or premises thereof which that occupant occupies, controls, or uses in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.  
Sec. 29-7-3. - Disposal of rubbish. 
Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in rubbish containers equipped with tight fitting covers as required by this Code.  
Sec. 29-7-4. - Disposal of garbage. 
Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in garbage disposal facilities, or if such facilities are not available, by removing all nonburnable matter and securely wrapping such garbage and placing it in tight garbage storage containers as required by this Code, or by such other disposal method as may be required by applicable laws or ordinances.  
Sec. 29-7-5. - Garbage storage facilities. 
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be any adequate mechanical food waste grinder, in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the building inspector, in the structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can or cans. Such facilities shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants.  
Sec. 29-7-6. - Rubbish storage facilities. 
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish.  
Sec. 29-7-7. - Food preparation. 
All spaces used or intended to be used for food preparation shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage when necessary.  
Sec. 29-7-8. - Supplied fixtures and equipment. 
The owner or occupant of a structure or part thereof shall keep the supplied equipment and fixtures therein clean and sanitary, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation.  
Sec. 29-7-9. - Furnished by occupant. 
The equipment and fixtures furnished by the occupant of a structure shall be properly installed, and shall be maintained in good working condition, kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks or obstructions.  
Sec. 29-7-10. - Caretaker. 
In every multiple dwelling in which the owner does not reside or visit on a regular basis, there shall be a responsible person, designated by the owner, whose duties include maintaining the commonly used parts of the premises.  
Secs. 29-7-11, 29-7-12. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXTERMINATION 
 
Sec. 29-7-13. - Owner. 
The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting, leasing or selling the structure.  
Sec. 29-7-14. - Tenant-occupant. 
The tenant-occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rat-proof condition of the structure, and if the tenant-occupant fails to maintain the rat-proof condition, the cost of extermination shall be the responsibility of the tenant-occupant.  
Sec. 29-7-15. - Single occupancy. 
The occupant of a structure containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rats or other pests in the structure or on the premises.  
Sec. 29-7-16. - Multiple occupancy. 
Every owner, agent or operator of two or more dwelling units or multiple occupancies, shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rats or other pests in the public or shared areas of the structure and premises. When infestation is caused by failure of an occupant of a unit of the two or more dwelling units to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination.  
Sec. 29-7-17. - Continued rat infestation. 
Continuing or repeated incidents of rat infestation determined from the official records as provided in section 29-1-23 of this Code shall require the installation of rat and vermin proof walls. The rat and vermin proof walls shall be installed in accordance with the Building Code.  
Sec. 29-7-18. - Furnished by occupant. 
The equipment and fixtures furnished by the occupant of a structure shall be properly installed, and shall be maintained in good working condition, kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks or obstructions.  
Sec. 29-7-19. - Caretaker. 
In every multiple dwelling in which the owner does not reside or visit on a regular basis, there shall be a responsible person, designated by the owner, whose duties include maintaining the commonly used parts of the premises.  
Sec. 29-7-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 29-8-1. - Occupancy permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or agent thereof to occupy or use, or to permit the occupancy or use of any single or multi-family dwelling unit for any purpose including the movement of furniture, equipment or other personal property into said premises until a permit of occupancy has been issued by the code official. The permit so issued shall state that the occupancy complies with all of the provisions of this Code as far as can be determined by a visual inspection of the premises and a review of the records. 
Occupancy permits, with inspections, within the limitations of section 29-8-3, are required for all tenant changeovers, including those not individually metered. 
(b)  The fee for the occupancy permit shall be $5.00 for each dwelling unit or building, or portion thereof, occupied. 
(Ord. No. 03-117, 10-20-03)  
Sec. 29-8-2. - Application residential. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement on an application for an occupancy permit for a dwelling unit as to the names, relationships, or number of occupants who will occupy the dwelling unit.  
Sec. 29-8-3. - Action on an application. 
The code official shall examine, or cause to be examined, all applications for occupancy permits within a reasonable time after filing. He shall cause the premises to be inspected within seven working days after filing. If the premises is not inspected within the seven working days, then the occupancy permit shall be automatically issued without an inspection. If the premises are not in compliance with this Code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall provide the applicant with a list of defects that are not in compliance. Said defects shall be listed with as much specificity as possible. The owner or occupant of every dwelling unit and its premises shall give the code official free access thereto, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of such inspection. An inspection shall be valid for a period of one year. The dwelling unit does not have to be reinspected during the year, even if the occupancy changes. There shall be a fee of $100.00 for the original inspection, and $50.00 for the first reinspection. A reinspection shall be made within seven working days, from receipt of the written request or the Permit shall automatically be issued without a reinspection. If specific defects are found in the original inspection, the code official shall not require additional defects to be corrected that were discovered on a reinspection unless the new defects occurred after the original inspection. There shall be a fee of $50.00 for every reinspection after the first reinspection at the discretion of the inspector. No Permit shall be required under this Article for a dwelling unit that is less than five years of age, unless said property has been materially damaged. 
(Ord. No. 03-117; 10-20-03)  
Sec. 29-8-4. - Issuance of permit. 
If all the fees are paid and the code official is satisfied that the premises and its occupants are in compliance with this Code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue the occupancy permit as soon as practicable.  
Sec. 29-8-5. - Conditional permit. 
Occupancy shall be permitted on a conditional basis when in the judgment of the code official practical difficulties interfere with the completing all repairs required to bring the premises into full compliance with this Code prior to permitting occupancy. However, no conditional permit shall be issued when there is a condition on the premises which can threaten the health or safety of an occupant. No conditional permit shall be issued under the provisions of this Code for premises which have been newly constructed, new altered, or on which a change in use is proposed unless a certificate of use and occupancy has first been issued under the provisions of the Building Code.  
Sec. 29-8-6. - Rejection of application. 
If the application does not comply with the requirements of all pertinent laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore.  
Sec. 29-8-7. - Suspension of permit. 
Any permit issued shall become invalid is the occupancy is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit or if the occupancy is terminated.  
Sec. 29-8-8. - Revocation of permit. 
The code official may revoke a permit in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of facts in the application on which a permit was based, or in the event a structure or part thereof is condemned pursuant to this Code.  
Sec. 29-8-9. - Existing residential occupancies. 
The provisions of section 29-8-1 shall not apply to any residential occupancy in existence at the time this Code takes effect, unless there is a change in the occupancy of any person after said date, or complaint filed.  
Sec. 29-8-10. - Penalty. 
Any owner or occupier of any premises violating this Article shall be fine upon conviction, a minimum of $100.00. Each day an occupancy continues without complying with this article shall be considered a separate offense, and is subject to a separate fine. Additionally, in the event that a unit found in violation of this Code does not have operational individual service meters for city utilities, the owner(s), at their own expense, shall construct/install individual service meters for each unit within a multi-unit premises. Shall from the date of infraction, be required to place all utility bills in the name of the renters. 
(Ord. No. 03-117, 10-20-03)  
Chapter 30 - PUBLIC SAFETY  
ARTICLE I. - CIVIL EMERGENCY 
 
Sec. 30-1-1. - Definitions. 
Civil emergency is hereby defined to be: 
(a)  A "riot or unlawful assembly" characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law; or 
(b)  Any "natural disaster" or "man-made calamity", including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the corporate limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Curfew is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency.  
Sec. 30-1-2. - Declaration of emergency. 
Whenever an emergency as defined in section 30-1-1 exists, the mayor shall declare the existence by means of a written declaration, setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.  
Sec. 30-1-3. - Curfew. 
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city as a whole as he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.  
Sec. 30-1-4. - Authority of mayor to issue orders. 
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the mayor may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders: 
(a)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted. 
(b)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer. 
(c)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of gasoline or other flammable liquid or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(d)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(e)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.  
Sec. 30-1-5. - Effectiveness. 
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of 48 hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the mayor indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The mayor shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-hour period during the time the civil emergency exists.  
Sec. 30-1-6. - Notification. 
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the mayor shall notify the news media situated within the city and shall cause three copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the city: 
(A)  The City Hall. 
(B)  The post office. 
(C)  The city Library. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-1-6.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 30-2-1. - Created. 
There is hereby created and established a volunteer fire department, to be known as the Mascoutah Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 2-17-04)  
Sec. 30-2-2. - Organization. 
The Mascoutah Fire Department shall consist of a fire chief, one assistant fire chief, one deputy fire chief, and 40 members. The members shall have the right to organize themselves as a volunteer organization and to adopt bylaws to govern said organization. None of the officers or members of the department shall be considered full-time employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 938, 1-16-95; Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 2-17-04)  
Sec. 30-2-3. - Membership. 
All officers and members of the Mascoutah Fire Department shall be appointed by the city manager under the direction of the city council. The membership of the Mascoutah Fire Department may make recommendations to the city manager and city council for appointments to fill any vacancies. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 2-17-04)  
Sec. 30-2-4. - Chain of command. 
The fire chief shall be in full and absolute command of the apparatus and of the training and fire fighting activities of the department and shall preside over all meetings of the department. In the absence of the fire chief, the assistant chief shall assume the duties and full authority of the fire chief. In the absence of the fire chief, the assistant fire chief, and the deputy fire chief, the first captain on the scene shall be in command. The fire chief shall appoint from the membership five captains and five lieutenants; each captain to have immediate command of one fire company to be organized from the membership of the department. Each captain is to be assigned one lieutenant who will assist him and be second in command of said fire company. No fireman in attendance at a fire shall neglect or refuse to obey the orders of the officer in command. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 2-17-04)  
Sec. 30-2-5. - Insurance. 
The city shall provide insurance coverage for members of the department as may be required under the provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 65, Section 5/10-5-2, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 2-17-04)  
Sec. 30-2-6. - Age requirements. 
No officer or member shall be under 21 years of age. All officers and members shall be required to retire from active status with the department upon reaching age 65. The department in its bylaws may provide for an inactive or honorary status for members who are no longer eligible for active status by reason of age or disability. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 3-14-16)  
Sec. 30-2-7. - Finances. 
All expenditures of city funds shall be upon the recommendation of the fire chief and with the approval of the city manager. The fire chief shall at the beginning of each fiscal year submit a proposed budget for the department to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 2-17-04)  
ARTICLE III. - POLICE CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-3-1. - Introduction. 
Each officer and employee of this department shall read and understand all procedures pertaining to the police department. These procedures give explanation of expectations of all employees. They are also directed at standardizing behavior and giving direction on a day to day basis. Read them carefully. 
The regulations and procedures will be adhered to and enforced by each supervisor as well as the department head. 
We, as police officers and public employees, are here to serve and protect. 
The goal of this department and its members shall be as follows: 
(a)  To protect life and property of all citizens and persons. 
(b)  To serve the public in all areas as related to public safety and order. 
(c)  To enforce all federal, state, county and municipal laws within the city limits of Mascoutah. 
(d)  To address all public safety problem areas as recognized by monthly reports, annual reports of special order. 
(e)  Address goals of this department as stated in annual report as well as yearly evaluations. 
(f)  Each squad shall periodically advise the chief of police of problems and new ideas pertaining to the realization and identification of goals and objectives. 
(g)  Each member of this department shall adhere to the "code of ethics" as provided in the policy manual. 
It is important that each member formulate this department's goals as well as dedicate themselves to their accomplishments. 
Each commissioned officer shall take an oath of office to uphold all laws of the Constitution of these United States, State of Illinois, and City of Mascoutah prior to beginning duty. 
Officers will be issued an official identification card. 
Each commissioned officer shall render proper military courtesies to the National Colors and the National Anthem of the United States of America when in uniform. 
This policy shall be reviewed annually.  
Sec. 30-3-2. - Procedural system. 
The procedures within this Code and appendices are designed to give guidance and direction to all employees. All procedures shall be adhered to by all persons. It shall be this department's policy to implement and amend procedures with the approval of the city manager in accordance with need, laws and preferred courses of action as decided on by the chief of police with input from all employees. 
All procedures shall contain purpose, policy, definitions, effective date, and narrative of procedures. The use of the masculine pronoun in this document is understood to be for clerical use only and it is further understood that the masculine pronoun includes the feminine pronoun as well. 
All procedures may be questioned and discussed at meetings which shall be held monthly. Present shall be the chief, sergeants, police officers and any other interested party upon approval of the chief. 
Policies shall be provided for and reviewed by all employees and signed for to verify receipt of same. Procedures shall be as explained in this manual, appendices, supplements and training sessions conducted by/for the department.  
Sec. 30-3-3. - Management. 
Management of this department shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or, in his absence, his designate.  
Sec. 30-3-4. - Demeanor in office. 
In addition to the above enumerated code of ethics, the following shall be adhered to. At no time shall members of this police department engage in the use racial references, curse words in the court of public contact, or engage the public in an argumentative or violent fashion. It is our responsibility as public servants to treat people respectfully and in a professional business-like manner. Any violation of this demeanor will be interpreted as conduct unbecoming and shall be dealt with by use of disciplinary procedures initiated by one's immediate supervisor. All noncompliance with this policy shall be reported immediately to the employee's supervisor for appropriate action.  
Sec. 30-3-5. - Law enforcement role and authority. 
Departmental goals and objectives shall be set and evaluated on a yearly basis with monthly evaluations occurring through the vehicle of reports and meetings. Goals and objectives may be updated and/or evaluated throughout each fiscal year. All personnel shall through memoranda inform the chief of police of suggestions and opinions which affect these goals and objectives. Personnel shall advise the chief of police of all areas of concern with respect to these issues. This may be done on a daily basis or during scheduled meetings. 
Goals and objectives, as well as budget requests facilitating their accomplishments shall include participation by all department subdivisions and personnel.  
Sec. 30-3-6. - Limits of authority. 
Police officers: It shall be the duty of each member of the police force to arrest all persons in the city found in the act of violating any law or provisions of this Code, or aiding or abetting in any such violation, or any person whom the law officer has reasonable grounds for believing has committed a public offense and who is likely to escape before a complaint can be filed and a warrant can be issued for his arrest. 
Each commissioned member of the police force shall have power and authority to serve and execute warrants and other processes for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with any crime, hold for examination or trial, or taken in the execution or the commission of any crime. No member of the police department shall do any other business or service that will interfere with his duties as a police officer. 
All employees of the Mascoutah Police Department are empowered to utilize discretion as authorized by law, procedure, and supervisory authority in various aspects of their jobs. Discretion should be utilized within the guidelines of this police manual as well as past accepted practice, notwithstanding existing general orders or existing law.  
Sec. 30-3-7. - Unity of command. 
Each employee within this department is accountable for completion of his assignments. This policy shall be the case unless a superior shall assume command due to circumstances such as a unique situation or the absence of the usual supervisor. Unless special circumstances exist, all information shall flow in both directions by use of the chain command.  
Sec. 30-3-8. - Span of control. 
The span of control of any supervisor under normal circumstances shall be those persons on duty which fall under his rank.  
Sec. 30-3-9. - Delineation of responsibility. 
This directive will explain duties and responsibilities of each job assignment within this department by use of job descriptions. These job descriptions are included in the policy manual so that all personnel will be able to familiarize themselves with all facets of this operation.  
Sec. 30-3-10. - Authority and responsibility. 
It is hereby stated that is will be the policy of this department that any person held responsible for any job assignment or activity is, and should be comfortable, that he also has been given the commensurate authority to accomplish the task or goal. In conjunction with this, all employees shall be accountable for their use of this delegated authority. This is to include a responsibility as to how authority is used as well as failure to use it.  
Sec. 30-3-11. - Competency. 
Police officers shall maintain sufficient competency, proficiency, certification, and physical condition to perform their duties and assume the responsibilities of their position. Members shall perform their duties in a manner which will tend to establish and maintain the highest standards of efficiency in carrying out the functions of objectives of the department. Incompetence may be demonstrated by a lack of knowledge of the application of laws required to be enforced, an unwillingness or inability to perform assigned task, the failure to conform to work standards established for the police officers' rank, grade or position, the failure to take the appropriate action on the occasion of a crime, unnecessary absence from or failure to perform the assigned patrol during a tour of duty, or repeated poor evaluations or a record of repeated infractions of the rules, regulations, manuals or directives.  
Sec. 30-3-12. - Training cost. 
Cost of training which is not reimbursed to the city shall be paid by any police department employee who voluntarily leaves the service within two years of the date the employee was hired.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY (ESDA) 
 
Sec. 30-4-1. - Policy and procedures. 
(a)  Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in this or in a neighboring municipality of atomic or other means from without, or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake, or other natural or man-made causes, and in order to insure that this municipality will be prepared to and will adequately deal with any such disasters, preserve the lives and property of the people of this municipality and protect the public peace, health and safety in the event of such a disaster, it is found and declared to be necessary: 
(1)  To create a municipal emergency services and disaster agency; 
(2)  To confer upon the mayor the extraordinary power and authority set forth under article I of this chapter (65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-1-6). 
(3)  To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency services and disaster operations. 
(b)  Whenever the mayor determines after an investigation that a dangerous situation or a potentially dangerous situation exists which could cause death to individuals or serious injury to property or the health and welfare of public, the mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists. The extraordinary powers may not be exercised until an ordinance shall have been adopted which shall establish standards for the determination by the mayor of when the state of emergency exists and shall provide that the mayor may not exercise such extraordinary power and authority except after signing under oath a statement finding that such standards have been met, setting forth facts to substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the emergency and declaring that a state of emergency exists. This statement shall be filed with the clerk of the municipality as soon as practical. A state of emergency shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities after the state of emergency is declared. A subsequent state of emergency may be declared if necessary. 
(c)  It is further declared to be the purpose of this Code and the policy of the municipality that all emergency management programs of this municipality be coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of the federal and state governments, including their various departments and agencies, of other municipalities and localities and private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the nation's manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur.  
Sec. 30-4-2. - Limitations. 
Nothing in this Code shall be construed to: 
(a)  Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute, except that actions otherwise authorized by this Code or other laws may be taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health or safety. 
(b)  Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but any communications facility or organization (including but not limited to radio and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or instructions in connection with a disaster. 
(c)  Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, fire fighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of any personnel thereof, when on active duty; but state and local emergency operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance of functions related to disaster emergencies. 
(d)  Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the mayor and the city council to exercise any other powers vested in them under the constitution, statutes, or common law of this State, independent of or in conjunction with any provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 30-4-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the definitions hereinafter ascribed: 
(a)  Coordinator means the staff assistant to the mayor with the duty of carrying out the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, explosion, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action. 
(c)  Emergency management means the efforts of this municipality to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation. 
(d)  Emergency operations plan means the written plan of the municipality describing the organization, mission and functions of the government and supporting services for responding to and recovery from disasters. 
(e)  Emergency services means the preparation for and the carrying out of such functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, earthquake, or other man-made or natural causes. These functions including, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, emergency aviation services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life or property. 
(f)  Political subdivision means any county, city, village, or incorporated town.  
Sec. 30-4-4. - Emergency services and disaster agency. 
(a)  There is hereby created an emergency services and disaster agency and a coordinator of the emergency services and disaster agency, herein called the "coordinator", who shall be the head thereof. The coordinator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. He shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  The emergency services and disaster agency shall obtain, with council approval, such technical, clerical, stenographic and other administrative personnel, and may make such expenditures within their budget therefor as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Code. 
(c)  The coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the mayor, shall be the executive head of the municipal emergency service and disaster agency, and shall be responsible under the direction of the mayor for carrying out the program for emergency services and disaster operations of this municipality. He shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency services and disaster operations within this municipality and shall maintain liaison, and cooperate with, the civil defense and emergency management agencies and organization of the county, other counties and municipalities, and of the federal and state government. 
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve by the coordinator, the mayor or any persons designated by him, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this Code. 
(d)  The municipal emergency services and disaster agency shall take an integral part in the development and revision of the local emergency operations plan. 
(e)  In the development of the emergency operations plan, the municipal emergency services and disaster agency shall interrelate with business, labor, industry, agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community leaders. 
(f)  The municipal emergency services and disaster agency shall: 
(1)  Determine the requirements of the municipality for food, clothing and other necessities in the event of an emergency. 
(2)  Develop an emergency operations plan that meets the standards promulgated by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency. 
(3)  Biannually review and revise the local emergency operations plan. 
(4)  Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills in emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery. 
(5)  Establish a register of government and private response resources available for use in a disaster. 
(6)  Prepare, for issuance by the mayor, ordinances, proclamations and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters. 
(7)  Cooperate with the federal, state and county government and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this Code and in implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response and recovery. 
(8)  Initiate and coordinate planning for: 
(a)  The establishment of an emergency operating center. 
(b)  The implementation of a 911 system. 
(9)  Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the implementation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 30-4-5. - Emergency services and disaster powers of the mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the general direction and control of the emergency services and disaster agency, and shall be responsible for the carrying out of the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  In performing his duties under this Code, the mayor is authorized to cooperate with state and federal governments and with other municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to emergency services and disaster operations defined in this Code. 
(c)  In performing his duties under this Code, the mayor is further authorized: 
(1)  To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations of the local disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this Code within the limits of the authority conferred upon him. 
(2)  To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency management of this municipality which plan and program shall be integrated into and coordinated with disaster plans of the state and federal governments and other political subdivisions, and which plan and program may include: 
(a)  Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by disaster. 
(b)  Prompt and effective response to disaster. 
(c)  Emergency relief. 
(d)  Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters. 
(e)  Recommendations for zoning, building and other land-use controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other preventive and preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters or their impact. 
(f)  Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency action plans. 
(g)  Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger, damage or loss from flood, conflagration or other disaster. 
(h)  Organization of municipal manpower and chains of command. 
(i)  Coordination of local emergency management activities. 
(j)  Other necessary matters. 
(3)  In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency management of this municipality, and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to procure and preposition supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency services and disaster organizations in advance of actual disaster to insure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster operations. 
(4)  Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this municipality as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the municipality for the emergency management phases of preparedness, response, and recovery, and to plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof. 
(d)  The mayor is authorized to designate space in a municipal building, or elsewhere for the emergency services and disaster agency as its office.  
Sec. 30-4-6. - Financing. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city council and declared to be the policy of the municipality that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster emergencies. 
(b)  It is the city council's intent that the first recourse shall be to funds regularly appropriated to the agency. If the mayor finds that the demands placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are unreasonably great, and the Governor has proclaimed the municipality a disaster, he may make application for funds from the state disaster relief fund. If monies available from the fund are insufficient, and if the mayor finds that other sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are insufficient, he shall issue a call for an immediate session of the city council for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the city council may deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for other purposes, or borrow monies from the United States Government or other public or private sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the city council is capable of convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure or loan of such monies, the mayor is authorized to carry out those decisions until such time as a quorum of the city council can convene. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the mayor's authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts, or payments in aid of disaster prevention, preparedness, response or recovery.  
Sec. 30-4-7. - Local disaster emergencies. 
(a)  A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the mayor or city council. If declared by the mayor, it shall not be continued for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be filed promptly with the municipal clerk. 
(b)  The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to activate any and all applicable local emergency operations plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder. 
(c)  During a local disaster emergency, the mayor may suspend the provisions of any municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of municipal business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any municipal agency, if strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as authorized by "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", provided that, if the city council meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.  
Sec. 30-4-8. - Testing of disaster warning devices. 
The testing of disaster devices including outdoor warning sirens shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 in the morning.  
Sec. 30-4-9. - Mutual aid arrangements between political subdivisions. 
The coordinator for emergency services and disaster operations may, in collaboration with other public agencies within his immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within this state for reciprocal disaster response and recovery in case a disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved by each of such political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided by law, and unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the state director. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state and local emergency management operations plan and program, and in the event of such disaster as described in section 30-4-3 of this Code, it shall be the duty of each local and department for emergency services and disaster operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements.  
Sec. 30-4-10. - Communications. 
The local emergency services and disaster agency shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies. The agency shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or network. In studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for general municipal and local governmental purposes. The agency shall make recommendations to the mayor as appropriate.  
Sec. 30-4-11. - Immunity. 
Neither the municipality, the agency or any member thereof or any person acting at their direction, engaged in any emergency services and disaster operations or disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this Code or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this Code is liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this act under the Worker's Compensation Act or the Worker's Occupational Diseases Act, or under any pension law, and this Section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any Act of Congress.  
Sec. 30-4-12. - Professions, trades and occupations. 
If such disaster as is described in section 30-4-3 occurs in this municipality and the services of persons who are competent to practice any profession, trade or occupation are required in this municipality to cope with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed or registered in this municipality to practice such profession, trade or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed elsewhere to practice any such profession, trade or occupation may, if a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in this municipality pursuant to the order of the head of that political subdivision and upon the request of the municipality, or if otherwise requested so to do by the mayor or the coordinator of this municipality, during the time the disaster condition continues, practice such profession, trade or occupation in this municipality without being licensed or registered in this municipality.  
Sec. 30-4-13. - Budget and levy of tax. 
The city council may make budget for emergency services and disaster operations in the manner provided by law for making budget for the ordinary expenses of such political subdivision. The city council may also levy for emergency services and disaster operations a tax not to exceed .05 percent of the full, fair cash value as equalized or assessed by the department of revenue on all taxable property in the municipality for the current year. However, the amount collectible under such a levy shall in no event exceed $0.25 per capita. The annual tax shall be in addition to and in excess of the amount authorized to be levied for general corporate purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 30-4-14. - Authority to accept services, gifts, grants or loans. 
Whenever the federal or state governments, or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the municipality services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency management, the municipality, acting through the mayor or through its city council, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance the mayor or the city council may authorize any officer of the municipality to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the municipality.  
Sec. 30-4-15. - Orders, rules and regulations. 
(a)  The mayor shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any amendment thereof made by him pursuant to the provisions of this Code in the office of the municipal clerk. No such rule, regulation or order, or any amendment thereof, shall be effective until ten days after such filing; provided, however, that upon the declaration of such a disaster emergency by the mayor as is described in section 30-4-7, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation order or amendment issued pursuant to this Code and during the state of such disaster emergency, is abrogated, and said rule, regulation, order or amendment shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the municipal clerk, accompanied by a certificate stating the reason for the emergency. 
(b)  The emergency services and disaster agency established pursuant to this Code, and the coordinator thereof, shall execute and enforce such orders, rules and regulations as may be made by the Governor under authority of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. The local emergency services and disaster agency shall have available for inspection at its office all orders, rules and regulations made by the Governor, or under this authority. The state emergency management agency shall furnish such orders, rules and regulations to the agency.  
Sec. 30-4-16. - Utilization of existing agency, facilities and personnel. 
In carrying out the provisions of this Code, the mayor and the coordinator of the emergency services and disaster agency are directed to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the municipality to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed, upon request, to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the coordinator and the emergency services and disaster agency.  
Sec. 30-4-17. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect such other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are hereby declared to be severable.  
Sec. 30-4-18. - No private liability. 
(a)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual or impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for negligently causing loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(b)  Any private person, firm or corporation and employees and agents of such person, firm or corporation in the performance of a contract with, and under the direction of, the municipality under the provisions of this Code, shall not be civilly liable for causing death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the event of willful misconduct. 
(c)  Any private person, firm or corporation, and any employee or agency of such person, firm or corporation, who renders assistance or advice at the request of the municipality, shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the event of willful misconduct. The immunities provided in subsection (c) shall not apply to any private person, firm or corporation, or to any employee or agent of such person, firm or corporation whose act or omission caused in whole or in part such actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable therefore.  
Sec. 30-4-19. - Succession. 
In the event of the death, absence from the municipality or other disability of the mayor preventing him from acting under this Code or for any other municipal purpose, and until the office is filled in the manner prescribed by law, the coordinator of the emergency services and disaster agency shall succeed to the duties and responsibilities of the mayor.  
Sec. 30-4-20. - Compensation. 
The city council, by its annual budget ordinance, may provide for the payment of the salary of the coordinator and such other office staff and personnel as may be expressly provided for in the ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any member of the agency from receiving compensation from the State of Illinois Emergency Management Agency under any provisions of that agency. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 30-4-21. - Personnel oath. 
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity in the municipal emergency service and disaster agency, shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before the coordinator of the municipal emergency service and disaster agency before a person authorized to administer oaths in this municipality, which oath shall be filed with the coordinator of the emergency services and disaster agency, and which oath shall be substantially as follows: 
"I, ___________ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time I am affiliated with the City, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."  
Sec. 30-4-22. - Emergency termination or reduction of electrical service. 
(A)  Declaration of emergency condition. When in the judgment of the mayor or city council, as provided herein in section 30-4-7(a), a local disaster emergency requires the termination or reduction of electrical service, the mayor or city council shall forthwith declare in writing the existence of the emergency condition and order the termination or reduction.  
Sec. 30-4-23. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating this Code or any order thereunder shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $750.00. 
(Ord. No. 958, 4-3-95 in part) 
State Law reference— See 20 ILCS Sec. 3305/1 et seq.  
ARTICLE V. - AMBULANCE SERVICE 
 
Sec. 30-5-1. - Service established. 
There is hereby created the Mascoutah Ambulance Service, an administrative department of the city for the purpose of providing ambulance services for the residents of the city and the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District. The city council may, upon the recommendation of the city manager and the advisory committee contract to provide service to residents of other governmental units or groups of individuals.  
Sec. 30-5-2. - Manager appointed. 
The department shall be administered by the ambulance service operations manager who shall be appointed by the city manager. The ambulance service operations manager shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager, who shall have the power to remove him from office.  
Sec. 30-5-3. - Duties of ambulance manager. 
The operations manager shall supervise the operation of the Mascoutah Ambulance Service and he shall: 
(a)  Provide prompt and efficient 24-hour ambulance service for the territory encompassing the city and the Mascoutah Rural Fire District. 
(b)  Make-up work schedules which shall provide for two persons per call for each ambulance. 
(c)  Maintain the interior and exterior of the ambulances in a clean condition. 
(d)  Keep a clean linen supply. 
(e)  Advise the city manager of necessary repairs and routine maintenance, as required to keep ambulances in good, mechanic condition. 
(f)  Advise the city manager, of any supplies that are required to maintain a proper ambulance service. 
(g)  Prepare all billings: 
(1)  The original bill to recipient of the service shall be in duplicate. 
(2)  Send monthly statements. 
(3)  Bill Medicare when necessary. 
(4)  Bill Illinois Public Aid when necessary. 
(5)  Bill private insurance companies when necessary. 
(h)  Insure that all drivers and attendants receive the necessary and proper training. 
(i)  Notify the city manager of any changes in the laws and regulations regarding any phase of the ambulance service, equipment or training requirements.  
Sec. 30-5-4. - Salary of manager. 
The salaries of the operations manager and the ambulance employees shall be established by the city council by resolution or in the city budget.  
Sec. 30-5-5. - Ambulance advisory committee. 
There is hereby created an ambulance advisory committee pursuant to a contractual agreement approved on September 19, 1994 between the city and the Rural Fire Protection District. (See Appendix "A"). The committee shall be comprised of five members, one from Fayetteville; one from the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District; one from the special service area, and two by the City of Mascoutah.  
Sec. 30-5-6. - Duties of committee. 
The committee shall advise the city as to the operation of the ambulance service. It shall review the rules, regulations, staffing and equipment needs and provide written recommendation to the city manager concerning the same.  
Sec. 30-5-7. - Fees. 
The ambulance committee shall review and establish service fees for the Mascoutah Ambulance Service. 
State Law reference— See 5 ILCS Sec. 220/2.  
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSING AND DETERMINING CLAIMS UNDER PSEBA 
 
Sec. 30-6-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a fair and efficient method for determining the eligibility of a full-time employee for the benefits enumerated under PSEBA through an administrative process, including if necessary, an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 30-6-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms will have the following meanings. These definitions are derived from the federal Public Health and Welfare Act, which was enacted in 1944 and amended in 1984 to define, by inclusion or reference, the following terms. 
For use in this article, provisions containing the words "mayor," "commissioner," "alderman," or "city council" also apply to the president, trustee, councilmember and boards of trustees so far as the provisions are applicable to them. 
Catastrophic injury. An injury, the direct and proximate consequences of which permanently prevent an individual from performing any gainful work. 
Gainful work. Full- or part-time activity that actually is compensated or commonly is compensated. 
Injury. A traumatic physical wound (or a traumatized physical condition of the body) directly and proximately caused by external force (such as bullets, explosives, sharp instruments, blunt objects, or physical blows), chemicals, electricity, climatic conditions, infectious disease, radiation, virus, or bacteria, but does not include: 
(1)  Any occupational disease; or 
(2)  Any condition of the body caused or occasioned by stress or strain. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 2, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 30-6-3. - Application procedure. 
As noted by the Court in Pedersen, "the Act, however, does not provide any guidance on the proper procedure for seeking PSEBA benefits." This article and the application procedure of this section establishes guidance on the proper procedure for public safety officers seeking PSEBA benefits in the city. 
(a)  Public safety officers, or family member(s) of an injured or deceased public safety officer, ("applicant") must file a full and complete PSEBA application in writing within 30 days of filing a pension claim with the city or within 30 days of the date of the adoption of this article in the event that an applicant has filed for a PSEBA claim prior to the date of adoption of this article, whichever is later, if the applicant is seeking benefits under PSEBA. The city shall notify applicant if the PSEBA application is incomplete and applicant shall have five days to remedy their application. Failure to timely file the full and complete application shall result in a forfeiture of the benefits under PSEBA by failure to properly submit a complete application. 
(b)  A complete PSEBA application includes the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant, date of hire, detailed information regarding the incident, including information relating to how the injury was sustained in the line of duty (date, time, place, nature of injury, and other factual circumstances surrounding the incident giving rise to said claim); 
(2)  The applicant's firsthand knowledge explaining, to the city's satisfaction, how the injury/death directly resulted from: 
a.  Response to fresh pursuit; 
b.  Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency; 
c.  An unlawful act perpetrated by another; or 
d.  Participation during the investigation of a criminal act; 
(3)  A signed PSEBA medical authorization release which authorizes the collection of information related to the incident including, but not limited to, disability pension proceedings, worker's compensation records, and medical records and specifies the name and address for pertinent health care provider(s); 
(4)  A signed PSEBA general information release specifying the name and signature of the applicant or her/his authorized representative along with legal proof of said representation and name and signature of witness authorizing the collection of information pertinent to the incident review process; 
(5)  The name(s) of witnesses to the incident; 
(6)  The name(s) of witnesses the applicant intends to call at the PSEBA hearing; 
(7)  Information and supporting pension documentation filed with the appropriate pension board; 
(8)  Information supporting the PSEBA eligibility requirements; and 
(9)  Other sources of health insurance benefits currently enrolled in or received by the applicant and/or family members if the applicant is deceased. 
(c)  The PSEBA application must be submitted to the city clerk in its entirety. 
(d)  The PSEBA application must be sworn and notarized to certify the truthfulness of the content of the information. A review of the application shall not occur until the application is complete. 
(e)  On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the city, the completed application shall then be submitted to the city as the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date stamped and provided to the applicant. 
(f)  Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the city shall set the matter for an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to make a determination on whether to grant the applicant PSEBA benefits based on the result of the administrative hearing. 
(g)  The applicant will be given written notice of the date for the scheduled administrative hearing to be served not less than ten days prior to the commencement of the hearing. If the applicant, upon receiving written notice of the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the applicant must contact the hearing officer in writing within seven days after being served. The hearing officer shall establish an alternative hearing date which is within 30 days of the original hearing date. Failure to appear at the administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA benefits. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 30-6-4. - Administrative composition. 
The administrative hearing shall be scheduled and conducted by a hearing officer whose authority and limitations are as follows: 
(a)  Authority of the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall have all of the authorities granted to her/him under common law relative to the conduct of an administrative hearing, including the authority to: 
(1)  Preside over city hearings involving PSEBA; 
(2)  Administer oaths; 
(3)  Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of eligibility under PSEBA; 
(4)  Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their representatives; 
(5)  Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence; 
(6)  Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing; and 
(7)  Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order. 
(b)  Hearing officer. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position of hearing officer for each hearing on PSEBA benefits that shall come before this city. In making said selection, the following information should be considered, at a minimum: 
(1)  The individual's ability to comply with the job description as set forth herein; and 
(2)  The individual must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois and have knowledge of and experience in employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence, and administrative practice. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 4, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 30-6-5. - Administrative hearing. 
The system of administrative hearings for the determination of eligibility for benefits under PSEBA shall be initiated either by the city or by the applicant after the submission of a full and complete PSEBA application. An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the benefits shall be consistent with the Act. 
(a)  Record. The city shall ensure that all hearings are attended by a certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court reporter and a copy be provided to the applicant within 28 days of the date of the administrative hearing. 
(b)  Procedures. The city and the applicant shall be entitled to representation by counsel at said administrative hearing and present witnesses, testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents. 
(c)  Evidence. The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent practicable unless, by such application, the hearing officer determines that application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the conduct of her or his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole discretion of the hearing officer. The hearing officer must state on the record her or his reason for that determination. 
(d)  Final determination. A written determination by the hearing officer of whether the petitioning applicant is eligible for the benefits under PSEBA shall constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari. 
(e)  Burden of proof. At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all hearings conducted under this article shall be by the preponderance of the evidence. 
(f)  Administrative records. All records pertaining to the administrative process shall be held in a separate file under the applicant's name with the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 5, 6-4-18) 
APPENDIX "A" 
CONTRACT AGREEMENT—AMBULANCE 
This Agreement entered into this 19th day of September, 1994, by and between the City of Mascoutah, a municipal corporation, and the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District, a municipal corporation. 
WHEREAS, there is a necessity and a need for an ambulance service within an area composed of the City of Mascoutah and the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District, and 
WHEREAS, it is a proper function of the governmental bodies to provide ambulance service to the residents of that area, and 
WHEREAS, both the governmental bodies have passed a special tax authorized by the State Statutes for the providing of ambulance service to the residents of their particular municipalities, and 
WHEREAS, both parties are desirous of cooperating in the providing of that service to the residents of their districts, 
WHEREFORE IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS: 
1.  That the Board of Trustees of the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District, and the City of Mascoutah, have been authorized by proper Resolutions of their separate governing bodies to enter into this Agreement. 
2.  That the legal basis for the Agreement is the Illinois Constitution, Article 7, Section 10, as well as the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 5, Section 220/1. 
3.  That the parties agree that the City of Mascoutah shall be the body politic that shall provide all of the services and shall hold title to any and all equipment that shall be necessary and shall be responsible for either hiring or contracting for the services in the area, subject to the approval of the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District. 
4.  That the funds necessary to provide the service, either through direct operation by the City of Mascoutah, and the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District does hereby agree to reimburse the City of Mascoutah for their equal levy percentage based on the cost upon the assessed valuation of the City of Mascoutah and the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District. Payment will be made to the City of Mascoutah according to the attached payment schedule. 
5.  That the parties agree that there shall be an advisory committee to be comprised of five (5) members, one (1) from Fayetteville, one (1) from the Mascoutah Rural Fire District, one (1) from Special Service Area and two (2) which shall be appointed by the City of Mascoutah, who shall advise both bodies as to the operation of the ambulance service. Committee may be expected to provide for additional service areas and commensurate representation. 
6.  The City of Mascoutah, who will be making all payments and will hold all property in its name, shall hold same separate and apart from any other property owned by the City and the City shall annually make an accounting to the Mascoutah Rural Fire Protection District of the assets held by them under this Agreement as well as the actual cost of the operation of the ambulance service under this Agreement. 
7.  If any personnel are to be provided, they shall be employees of the City of Mascoutah and the City of Mascoutah shall assume the liability and insurance for the property as well as the liability of the operation, if they become involved in the operation directly. Policy making shall be upon the advice of the committee proposed previously in this Agreement, but day to day management and routine decision shall be made by the City of Mascoutah, which is providing the service. 
8.  This Contract may be reviewed by the parties on an annual basis at the end of each calendar year. Upon such review, each party shall have the right to terminate this Contract by giving the other party a sixty (60) day written notice of termination. 
9.  The rates charged for ambulance service will be the same for District residents as those charged to City residents. 
SCHEDULE OF PAYMENT TO CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
FROM: 
MASCOUTAH RURAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 
Payment to City of Mascoutah from Rural Fire Protection District shall be as follows: 
1.  First payment shall be made to the city clerk no later than September 30 each year, constituting one-half of total special tax revenue levied for support of ambulance service, and; 
2.  Second payment shall be made no later than January 30 each year, constituting one-half of total special tax revenue levied for support of ambulance service. 
3.  The requirements of the preceding paragraphs 1 and 2 are subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  That the Fire Protection District shall not become liable for any payments to the city any sooner than 30 days after the district has received the tax proceeds from the county; and 
B.  That the total amount due from the district to the city shall not exceed the actual amount of tax proceeds paid by the county to the district in any one tax year.  
Chapter 31 - RECREATION AND PARKS  
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 31-2-1. - Rules governing park areas. 
The term "parks" refers to Scheve Park, Maple Park, the Reservoir, the Civic Center, and any other mini-parks so designated by the city. The parks are officially open for use by the public year round. Certain facilities utilizing domestic water will be closed because of freeze conditions as weather conditions dictate. Typically, this closure period will be from October 25th to April 15th each year. Typical park hours are from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. The following rules are hereby adopted for the Mascoutah parks. Any exceptions from these rules require written permission from the city. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any fireworks or firearms in the city parks. 
(b)  No person shall write upon, mark, deface, or improperly use any property or equipment in any city park. 
(c)  No person shall drive or ride upon the grass or footways; vehicles are restricted to roadways and parking areas except during special events; e.g., homecoming. Only loading and unloading shall be permitted. No person shall drive a motor vehicle faster than fifteen miles per hour in any of the parks. All heavy traffic, farm vehicles, and delivery trucks of all kinds are prohibited from roads, walks, and driveways of all parks, and prohibited from the use thereof, except in the case of participating in a show or display; e.g., homecoming. All Illinois Rules of the Road apply to all traffic in the parks. 
(d)  No person shall break, cut, mutilate, injure, or remove any tree, plant, shrub, fence, or any property in the parks. 
(e)  No person shall commit a nuisance or offense against decency, including cursing, swearing, using abusive language, fighting, or behaving in a riotous or disorderly manner. 
(f)  No person shall chase, kill, attempt to snare, or catch any rabbits, squirrels, birds, or any other animal within the city parks, except that fishing is permitted in the reservoir. 
(g)  No person shall paste, affix, or inscribe any handbill or poster on park property. No person shall parade, exhibit, or distribute any advertisement, circular, or handbill, nor be permitted to sell or dispose of any article in any park. 
(h)  Trash, garbage, or rubbish shall be disposed of by depositing it in appropriate receptacles. 
(i)  No person shall bring any animals/pets into any city park except when leashed and controlled. No animals shall be allowed in the children's playground areas. All animals/pets are banned from city-approved public events, except in the case of pet shows, animal displays, or guide dogs. 
(j)  Pavilions in the city parks are available on a first come basis after 8:30 a.m., except those which are reserved. Anyone wanting to reserve a pavilion shall make reservations with the appropriate officials as designated by the city. Reservation signs are posted on the pavilion by 8:00 a.m. on the day of the reservation. Rental charges shall be paid in advance as provided in a fee list maintained at City Hall. In addition to the rental fee, the renter is required to pay a $25.00 deposit. The renter will make sure that any picnic tables removed from the pavilion are returned to the pavilion, that all trash and rubbish are deposited in receptacles, and that no damage is done to the pavilion. Failure to do so will result in forfeiture of the deposit. City staff will be responsible for enforcement and sign off on returned deposits. 
Local organizations may reserve a pavilion free of charge, provided they have made an advance written request to the city manager. Local church organizations may reserve a pavilion free of charge for one event per year. 
Small family picnics (under 25 people) may be held throughout the picnic areas. Larger groups (25 people or more) are restricted to the pavilions and the area immediately surrounding the pavilions, and shall not be extended beyond two consecutive days. 
No person shall disturb any picnic or intrude upon it without the consent of those composing it. 
The railroad car facility is also available for rentals with arrangements made through the Mascoutah Improvement Association. 
(k)  No person shall swim in the pool except at those times allotted for public swimming, or at time set aside for programs and special events by the pool manager. 
(l)  No glass beverage containers are permitted in the park at any time. No open fire, with the exception of BBQ grills and pits, are permitted. 
(m)  Children under ten years of age must be accompanied by an adult. No person over the age of ten years may use the playground equipment in the Scheve Park kiddie playground, except the lawn swing. 
(n)  No unauthorized ATVs (all terrain vehicles) are permitted in the parks. 
(o)  No bicycles, skates, or skateboards are permitted under the pavilions, on the stage area of the Scheve Park Depot, on the tennis courts, or improved facilities. Skateboards are permitted on the concrete pad, within up to ten feet of the Scheve Park Depot/Stage area, and the gated Park Drive area. This drive area will be closed for park pedestrians and skateboarding/skating/bicycling as seasonally appropriate. Policy of hours will be provided. 
(p)  Alcoholic beverages not contained in glass bottles are allowed for private functions, provided that all state and local laws are followed. Alcoholic beverages may not be sold or transferred without obtaining the proper licensing from the City of Mascoutah, City Clerk's office. 
(q)  No person or group shall be allowed to play either pre-recorded or live music which is found to be disruptive to park patrons or park neighbors and can be heard more than 200 feet from the source. In this case, the administrative citation referenced below will be issued. In addition, law enforcement will be empowered to cause the cessation of activities after the first warning. 
(r)  An administrative citation is the penalty for violations of these rules. This does not limit the city from resorting to other remedies legally available. 
(s)  Additional rules and regulations for the Mascoutah Dog Park are as follows: 
(1)  Hours of operation are dawn to dusk. 
(2)  Use park at your own risk. 
(3)  Owners are legally responsible for the behavior of their dog(s) at all times. 
(4)  Dogs must be leashed while entering and exiting the park. 
(5)  Dog waste must be cleaned up by their owners immediately. 
(6)  Owners must be within the dog park and supervising their dog with leash readily available. 
(7)  Dog handlers must be at least 16 years of age. 
(8)  Children under 13 must be accompanied by an adult and supervised at all times. 
(9)  Aggressive dogs must be removed immediately. 
(10)  Dogs should be under voice control. 
(11)  The following are prohibited from entering the Mascoutah Dog Park: 
(i)  Human and dog food/treats. 
(ii)  Glass containers. 
(iii)  Dogs in heat. 
(iv)  Sick dogs. 
(v)  Aggressive dogs. 
(vi)  Puppies (under four months). 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 31-2-2. - Management. 
The park board shall be required to adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing the management of the city parks and swimming pool. 
(a)  The city manager shall hire a manager for the swimming pool, and any other personnel deemed necessary. 
(b)  It shall determine compensation for their services. 
(c)  It shall determine fees to be charged from the individual and groups and, from time to time as may be required, submit to the city council for its action any suggested changes to the fee schedules. 
(d)  It shall consult with the city council before approving abnormal expenditures, making unusual repairs, or for any other operations that are other than routine and normal. 
(e)  It shall advise the city council and make recommendations for site changes and other matters that might improve the appearance or operation of the pool. 
(f)  It shall periodically inspect the pool site for condition and manner of operation, and see to it that said pool is operated according to the rules of the State of Illinois and in a clean and orderly manner.  
ARTICLE III. - POOL MANAGER 
 
Sec. 31-3-1. - Pool manager. 
The pool manager appointed by the city manager shall attend meetings of the park board when requested. The pool manager shall be knowledgeable and perform duties as follows: 
(a)  He shall become thoroughly familiar with the State of Illinois requirements governing the operation of a swimming pool. 
(b)  He shall not incur any indebtedness other than normal operation without prior approval of the park board. 
(c)  He shall hire and discharge all personnel required in the operation of the pool. 
(d)  He shall deposit all receipts and maintain a simplified record of all financial transactions conducted by him as may be required by the treasurer. 
(e)  He shall make and enforce rules and regulations for the safe operation of the pool. 
(f)  He shall keep and maintain a record of the time all hourly employees work as may be required by the treasurer. 
(g)  He shall deposit all funds in the name of the City of Mascoutah, swimming pool fund, in the bank designated by the city. 
(h)  He shall approve all invoices for supplies used in and about the pool, all expenditures for labor, and all invoices for repair and maintenance of the pool prior to approval of said bills by the park board.  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY RESERVOIRS 
 
Sec. 31-4-1. - Fishing allowed. 
Only those persons who observe the regulations of this chapter shall be allowed to fish in the Prairie Lake Reservoir.  
Sec. 31-4-2. - State fishing license required. 
Any person who fishes in the Prairie Lake Reservoir shall first obtain a fishing license as required under the laws of the State of Illinois and shall be in observance of all laws, rules and regulations relating to fishing under any of the statutes of the State of Illinois.  
Sec. 31-4-3. - Fishing prohibited during nighttime. 
No person shall be allowed to fish in the Prairie Lake Reservoir between the time of sundown and sunrise.  
Sec. 31-4-4. - Pole and line fishing. 
The fishing permitted under this article shall include only hook and line fishing, which shall include rod and reel, casting and fly casting but shall not include traps, seines, trotlines, nets of any kinds, or other methods commonly used in commercial fishing.  
Sec. 31-4-5. - Bass and channel catfish fishing restricted. 
Fishing in the Prairie Lake reservoir shall be restricted to bass which are 15 inches or larger, with a limit of three bass per day, a limit of six channel catfish per day. There is no limit on all other kinds of fish. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 10-2-17)  
Sec. 31-4-6. - Swimming prohibited. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit swimming in the Prairie Lake Reservoir and at no time shall anyone be permitted to wade or swim in said water. 
(Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 10-2-17)  
Sec. 31-4-7. - Boats permitted. 
(a)  There is no public boating at the Prairie Lake Reservoir without prior city approval. Approval will require registration with the city manager's office. Registration will be annually on a calendar year basis, expiring December 31st of each year. Must be 18 years of age or older to register. There will be no fee for registration. 
(b)  The following boats are permitted: paddle boats, canoes or kayaks (or similar), and sail boats (with sails less than 12 foot in height). 
(c)  The following boats are prohibited: motorized boats, blow up boats, air boats, hydroplanes or racing skins (or similar). 
(d)  Fishing from boats is permitted subject to the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  No person shall operate a boat unless it carries for each occupant a coastguard-approved personal flotation device in good condition especially designed for that purpose. 
(f)  There will be no boating between the time of sundown and sunrise. 
(g)  No person shall operate a boat while under the influence of any drug or alcohol. 
(h)  No boat shall operate any horn, siren, or other sound device as to create a nuisance or disturb the peace or quiet of the lake environment. 
(i)  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted on a boat unless accompanied by an adult over the age of 18. Exemptions may be allowed to this provision for school sponsored and civic organization activities and events upon request and approval by the city manager. 
(j)  The city shall at all times have power and authority to prohibit, restrict or otherwise limit or regulate the keeping, maintenance or operation of any or all boats on the waters of the Prairie Lake Reservoir should it become necessary to do so in the interest of the public health or safety or for the protection or improvement of the reservoir or other cause. 
(k)  Any boat found abandoned or adrift in Prairie Lake Reservoir, or any unpermitted boat thereon, shall be taken up by the city. The owner of such boat shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the city in connection with the taking, towing, impoundment, and storage of such boat. Further, the owner of such boat shall pay an impoundment fee of $15.00 per day for each day such boat is impounded by the city. All such expenses and fees shall be payable to the City of Mascoutah. The city shall have a lien thereon for all such expenses and fees and for any unpaid fees and for all damages caused by such boat to property of the city and may enforce such lien by advertisement and sale of such craft in like manner as chattel mortgages may be foreclosed under the laws of this state. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as exonerating the owner or operator of any boat from personal liability to the city or other person for any damage or injury by such boat. 
(l)  Boat owners and operators will comply with all safety and registration requirements of the Illinois Boat Registration and Safety Act (625 ILCS 45/1-1 et seq.) and any amendments thereto. 
(m)  The business of renting boats for hire or conveying passengers for hire on Prairie Lake Reservoir is prohibited. 
(n)  All boats are required to remain ten feet away from all fountains located in Prairie Lake Reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 10-2-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2017, repealed the former § 31-4-7, and enacted a new § 31-4-7 as set out herein. The former § 31-4-7 pertained to boats not permitted and derived from the original codification of this Code.  
Sec. 31-4-8. - Ice skating. 
Ice skating at the Prairie Lake Reservoir is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 10-2-17)  
Sec. 31-4-9. - Signs. 
Signs shall be posted at the Mascoutah reservoirs stating that public boating is not allowed without prior city approval and swimming and ice skating is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 10-2-17)  
Sec. 31-4-10. - Automobiles to be limited to roadways. 
Any vehicles operated upon said city reservoirs' property shall be confined to established roadways at all time and at no time shall automobiles be driven or operated upon any embankments, levees, grass areas or other areas clearly designated as no parking areas by said city.  
Sec. 31-4-11. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
All persons exercising the privileges granted by this chapter shall do so in an orderly manner and no persons shall engage in any loud, unusual or improper noise, quarreling, fighting or in any other activity of a disorderly nature; no such person shall discharge any firearms or carry such weapons at any time during the exercise of any privilege herein granted.  
Sec. 31-4-12. - Suspension of privileges. 
The city reserves the right to suspend the privileges granted herein for any reason that it may deem to be to the best interests of the health, welfare or convenience of the residents of the city.  
ARTICLE V. - TREE AND SHRUB REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Trees and shrubs, § 33-3-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 31-5-1. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Mascoutah Tree Ordinance of Mascoutah, Illinois. It shall amend Mascoutah City Code of Ordinances, chapter 31, recreation and parks, by adding article V, tree and shrub regulations. It is acknowledged that this article will amend and supplement chapter 33, street regulations, article III, trees and shrubs. In the event that the provisions herein conflict with said chapter 33, article III, the provisions in chapter 33, article III, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 1, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 31-5-2. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within Mascoutah, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 2, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 31-5-3. - Responsibility. 
The City of Mascoutah Parks and Recreation Commission shall act as the city tree board. The terms of office for these commission members are established in the parks and recreation commission code. The commission may designate one of its members and/or someone outside the commission as the primary contact and liaison person responsible for trees within the city. This person may also be an additional point of contact for all state and federal agencies regarding regulation of trees in accordance with this article. Additionally, the parks and recreation commission may call upon the local agencies such as the Mascoutah Garden Club for advice, assistance, expertise, and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 3, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 31-5-4. - Duties. 
The parks and recreation commission shall: 
(1)  Consider tree issues as outlined in this ordinance at their regular meetings. 
(2)  Advise and recommend to the city council on any issues regarding this article. The topics may include, but not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Amendments to the article. 
b.  Policy concerning selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city. 
c.  Establishment of educational and informational programs that will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the urban forestry plan. 
d.  Further development of policies and procedures. 
(3)  Encourage availability of copies of this article and any other information related to planting and maintenance of trees and shrubs to any interested person. 
(4)  Make recommendations of actions regarding the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, and other plants located on city-owned property, to conform with the urban forestry plan, the arboricultural specifications manual, and this article. 
(5)  Encourage proper placement of trees on private property: 
a.  So as not to interfere with sewer and water line service for the private owner. 
b.  So as not to encroach on drainage and utility easements. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 4, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 31-5-5. - Mascoutah Electric Department. 
This department is responsible for trimming and pruning trees when they interfere with electric lines. This is required to be done every year as limbs grow and create a potential safety hazard. Insofar as practical, all pruning work will be carried out in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 5, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 31-5-6. - Permits. 
Permits are required for the following: 
(1)  For a non-official person to plant trees or shrubs on city-owned property, or treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any tree, shrub or other plant located on city-owned property. 
(2)  For a non-official person to trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on city-owned property and thereby cause damage to persons or property. 
(3)  Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any tree, shrub, or other plant located on city-owned property. 
(4)  Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster, or any other manmade object to any tree, shrub, or other plant located on city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 6, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 31-5-7. - Public nuisances. 
No action taken by parks and recreation, just regulations. 
(1)  Definition. The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this article: (These are general regulations and are not enforced by the parks and recreation commission.) 
a.  Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on city owned property or on private property that poses a public safety threat. 
b.  Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof, whether located on city owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
c.  Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street sign on city property. 
d.  Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs vehicular lines of sight, and as such may be determined by the city manager, or his/ her designee, pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Right to inspect. Employees of the city have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance. This "right to inspect" is established solely to assure that the private property owner, adjacent property owners, and adjacent public properties are protected from trees where falling limbs may create a hazard. 
(3)  Remedial actions. The following are the examples of, but not sole prescribed methods of abating public nuisances under this article: 
a.  Any public nuisance under this article which is located on city owned property shall be remedied by city employees. 
b.  Any public nuisance under this article which is located on privately owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise remedied by the property owner or his/ her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance. The city manager, or his/ her designee, shall notify the property owner in writing of the following: 
i.  Identify by legal description or by common description the premises upon which the nuisance is located. 
ii.  Describe the kind of tree or shrub which is the nuisance, its location on the property and the reason for declaring it a nuisance. 
iii.  Recommend the actions that the property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance. 
iv.  Require the elimination of the nuisance no less than 30 days after the notice is delivered or sent. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 7, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 31-5-8. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of article, and upon being notified in writing about non-compliance, the property owner shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each separate offense. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this article shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. 
If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this article, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub or other plant located on city owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs may be determined in accordance with the latest revision of A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. Any party who elects to dispute any action or decision by the city shall be entitled to appeal to the city council for a final determination. Appropriate appeal forms shall be provided by the city, and must be completed prior to council review. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 8, 4-5-04)  
ARTICLE VI. - ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL 
 
Sec. 31-6-1. - Purpose. 
The Arboricultural Specifications Manual for the City of Mascoutah, commonly known as the Tree Policy Manual, specifies the arboriculturally correct standards of practice for tree planting and the care of trees in the City of Mascoutah. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 6-16-14)  
Sec. 31-6-2. - Policy. 
Any work on public trees as defined by the City of Mascoutah shall comply with said ordinance and this Arboricultural Specifications Manual. This manual is also recommended as a guide for proper tree care activities by the private sector. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 6-16-14)  
Sec. 31-6-3. - Goals. 
(a)  To encourage professionals and amateurs to plant and maintain trees correctly. 
(b)  To achieve close cooperation between the tree commission, all city departments and private developers on matters that affect Mascoutah's trees located on rights-of-way or public lands in order to preserve and improve Mascoutah's tree canopy and aesthetics. 
(c)  To promote selective natural regeneration of hardy native trees on public lands and rights-of-way. 
(d)  To assist the citizens of Mascoutah to realize the benefits provided by a healthy tree canopy. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 6-16-14)  
Sec. 31-6-4. - Definitions. 
When used in this manual, the following terms shall have herein the meanings ascribed to them: 
Arboricultural Specifications Manual. Manual which outlines all methods, practices, and procedures of tree planting, replacement, and protection for the City of Mascoutah. 
Graft union. The place on the stem of a plant where the bud is joined to the rootstock or trunk. It is usually indicated by a slight swelling. 
Plant. Any multi-cellular organism of the kingdom Plantae characteristically containing chloroplasts, having cellulose cell walls, lacking the power of locomotion, and reproducing by seeds or spores. 
Public lands and places. All lands and/or grounds owned by the City of Mascoutah. 
Public trees. Those trees located on public lands. 
Rights-of-way. Those lands in the public ownership along public roads or easements. 
Root flare. Base of trunk that swells out to become buttress roots entering the soil. 
Shrub. A low woody perennial plant usually having several major branches. 
Shrubbery. An area where a number of shrubs are planted. 
Tree. A perennial woody plant having a main trunk and usually a distinct crown. 
Tree sub committee. Those members appointed to recommend policies, regulations and standards to protect the community forest in the City of Mascoutah. 
Tree City USA. Certification attained by accomplishing and maintaining the standards as set out by the Tree City USA organization in an effort to grow and manage a viable urban forest. 
Tree Policy Manual. See Arboricultural Specifications Manual. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 6-16-14)  
Sec. 31-6-5. - Selection of species varieties and cultivars. 
(a)  "Right Tree—Right Place". Consider the physical conditions of your planting site. Sun and wind exposure, soil type and drainage pattern are all factors that can affect the growth and performance of the tree. 
(b)  When choosing the right tree it helps to consider varieties and cultivars. A variety or cultivar is a subgroup within a larger tree species having a distinct character or trait. Selection of a particular species and/or cultivar can help solve problems related to planting sites. By selecting a tree with a problem solving trait it is possible to: Reduce the need for pesticides; reduce maintenance hours; improve tree health; predict crown size and root space needs; enhance aesthetics through more diversity of flowers; eliminate the nuisance of fruit dropping and thorns in addition to extending the life of the tree. 
(c)  Tables 1 & 2 of this manual [in this article] contain lists of acceptable trees. The trees on these lists have been proven adaptable to and suitable for urban conditions in the City of Mascoutah. These lists contain species by size category and common and scientific name. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 6-16-14)  
Sec. 31-6-6. - Standards of practice. 
(a)  Plant material selection, handling, inspection, storage, planting: 
(1)  Only desirable, long-lived trees of good appearance and beauty shall be planted on public sites. All plant material should be generally free from injurious insects and disease. Any trees planted shall be adaptable to USDA Zone 6 climate conditions. 
(2)  Trees shall be tagged indicating species and size. Trees shall be free of wounds, insects and cankers. Root systems should be full and root balls should be moist but not moldy. Root balls should be protected from freezing. 
(3)  Plants should be protected from wind during transport and kept cool and moist at all times. Care should be taken as not to drop or otherwise loosen the root ball. Plant should not be picked up by the trunk. Instead, the soil ball should be supported when moving plant. 
(4)  Bare rooted plants must be planted when dormant (buds are closed and not leafed out). Roots should always be kept moist and cool and trees planted as soon as possible. If storing the trees until planting, the root balls should be covered with moist soil or wood chips until planting time. All bare rooted trees should be soaked in water immediately prior to planting. 
(b)  Spacing and location specifications for public areas: 
(1)  Before digging make certain you are aware of underground utility locations. Call JULIE and wait for their response before digging. 
(2)  Minimum spacing on planting trees is 25 feet from the next tree. 
(3)  Plant street trees between curb and sidewalk if the planting strip is at least four feet wide, large/medium trees may only be planted behind the sidewalk. Small trees with upright/columnar branches and single stemmed may be used if they are on the approved tree list. 
(c)  Minimum size specifications: Trees planted on commercial/multi-family projects shall be no smaller than two and one-half inches in caliper (diameter measured at six inches above the ground). Trees planted on single/two-family projects shall be no smaller than one and one-half inches in caliper. 
(d)  Planting procedures: 
(1)  Potted and/or balled and burlapped trees. 
i.  The hole shall be dug with the width three times the spread of the root ball and no deeper than the root ball. Hole should have slanted sides and be roughened with the shovel. 
ii.  Trees shall be planted no deeper than the original root flare. Do not confuse a graft union for the root flare. In clay soils trees can be planted slightly higher, not to exceed 20 percent of root ball above ground. Set trees on native soil or thoroughly compact backfill. 
iii.  Remove tree from the pot or cut away twine around the trunk and fold back burlap and the wire basket to below ground level. When possible, remove burlap and wire baskets. Always remove all plastic twine and artificial burlap. 
iv.  Straighten tree and completely backfill the hole with existing soil. Avoid using excessive amounts of organic matter. 
v.  Apply water to settle the soil and to eliminate any voids. At this time a solution of root stimulator can be watered in. 
vi.  Break up any dirt clods; add soil if needed. 
vii.  Place a two- to four-inch layer of mulch around the tree in a minimum three-foot radius. 
(2)  Bare rooted trees. 
i.  Plant trees immediately upon receipt. Soak in water before planting. 
ii.  Avoid any drying or warming of seedlings. 
iii.  Trim any long root hairs with a sharp tool. 
iv.  Place seedling in slit or hole, making sure roots are straight and not bent in a "J" shape. Pack soil firmly around roots and water. Plant the seedling at the previous planting depth for hardwoods and slightly deeper for evergreens. 
(e)  Early maintenance procedures: 
(1)  Plants should be thoroughly watered every five to ten days from April through October as needed as a supplement to natural rainfall. Plants should receive a total of two inches of water every two weeks. Use of a "treegator" on newly planted trees is highly recommended. 
(2)  Trees should be pruned as needed to remove dead, damaged, or poorly located limbs only. Fertilizing is not usually necessary. Only after trees are fully established (two to five years), lower branches may be removed to promote tree structure and facilitate pedestrian and vehicle clearance. 
(3)  Thin barked trees subject to sunscald should be protected from November to April with approved paper tree wrap material. Remove all wrap during the growing season. 
(4)  Trees that are planted in windy open areas need be staked. Stake to prevent movement of root ball, not of tree trunk. Stake with three guy lines, protecting trunk of tree from rope damage. 
(5)  Mulch shall be maintained at all times at a depth of three inches in a minimum three-foot radius around each tree. Recommended mulch shall be shredded bark or aged wood chips. Do not "cone up" mulch around a tree and keep the mulch away from the tree trunk. "Coning up" invites rot and insect infestation. 
(6)  Spraying shall be done only for the control of specific diseases or insects, with the proper materials and the necessary strength, and applied at the proper time to obtain the desired control. All spraying of pesticides shall be performed by a licensed applicator and conform to federal and state regulations. 
(f)  Pruning procedures: 
(1)  No topping is allowed on public trees. 
(2)  Except for work necessitated by storms or other emergencies, a permit is required before any person may remove or cut any trees upon public lands within the city. 
(3)  All dead branches shall be removed. Branches that cross or rub shall be pruned. 
(4)  To prevent the spread of infectious disease, all pruning tools should be disinfected before being used on a new tree. 
(5)  All large, established trees shall have their lower branches pruned as necessary to allow the flow of vehicles and pedestrians under the tree; 15-foot street clearance and eight-foot sidewalk clearance is required 
(6)  Proper pruning techniques shall be used as noted below. All cuts shall be made with a sharp saw or pruning shears and only at the nodes or crotches. Wound dressings over cuts are not recommended 
(g)  Proper pruning principles guidelines: 
(1)  Locate the branch bark ridge (BBR) and make your cut outside the BBR. Small branches can be removed with one cut. 
(2)  Large limbs should be removed with a series of three cuts. Make an undercut about one half way through the limb away from the main trunk. Then make a top cut in the same area but slightly further out from the trunk then the first cut. This will remove the weight and bulk and leave a manageable stub to remove without damaging the trunk of the tree. The third cut is a smooth cut from the bottom up to remove the remaining stub. 
(h)  Do not: 
(1)  Make flush cut behind the BBR. 
(2)  Leave living or dead stubs. 
(3)  Injure or remove the branch collar. 
(4)  Paint cuts or otherwise treat the cuts. 
(5)  Top or misshape the tree. 
The best time to prune living branches is late in the dormant season or very early in spring before leaves form. Dead and dying branches can be pruned anytime. Use sharp tools! Make clean cuts. Be careful with all tools. Safety first! 
(i)  Construction protection procedures: Avoid soil compaction—The key to tree survival in the years following construction is protection of the roots during construction. Root compaction caused by the weight of stored materials, vehicles and foot traffic cuts off air and water passages in the soil that trees depend upon for good health. Damage from compaction often shows up slowly and years later. The safest and surest way to avoid compaction is to build a protective fence around the tree to keep damaging vehicles and materials away from the root zone. 
(j)  Avoiding breaks and scrapes: Special care with backhoes and other machinery is required to minimize damage to trunk, limbs and overhead branches. If work near a tree is required, wrap the trunk with protective material, such as 2×4s tied with rope or wire. Repair accidental damage immediately and report to the proper city authority. 
(k)  Recommended removal procedures: 
(1)  Appropriate street and sidewalk barriers shall be placed where removals may endanger the public. 
(2)  The street and police departments shall be notified of any street blockages or restrictions of on-street parking. 
(3)  The stumps of all trees shall be removed to a minimum of six inches below ground level, filled with soil and seeded. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 6-16-14) 
MASCOUTAH PARKS TREE LIST 
TABLE 1 
Deciduous Trees 
Large trees: Greater than 45 feet in height at maturity. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Acer rubrum 	Red Maple 
Acer nigrum 	Black Maple 
Acer saccharum 	Sugar Maple 
Betula nigra 	River Birch 
Carpinus betulus 	European Hornbeam 
Cercidiphyllum japonicum 	Katsuratree 
Fagus grandifolia 	American Beech 
Fagus sylvatica 	European Beech 
Ginkgo biloba ginkgo 	Ginko (Males Only) 
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis 	Thornless Honeylocust 
Liriodendron tulipifera 	Tulip Tree 
Metasequoia glyptostroboides 	Dawn Redwood 
Nyssa sylvatica 	Black Tupelo 
Platanus x acerifolia 	London Planetree 
Quercus alba 	White Oak 
Quercus bicolor 	Swamp White Oak 
Quercus coccinea 	Scarlet Oak 
Quercus ellipsoidalis 	Northern Pin Oak 
Quercus imbricaria 	Shingle Oak 
Quercus lyrata 	Overcup Oak 
Quercus macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 
Quercus muehlenbergii 	Chinkapin Oak 
Quercus nuttallii 	Nuttall Oak 
Quercus phellos 	Willow Oak 
Quercus prinus 	Chestnut Oak 
Quercus robur 	English Oak 
Quercus rubra 	Northern Red Oak 
Quercus shumardii 	Shumard Oak 
Styphnolobium japonicum 	Japanese Pagodatree 
Taxodium distichum baldcypress 	Baldcypress 
Tilia americana American linden 	American Linden 
Tilia tomentosa 	Silver Linden 
Zelkova serrata 	Japanese Zelkova 
 
Medium trees: 31 to 45 feet in height at maturity. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Koelreuteria paniculata 	Goldenraintree 
Parrotia persica Persian parrotia 	Persian Ironwood 
Prunus virginiana 	Canada Red Choke Cherry 
Prunus maackii 	Amur Chokecherry 
Prunus sargentii 	Sargent Cherry 
Quercus acutissima sawtooth oak 	Sawtooth Oak 
 
Small trees: 15 to 30 feet in height at maturity. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Acer buergerianum 	Trident Maple 
Acer ginnala 	Amur Maple 
Acer griseum 	Paperbark Maple 
Amelanchier arborea 	Common Serviceberry 
Amelancier grandiflora 	Serviceberry 
Cercis canadensis 	Eastern Redbud 
Cercis canadensis alba 	Whitebud 
Chionanthus virginicus 	White Fringetree 
Cornus kousa 	Kousa Dogwood 
Cornus mas 	Corneliancherry Dogwood 
Cotinus coggygria 	Common Smoketree 
Franklinia alatamaha 	Flanklinia 
Halesia tetraptera 	Carolina Silverbell 
Magnolia x soulangiana 	Saucer Magnolia 
Magnolia stellata 	Star Magnolia 
Magnolia virginiana 	Sweetbay Magnolia 
Malus crabapple 	Crabapple (Fruitless Cultivar) 
Styrax japonicus Japanese snowbell 	Japanese Snowbell 
Syringa reticulata 	Japanese Tree Lilac 
 
MASCOUTAH PARKS TREE LIST 
TABLE 2 
Coniferous and Evergreen Trees 
Large trees: Greater than 45 feet in height at maturity. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Abies balsamea 	Balsam Fir 
Abies concolor 	White Fir 
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis 	Nootka Falsecypress 
Cryptomeria japonica 	Japanese Cryptomeria 
Ilex opaca 	American Holly 
Picea abies 	Norway Spruce 
Picea glauca 	Black Hill Spruce 
Picea omorika 	Serbian Spruce 
Picea pungens 	Colorado Blue Spruce 
Pinus strobus 	Eastern White Pine 
Psedotsuga menziesii 	Douglas Fir 
Thuja plicata 	Green Gaint Arborvitae 
Tsuga canadensis 	Eastern Hemlock 
 
Medium trees: 31 to 45 feet in height at maturity. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Cedrus atlantica 	Blue Atlas Ceder 
Juniperus virginiana 	Eastern Redcedar 
Pinus bungeana 	Lacebark pine 
Pinus flexilis 	Limber Pine 
 
Small trees: 15 to 30 feet in height at maturity. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Ilex x attenuata 	Foster's Holly 
 
(Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 6-16-14)  
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 31-7-1. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Special event. Any outdoor or seasonal event such as tent sale, warehouse sale, sidewalk sale, craft fair, carnival, picnic, contest, game, sporting event, rodeo, 5K run, produce stand, or similar promotional event that requires use of city facilities, property or equipment. A special event may not exceed six months in duration per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 3-2-15)  
Sec. 31-7-2. - Permit required and procedures. 
(a)  Special events as defined in section 31-7-1 require a special events permit. 
(b)  An application for a special events permit must be filed with the city clerk not less than 60 days prior to the first day of the special event. The city clerk will coordinate review of the permit with affected city departments. 
(c)  With each special events permit application, the applicant must also provide the following related information (if applicable): 
(1)  The name and phone number for the person in charge of the event and a secondary contact. 
(2)  Facilities requested. 
(3)  Dates and times requested for event. 
(4)  Event description including anticipated attendance and charges for the event. 
(5)  List of materials to be brought on city property and any special consideration requests from the city. Additional fees may be charged for any services provided by the city. 
(6)  If concessions are to be provided, list what type and anticipated charges for concessions. The city and Mascoutah Improvement Association shall have first right of refusal for any concessions to be provided. 
(7)  Proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 naming the city as additional insured and damage bond or cash deposit to protect city facilities in the amount of $500,000. 
(d)  For any type of runs, walks or races, the following approved routes shall be used and shall be identified when submitting application for special events permit. The city will review alternate routes when requested but approval will be on a case-by-case basis. Applicant will be required to have properly trained personnel at every intersection with safety vests to provide traffic control. Traffic control will not be provided by the city. 
(1)  Route 1: Park Drive, North on 6 th Street, West on Fuesser Road, South on County Road, East on Harnett Street, North on 10 th Street, East on Park Drive to finish. 
(2)  Route 2: Park Drive, South on 6 th Street, East on Harnett Street, South on Railway Street, West on Main Street, North on County Road, East on Harnett Street, North on 10 th Street, East on Park Drive to finish. 
(e)  All applicants upon signing the special events permit understand, agree and certify to the following: 
(1)  Applicant and all of its program/activity attendees shall comply with all applicable laws and city ordinances, policies and procedures. 
(2)  Applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless city and its agents and employees for and from any and all loss, including but not limited to attorney's fees, damages, expenses and liability arising out of applicant's use of city facilities/property. 
(3)  Applicant shall pay any damages to city facilities, property, or equipment arising out of its use of city facilities/property, whether such damage was accidental or deliberate. (The cost of damages will be based on the repair or replacement cost, the choice of which is at the discretion of the city.) 
(4)  Applicant shall supply adequate supervision to ensure proper care and use of city facilities/property. 
(5)  Applicant shall not move [or] alter city property without prior approval of the city. 
(6)  Applicant shall be responsible for all safety precautions and traffic control if event involves use of city streets. 
(7)  Applicant shall not attach, nail or otherwise affix signs, displays or materials to city facilities/property without prior consent by the city. 
(8)  Applicant shall be responsible for all clean up associated with event. Failure to clean up will result in a fee equal to city's actual costs (labor and equipment rental) being charged for the city to clean up. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 3-2-15)  
Sec. 31-7-3. - Fees. 
(a)  Cost for a special events permit shall be $50.00 for "for profit" applicants. There will be no permit charge for nonprofit organizations (proof of nonprofit status is required). 
(b)  Cost for grand stand rental shall be $1,200.00 per day for "for profit" applicants. Cost for grand stand rental shall be $100.00 per day for nonprofit organizations (proof of nonprofit status is required). Performance bond, or deposit, in the same amount is required and will be returned to applicant upon inspection of grand stands for trash removal and no damage. Fencing for grand stand rental is also available but no setup assistance will be provided. 
(c)  "Runners on roadway" signage will be provided by the city for any type of runs, walks or races and the fee for the signage shall be $50.00 per event. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 3-2-15)  
ARTICLE VIII. - BALL FIELD USE RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 31-8-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Field preparation. Field preparation will be done by city of Mascoutah personnel and shall include field maintenance (in-field dragging, mowing, watering) lining of fields, and placement of bases and pitching mound. 
Mascoutah sports organizations. Mascoutah sports organizations are defined as those organizations whose teams consist of at least 50 percent Mascoutah residents. Team and participant rosters may be required for verification. 
Non-Mascoutah sports organizations. Non-Mascoutah sports organizations are defined as those organizations whose teams consist of less than 50 percent Mascoutah residents. Team and participant rosters may be required for verification. 
Turface. Turface conditioner is used as a field drying materials for managing moisture, improving drainage, and keeping skinned surfaces safe and playable. City of Mascoutah personnel will apply Turface at the request of a renter to help during wet conditions. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 31-8-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  Any person or organization desiring to use the ball fields for practices, games, tournaments, clinics, camps, classes or use of batting cages are required to obtain a ball field use permit. 
(b)  An application for ball field use must be filed with the city manager's office not less than two days prior to the date of use. 
(c)  With each ball field use permit application, the applicant must also provide the following related information: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number for the organization and/or person renting the ball fields. 
(2)  Type of sport/activity. 
(3)  Dates and times requested for ball field rental including identification of which ball field is preferred. 
(4)  Pitching distance and base distance must be designated so fields can be prepped by the City of Mascoutah prior to use. 
(5)  Proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 naming the city as additional insured and damage bond or cash deposit to protect city facilities in the amount of $500,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 31-8-3. - Fees. 
(a)  Rental fees for practices, games, clinics, camps and classes shall be as follows: 
(1)  $25.00 per field for a single sport activity, prepped. 
(2)  $100.00 per field for all day ball field use, prepped. 
(3)  Rental fees for games and practices will not apply to Mascoutah sports organizations. 
(4)  Rental fees for clinics, camps and classes will apply to all sports organizations. 
(b)  Tournament fees. 
(1)  $200.00 per day for Mascoutah sports organizations. 
(2)  $400.00 per day for non-Mascoutah sports organizations. 
(c)  Additional fees. 
(1)  $25.00 for additional lining of a ball field on the same day of rental. 
(2)  $12.00 per bag to have Turface added to a ball field. 
(3)  Additional fees will apply to all sports organizations. 
(d)  Field light fees. 
(1)  Light key deposit. A $25.00 per key cash deposit is required for rentals that require keys to operate field lighting. The keys must be returned within 24 hours of the last rental date to receive full refund of deposit. If a key is not returned or becomes lost, individual will be charged $100.00 for replacement. 
(2)  $15.00 for use of lights for a single game or practice per ball field. 
(3)  $30.00 for all day use of lights for multiple games or practices per ball field. 
(4)  Field light fees and deposits will apply for all sports organizations. 
(e)  Batting cages. There will be no fees charged for use of batting cages. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 31-8-4. - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted for use of the ball fields located in Mascoutah parks. 
(a)  The City of Mascoutah will give rental groups a copy of the approved application which shall become the permit authorizing use of the field(s) for the following types of sport activities: practices, games, tournaments, clinics/camps/classes or use of batting cages. 
(b)  Field use is limited to the specified times as noted on the permit. If warm-up time is needed then that must be included in the application. Access to fields will not be granted more than one hour prior to scheduled rental time. 
(c)  Permits may be revoked if there is failure to follow City of Mascoutah regulations. 
(d)  Rental groups shall take sincere steps to encourage participants, coaches, officials and spectators to demonstrate respect for the facilities. This includes emphasis on sportsmanship, proper conduct and language, proper use of equipment and care for facilities, and trash pick-up. 
(e)  Rental groups must collect and deposit all trash from their fields into appropriate containers immediately following each game or practice. Please help keep our parks clean and do not litter. 
(f)  City of Mascoutah will mow all of the grass areas, service restrooms daily, and regularly collect trash for removal. 
(g)  Rental groups are required to have an identifiable representative, who is 18 years of age or older, on site for the duration of the rental that the City of Mascoutah representative can talk to with any problems or concerns. 
(h)  If additional dates or times are needed to reschedule make-up games, preapproval by City of Mascoutah is required. 
(i)  To avoid damage, the following are not allowed on any ball field: studs and heels on footwear, chairs, stakes in tents, goals or other structures. 
(j)  Park hours are 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(k)  The speed limit in the park is 15 MPH. The posted speed limit must be observed. 
(l)  All vehicles within the parks should only be driven and parked on designated roadways and parking lots. 
(m)  Driveways and entrances must be clear at all times. Violators may be ticketed or towed at the owner's expense. 
(n)  All pets must be kept on a leash at all times. In accordance with city ordinances, owners must properly clean up after their pet. 
(o)  Rental groups are responsible for any contractors (photographer, sports equipment, airbrush artist, etc.) hired. It is the responsibility of the rental group to ensure their contractors and vendors comply with all facility policies and regulations. All items needed for the event must be delivered and removed from the facility during the hours designated on the agreement. 
(p)  The City of Mascoutah is not responsible for any personal property loss or damage to vehicles. The City of Mascoutah reserves the right to terminate its permit if regulations and/or rules are not followed. 
(q)  Rental groups who are given keys to facilities and are responsible for opening and closing the facility must ensure the facility is locked and secured prior to vacating the facility which can include securing gates, doors, locks, and turning off field lights. Failure to do so may result in non-refundable cancellation of field use for the remainder of the season. User groups may be responsible for the cost of additional lighting or vandalism repairs. Groups may also be subject to fees associated with lost keys. 
(r)  Soliciting is prohibited in all parks including the fields and parking lots, unless written authorization is provided by City of Mascoutah. 
(s)  Each rental group needs to designate a responsible party for all field rentals, to inform team coaches, representatives and players about City of Mascoutah procedures and rules. The responsible party is asked to report any problems with field conditions, equipment or lights. 
(t)  Rental groups should leave the field and suspend all outdoor activities if lightning is observed or thunder is audible. Everyone should immediately seek shelter in a building or automobile and remain in shelter until twenty minutes following the last sign of thunder or lightning. 
(u)  City of Mascoutah reserves the right to cancel any event or to restrict access to the fields due to an emergency, severe weather, vandalism, poor playing conditions or damage that could cause safety concerns. City staff will determine field playability as soon as reasonably possible and post cancellations on the city web site (www.mascoutah.org). Cancellation policy: 
(1)  Cancellations made by responsible party or City of Mascoutah for any type of sport activity made at least 48 hours in advance will result in a full refund. 
(2)  Cancellations made by responsible party or City of Mascoutah due to severe weather or poor field conditions for practices, games, clinics, camps or classes will result in a full refund if cancellation occurs prior to field preparation; there will be no refund if cancellation occurs after field preparation has been completed. 
(3)  Cancellations made by responsible party or City of Mascoutah due to severe weather or poor field conditions during the course of a tournament will result in a partial refund to be determined by the city manager if make-up cannot be scheduled. 
(4)  No refunds will be provided for Turface once it has been applied. 
(5)  No refunds for field light fees will be provided if lights had been turned on. 
(v)  No activity will be permitted which is in violation of local, state, and federal statutes. Rental groups must adhere to all City of Mascoutah Ordinances during the use of City of Mascoutah facilities and parks. Any participants violating any of these rules may be asked to vacate premises. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 31-8-5. - Concession stand permit required. 
(a)  Any person or organization desiring to use the ball field concession stand for tournaments are required to obtain a concession stand permit. 
(b)  An application for concession stand use must be filed with the city manager's office not less than two days prior to the date of use. 
(c)  With each concession stand permit application, the applicant must also provide the following related information: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number for the organization and/or person renting the concession stand. 
(2)  Type of sport/activity and number of teams to be included in tournament. 
(3)  Dates and times requested for concession stand rental. 
(d)  Fees. 
(1)  Fifty dollars per day for tournaments consisting of three through six teams. 
(2)  One hundred dollars per day for tournaments consisting of seven through 12 teams. 
(3)  Two hundred dollars per day for tournaments consisting of 13 or more teams. 
(e)  Organizations are responsible for bringing all food and drink items they are wishing to sell. No alcoholic beverages allowed. No selling of city owned food and drink items. 
(f)  Organizations are responsible for bringing own cash and change. 
(g)  Organizations will be allowed to use the following city equipment located within the concession stand: hot dog machine, popcorn machine, nacho machine, cash register, microwave, coolers. 
(1)  Deposit in the amount of $200.00 required for use of equipment. 
(2)  Organizations are responsible for clean-up of equipment after use. 
(3)  Deposit will be returned to applicant upon inspection of equipment for no damage and cleanliness. 
(4)  Organizations will be responsible for any and all damage to equipment and will be billed for any costs associated with repair or replacement not covered by the deposit. 
(h)  Organizations will be responsible for clean-up of the facility after use. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1(Att.), 4-16-18)  
Chapter 33 - STREET REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED 
 
Sec. 33-1-1. - Department established. 
There is hereby established a department of the municipal government which shall be known as the street department. It shall embrace the city manager, the public works director, and the city employees. It shall have primary responsibility for matters related to streets, alleys, sidewalks and access to, or encroachments thereon.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 33-2-1. - Undermining. 
No person shall undermine in any manner, any street or any other ground or real estate situated in the city or belonging to any private person.  
Sec. 33-2-2. - Open doors. 
No person shall open or allow to remain open, any door, any gate, or the grating of any vault belonging to the premises occupied by him, on any street, alley or sidewalk in the city for any purpose, except the taking in and removing goods; and any person allowing such grating to remain open shall warn passersby of the danger.  
Sec. 33-2-3. - Repairing sidewalks, etc. 
Whenever any sidewalk, pavement, or cellar door on the same becomes worn out or out of repair, or is torn up or broken and uneven, it shall be the duty of the public works director to immediately report such fact to the mayor or city manager, and upon verbal or written order from either of them, to give notice to the party owning the adjoining property to repair such sidewalk or cellar door without delay.  
Sec. 33-2-4. - Stairway—Railing. 
Steps or stairways leading into any building shall not extend from the wall of such building onto any pavement or sidewalk, and in such case, the person making or causing to be made such passage shall erect a railing on the side of the stairs toward the street to prevent persons from falling into the street.  
Sec. 33-2-5. - Closing street. 
Whenever public safety or the improvement or repair of any street, alley or public place requires it, the mayor or the city manager may order any street, alley, or public place temporarily closed to traffic and the placing of signs indicating that the street, alley or public place is closed by order of the mayor or city manager. Whenever such signs are so placed, no person shall ride or drive upon or cross such street, alley or public place, or in any manner, destroy, deface, or remove any such sign.  
Sec. 33-2-6. - Signs across street. 
No person shall place any sign, advertisement or banner over any or across any street, alley or sidewalk in the city, unless he has written approval of the city council. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-17.  
Sec. 33-2-7. - Vehicles and skateboards on sidewalks. 
No person shall operate any skateboard or motor vehicle on or over any sidewalk, except in crossing the same to go into a yard or parking lot.  
Sec. 33-2-8. - Deposits on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk, any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or property. 
Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width is not thereby reduced to less than four feet; and provided that no such article shall remain on such walk for more than 30 minutes.  
Sec. 33-2-9. - Obstructing street. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to deposit any material on any street which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any grass clippings, or to cause a lawn mower to blow grass clippings onto a street or any other articles such as glass which may cause injury to any person, animal or property. 
(b)  No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected on any public ground, or in any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city, any debris, materials, or obstruction, except as may be permitted by this Code. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the police department to exercise a vigilant supervision over such places and to notify any person found making such deposit or responsible for same to remove the offending matter at once. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-3.  
Sec. 33-2-10. - Rainwater drains. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of any storm water drain which discharges water onto any sidewalk in the city and it shall be unlawful to construct or permit the maintenance of any such drain which discharges into any public street or alley at a height greater than 18 inches above the ground or pavement.  
Sec. 33-2-11. - Building materials in street. 
The director may move any obstruction on any street or sidewalk of the city, but before doing so, he shall notify the person responsible therefore to remove such obstruction within a reasonable time after being notified. Any person engaged in erecting a building or fence or improving any lot on such street may deposit materials thereon and contiguous to such length of time as may be necessary for the work. The obstruction shall not extend to more than one-half of the width of the sidewalk, street, or alley adjacent to such improvement and the gutter shall always be left free and unobstructed. At night, such person shall keep an illuminated warning light on such material. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-3.  
Sec. 33-2-12. - Merchandise on public street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any signs or advertisements on any such pavements, unless permission is granted by the city council. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-3.  
Sec. 33-2-13. - Encroachments. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property.  
Sec. 33-2-14. - Posting bills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, paint, print or nail any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, or upon any private wall, door or gate without the consent, in writing, of the owner of such curbstone, flagstone, sidewalk, tree, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, private wall, door or gate.  
Sec. 33-2-15. - Signs on poles. 
No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint or fasten, or cause to be nailed, tacked, painted or fastened, any sign or any other foreign substance or material onto any telephone, telegraph, electric light, police and/or fire alarm pole or post, or any street or traffic sign located on any sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds or injure or deface any such pole or post.  
Sec. 33-2-16. - Injury to new pavements. 
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or destroy any newly-laid sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft, newly-laid pavement.  
Sec. 33-2-17. - Barbed-wire fences. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in part of barbed wire, or with any similar material designated to cause injury to persons, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within three feet of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public way or place unless such barbs or charged wire are at least six feet above the level of such public place.  
Sec. 33-2-18. - Burning on public streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, ditches or alleys in the city.  
Sec. 33-2-19. - Discharges into storm sewers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected any drain carrying or to carry any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool, industrial waste or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances into any storm sewers constructed as part of this improvement. [Ill. 177] 
(Ord. No. 02-112, 6-17-02) 
Cross reference— Sewage in natural outlet, § 38-5-5.  
ARTICLE III. - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Tree and shrub regulations, § 31-5-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 33-3-1. - Planting. 
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street or parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefore. Applications for such permits shall be made to the public works director. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the public works director.  
Sec. 33-3-2. - Planting trees in right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful to plant any bushes, trees, shrubs or other plants on the right-of-way of any public street, including the space on the right-of-way between the sidewalk and the adjacent street pavement.  
Sec. 33-3-3. - Removal. 
It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub or portion thereof in any street, parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefore. Applications for such permits shall be made to the public works director and shall be referred by him to the city manager before permission shall be granted.  
Sec. 33-3-4. - Injury. 
It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in such public place.  
Sec. 33-3-5. - Advertisements or notices. 
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway, or other public place.  
Sec. 33-3-6. - Dangerous trees. 
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the municipality at a height less than eight feet or in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. 
Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. 
The public works director may, at the owner's expense, trim or remove any tree or shrub so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be done away with.  
Sec. 33-3-7. - Wires. 
It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the permission of the city manager. 
Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles and wires in the streets, alleys, or other public places in the municipality shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the public works director so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their conduct.  
Sec. 33-3-8. - Gas pipes. 
Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the municipality shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.  
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 33-4-1. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place in the city without having obtained a permit as is herein required or without complying with the provisions of this article or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit.  
Sec. 33-4-2. - Applications. 
Applications for such permits shall be made to the city manager and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual excavating work; and the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom or for which the work is being done, and it shall also contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done.  
Sec. 33-4-3. - Fees. 
The fee for such permit(s) shall be as follows; however, the city council may waive the fees in this section: 
(a)  Excavation in asphalt or Portland cement concrete pavement or surface $1.00 per square foot. 
(b)  Excavation in brick pavement or surface $.50 per square foot. 
(c)  Excavation in oil treated street surface $.25 per square foot. 
(d)  Excavation in untreated or unimproved street or surface $.25 per square foot.  
Sec. 33-4-4. - Bond. 
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed with the clerk a bond in the sum of $50,000.00, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because of the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such tunnel or excavation. Such bond shall have as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the state as a surety company. The city manager may waive the bond provided for herein.  
Sec. 33-4-5. - Deposit. 
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has deposited with the clerk a cash deposit in the sum of $250.00 if no pavement is involved, and $1,000.00 if the excavation is a paved area, to insure the proper restoration of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. From this deposit shall be deducted the expense of the city of relaying the surface of the ground or pavement and of making the refill if this is done by the city or at its expense and the balance shall be returned to the applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored. The city manager may waive the deposit in this section.  
Sec. 33-4-6. - Manner of excavating. 
It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface. 
No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the city department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree, shrub or the roots thereof.  
Sec. 33-4-7. - Sidewalks. 
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. The temporary sidewalk is subject to inspection by the public works director and shall not be open for use until approved by him.  
Sec. 33-4-8. - Restoring surface. 
Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city shall restore the surface to its original condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and the surface re-laid by the applicant in compliance with the regulations of the city and under the supervision of the director.  
Sec. 33-4-9. - Supervision. 
The public works director shall, from time to time, inspect or cause to be inspected, all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other place in the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this Code. Notice shall be given to him at least ten hours before the work of refilling any such tunnel or excavation commences.  
Sec. 33-4-10. - Tunneling. 
It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in any portion of a street or sidewalk in the city which is paved with a concrete or asphalt paving. Where necessary, and where a proper permit has been secured, tunnels may be driven or excavated under any such pavement, provided that upon completion of the work involved, the tunnel shall be backfilled with compacted sand.  
Sec. 33-4-11. - Protective measures and routing of traffic. 
It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or upon any public place to place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for the safety of the general public. 
(a)  Barriers, warning signs, and lights shall conform to the requirements of all applicable provisions of this Code. Warning lights shall be electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. 
(b)  Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not to replace light sources. 
(c)  The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as nearly normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. When traffic conditions permit, the city manager may, permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him if, in his opinion, it is necessary. Such written approval may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. 
(d)  Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to alert traffic within a public street and cones or other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic in accordance with the instructions of the public works director.  
Sec. 33-4-12. - Clearance for vital structures. 
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital equipment as designated by the public works director.  
Sec. 33-4-13. - Protection of traffic. 
The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossing for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk adequate crossing shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line.  
Sec. 33-4-14. - Relocation and protection of utilities. 
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without the written consent of the director and the owner of the facility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner. The facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately-owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless other arrangements are made with the person owning the facility. The permittee shall support and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. The permittee shall secure approval of method of support and protection from the owner of the facility. 
In case of any said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this Section that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility damage and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The city shall not be made a party to any action because of this section. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground facilities and protect the same against damage.  
Sec. 33-4-15. - Abandonment of substructures. 
Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the city manager a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in the way or subsequently becomes in the way of an installation of the city or any other public body, which installation is pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove such abandoned substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the course of excavation for construction of the facility by the city or any other public body.  
Sec. 33-4-16. - Protection of adjoining property. 
The permittee shall, at all times, and at his or its own expense, preserve and protect from injury, any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where, in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain consent from the owner of such private property for such purpose and if he cannot obtain such consent, the public works director may authorize him to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe. 
At the permittee's own expense, all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work shall be shored up and protected, and the permittee shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from failure to properly protect and carry out the work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, said area shall be reseeded or the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this article. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist is parking street areas without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate city department or official having supervision of such property.  
Sec. 33-4-17. - Placement of excavated material. 
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner as to eliminate danger to those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the public works director shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites. 
All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the public works director, whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required by the public works director to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.  
Sec. 33-4-18. - Clean-up. 
As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All clean-up operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the public works director. From time to time as may be ordered by the public works director and in any event, immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall, at his or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the public works director, said work may be done by the public works director and the cost thereof charged to the permittee and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.  
Sec. 33-4-19. - Protection of watercourses. 
The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings, or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide.  
Sec. 33-4-20. - Breaking through pavement. 
(a)  Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the public works director when the use endangers existing substructures or other property. 
(b)  Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete may be required when the nature of the work or the condition of the street warrants. When required, the depth of the cut shall not be less than one inch in depth; however, depths greater than one inch may be required by the public works director when circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the public works director outside the limits of the excavation over cave-outs, overbreaks and small floating sections. 
(c)  Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations may be required by the public works director to confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench. 
(d)  Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or joint. 
(e)  Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench. 
(f)  Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the center line of the trench. 
(g)  Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line. 
(h)  Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be required by the public works director. 
(i)  The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement damage existing prior to excavation unless his cut results in small floating sections that may be unstable, in which case, the permittee shall remove and pave the area.  
Sec. 33-4-21. - Depth of structures. 
No person shall, without written permission of the city manager, install any substructure except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts, and catch basins at a vertical distance less than: 
(a)  Streets. Twenty-four inches below the established flow line of the nearest gutter. If said flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at a minimum of 24 inches below the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the traveled portion of the street. 
(b)  Parkway. 
(1)  The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 16 inches below established gutter grade when said substructure parallels the parkway. 
(2)  The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 12 inches below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at right angles to the parkway. 
(c)  Other public places. The minimum depth of any substructure in any other public place shall be 12 inches below the surface. 
Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain said specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of grade in the surface unless the grade in said substructure interferes with the maintenance of or travel on a public street.  
Sec. 33-4-22. - Backfilling. 
Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the soil shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts consistent with the type of soil involved and the degree of consolidation specified by the public works director. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall not be used in the backfill. 
The number and size of each lift shall be dependent upon the type of soil involved. Such backfill shall be done in a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to a density condition not less than that existing prior to excavation unless otherwise specified. The director may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests must show that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the public works director. All expense of such tests shall be borne by the permittee.  
Sec. 33-4-23. - Trenches in pipe laying. 
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in accordance with existing codes and regulations; however at night no more than 50 feet may be open with proper barriers.  
Sec. 33-4-24. - Prompt completion of work. 
After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.  
Sec. 33-4-25. - Urgent work. 
When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the public works director shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.  
Sec. 33-4-26. - Emergency action. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the city manager for such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced.  
Sec. 33-4-27. - Noise, dust and debris. 
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., shall not use except in case of emergency as otherwise provided herein, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.  
Sec. 33-4-28. - Preservation of monuments. 
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey bench mark within the city shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the city council to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument by the city.  
Sec. 33-4-29. - Inspections. 
The public works director shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this article. The public works director shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this article.  
Sec. 33-4-30. - Location records. 
Every public utility, after the enactment of this article, shall maintain records showing the location of all of its underground facilities except relatively minor facilities which connect a particular premise or building to a facility serving more than one premise or building and except oil or gas-gathering or field lines. Every public utility shall maintain equipment which can locate such facilities in the field.  
Sec. 33-4-31. - Liability of persons to city for damage. 
If any person violates any provision of this Code and any person or property in consequence thereof is injured or damaged, the person so guilty of such violation shall be liable to the city in relation thereto, and no prosecution or other proceeding by the city of such person for any penalty imposed for a violation shall constitute a bar to such action by the city for such damages. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Secs. 5/11-80-1 through 5/11-80-23.  
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS 
 
Sec. 33-5-1. - Application. 
Any person who desires new curbs and gutters constructed or new sidewalks installed shall file an application for same with the city manager's office. The application shall describe the premises. 
(Ord. No. 01-104, 4-16-01)  
Sec. 33-5-2. - Review of contractor's estimates. 
Any application and contractor's estimates shall be reviewed by the city manager and/or city engineer. Approval shall be on a first come first serve basis. The city shall solicit bids from a list of qualified contractors on an annual basis. Every year, on or before May 1, the city shall select the lowest qualified bidder to replace sidewalks and curb and gutters under this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-104, 4-16-01)  
Sec. 33-5-3. - Forms examined. 
Prior to the installation and pouring of any concrete for sidewalks, curbs and gutters, the forms prepared for such construction shall be examined by the city manager.  
Sec. 33-5-4. - City's expense. 
It shall be the policy of the city, upon the approval of the applications for sidewalks, curbs and gutters for the city to participate in the cost of construction of same, up to the amount of 50 percent of said construction cost. The approval is dependent upon funds being available and the benefit derived by the citizens. This section shall not apply to new subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 01-104; 04-16-01) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-11; 5/11-80-13.  
Sec. 33-5-5. - Storm sewers. 
(a)  Description of storm water sewers. Storm water sewers shall be any pipe or sewer used for the carrying of surface drains, ground waters, roof leaders, or storm waters, rain waters, or other waters other than sanitary sewage. 
(b)  Supervision. The public works director shall supervise all connections made to the public storm sewer system or excavations for the purposes of installing or repairing the same. 
(c)  Permits. Before any connection is made to the public storm water sewers, a permit shall be applied for and approved by the public works director or his designated representative. 
(d)  Requirements: Use of storm water sewers. Where a storm water sewer is accessible in a street, alley or easement to a building or premises abutting thereon, the surface drains, ground waters, roof leaders, or storm waters shall be discharged into the storm water sewer unless otherwise authorized by the city manager. Under no conditions shall sanitary sewage or wastes or any substance other than surface waters, ground waters, roof waters or storm waters be permitted to flow into or be connected to the storm water sewer; and no sanitary sewer shall be connected to the storm water sewer system. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-7.  
ARTICLE VI. - CULVERTS 
 
Sec. 33-6-1. - Obstruction of drain or storm sewer. 
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain or storm sewer in any public street or property.  
Sec. 33-6-2. - Permit for culvert. 
It shall be unlawful to install any culvert or replace any culvert without first obtaining a permit from the city manager.  
Sec. 33-6-3. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring a permit to install or replace any culvert shall file an application therefor with the city manager upon a form to be provided for that purpose. The application and the permit issued pursuant thereto shall be on the same form which shall be substantially as outlined in Appendix 'B' attached hereto.  
Sec. 33-6-4. - Termination of permit. 
All such permits shall terminate upon the expiration of one year following the date of issue.  
Sec. 33-6-5. - Type of culvert. 
Culverts shall be installed where driveways or walkways cross open ditches. The material used for the construction of the culverts shall be reinforced concrete, corrugated steel culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of 16 gauge, corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of 16 gauge, asbestos cement storm drain pipe (class IV), or of such other material as determined by the street department, depending upon the conditions existing. The culverts shall be of such size, installed at the grade and constructed with couplings as determined by the public works director. The person desiring the culvert shall purchase a culvert as provided herein and shall have it delivered on the site. The city shall install the culvert.  
Sec. 33-6-6. - Cost of installation. 
Any person installing or replacing a culvert shall, at his own expense, construct and install drainage inlet boxes in such form and manner as the public works director determines necessary depending on the conditions existing.  
Sec. 33-6-7. - Backfill cost. 
Any person installing or replacing a culvert shall, at his own expense, provide and place such backfill material as the public works director determines necessary to complete the project.  
Sec. 33-6-8. - Replacement cost. 
The expense of replacing any culvert shall be borne by the person making application for the permit to install the same. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-7.  
ARTICLE VII. - DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 33-7-1. - Permits required. 
No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across any sidewalk in the city without having first obtained a permit therefor. 
Applications for such permits shall be made to the city manager and shall be accompanied by the fee required. 
No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use, or for the habitual use of other than the owner or occupant of the premises served shall be issued except upon the order of the city manager.  
Sec. 33-7-2. - Fee. 
The fee for all such construction shall be $1.00.  
Sec. 33-7-3. - Grade surface. 
No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the sidewalk or be other than level.  
Sec. 33-7-4. - Specifications. 
Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with the specifications required by the public works director.  
Sec. 33-7-5. - Breaking curb—Bond required. 
Before a permit can be issued to break a curb in the city for the installation of a driveway or any other purpose, a bond or cash in the amount of $100.00 is required to be posted with the city clerk.  
Sec. 33-7-6. - Repair. 
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to keep the same in good repair where it cross the sidewalk and free from obstruction and openings. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-80-2.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SNOW REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 33-8-1. - Snow and ice removal policy. 
(a)  The following is intended to address snow and ice response procedures. 
(b)  The goal of the City of Mascoutah is to provide snow and ice response in a timely and cost-efficient manner. During ice or snow conditions, the city applies de-icer and plows snow. There are two phases for ice and snow response: (1) when snow or ice conditions exist, salt is applied based on public safety needs, starting with primary arterial streets and major intersections; and (2) depending on pavement conditions and forecast, snow plowing will likely commence when two inches of snow accumulates. It is standard practice to avoid salting either secondary streets or in newer subdivisions as repeated salting of concrete leads to deterioration of that material. 
(c)  Conditions such as blowing snow, continual freezing rain, accumulation, forecast conditions, or the need to assist with high priority state or county roadways vary for each snow and ice event. Accordingly, some streets may not be treated. Snow and ice response goals are set primarily to afford public safety crews the ability to provide emergency services. General travel, commerce or individual convenience issues take a lower priority and are not always able to be accommodated. An ongoing assessment is made during snow and ice removal operations regarding when to discontinue removal operations. 
(Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-17-14)  
Sec. 33-8-2. - Parking prohibited. 
Parking restrictions shall be in enforce at any time within 12 hours preceding a prediction by the National Weather Service of two inches or more of snow, sleet or freezing rain. Parking shall be prohibited on the following: (1) Main Street, (2) culs-de-sac, and (3) the side of street with odd address numbers on all streets not included in (1) or (2). Parking restriction will remain in effect for 18 hours after snow, sleet or freezing rain has occurred or sooner if the street has been cleared of snow or ice. 
(Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-17-14)  
Sec. 33-8-3. - Snow and ice removal by residents or private persons. 
(a)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or against a fire hydrant. 
(b)  Owners of private parking lots are responsible for removing their own snow. Such snow shall not be deposited on any sidewalk or city street. 
(c)  Property owners are responsible for clearing their driveway approaches and around mailboxes. Snow plowing operations may inconvenience property owners when snow is plowed in front of driveways or by mailboxes. It is impossible to efficiently and effectively plow the streets and avoid the ends of already cleared driveways. The city's priority is keeping roads open for emergency service provides and apologize for any inconvenience. Residents with medical conditions should contact the city engineer at City Hall if they need assistance with snow removal from their driveway approaches and mailboxes. Those residents will be placed on a list and snow removal aid will be prioritized by the city engineer. 
(d)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on street, gutters, storm drains, or other private property. Keep street gutters and storm drains clean for drainage; don't cause ponding of snow melt that can turn into ice. 
(Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-17-14)  
Sec. 33-8-4. - Parking violation notice; penalty. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle shall be found illegally parked, abandoned or stalled in violation of this article, the police shall attempt to notify the owner or drive of such vehicle by any means and may issue a parking violation notice. Such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by means of towing by order of police in accordance with section 24-6-7 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who violates or aids and abets in violation of this article shall be fined as provided in section 1-1-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-17-14)  
Chapter 34 - UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE  
ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 34-1-1. - Authority and purpose. 
In accordance with state law (65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-013-1 et seq.) this Unified Land Development Code regulates lots, structures and uses in order to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare; and to implement the city's Comprehensive Plan adopted in 2000, as amended, and to regulate the subdivision of land. More specifically, this Unified Land Development Code is intended to assist in achieving the following objectives: 
(a)  To ensure the provision of adequate light, air, and privacy for the occupants of all buildings. 
(b)  To encourage the development of buildings and uses on appropriate sites in order to maximize community-wide social and economic benefits while accommodating the particular needs of all residents, and to discourage development on inappropriate sites. 
(c)  To protect and enhance the character and stability of sound existing residential, commercial, and industrial areas, and to gradually eliminate nonconforming uses and structures. 
(d)  To protect the public from property damage caused by fire, flooding, poorly controlled storm water runoff, mine subsidence and adverse soil and topographical conditions. 
(e)  To provide adequate and well-designed parking and loading space for all buildings and uses, and to reduce vehicular congestion on the public streets and highways. 
(f)  To ensure the proper regulation of mobile home parks to protect the health and safety of residents. 
(g)  To authorize and regulate the design of planned developments. 
(h)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land. 
(i)  To allow free speech and expression through the medium of signs so long as the City is protected against the proliferation of an unlimited number of signs that substantially impinge upon the city's interests in aesthetics and safety. 
(j)  To provide for the efficient administration and fair enforcement of all the regulations in this Unified Land Development Code. 
(Sec. 1.1)  
Sec. 34-1-2. - Applicability. 
This Code shall be applicable to all lands within the corporate limits of the city. Outside of the corporate limits, the unincorporated territory within one and one-half miles of the city is subject to Mascoutah subdivision regulations as contained in article XII of this Code and to the St. Clair County Zoning Code (enacted pursuant to Illinois Statutes). Consequently, if proper application is made to St. Clair County for an interpretation of the development administrator or for a variance, conditional use permit, text amendment or rezoning, similar proceedings need not be initiated with the city. 
(Sec. 1.2)  
Sec. 34-1-3. - Interpretation, conflict with other ordinances. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Code, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this Code, nor is it intended by this Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this Code imposes a greater restriction, this Code shall control. 
(Sec. 1.3)  
Sec. 34-1-4. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
Any regulations previously adopted are hereby repealed if in conflict with this Code or any amendment thereto. 
(Sec. 1.4)  
Sec. 34-1-5. - Severability. 
The phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful by the valid judgment, decree, or injunction order of a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. In the event that, contrary to the policies, interests, and values of the city, a court of competent jurisdiction issues a judgment, decree, or injunction order that this Code, or any part thereof, is unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful because of any omission or prohibition in this Code, then all provisions of this Code not specifically declared to be unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful shall remain in full force and effect. In the event that a judgment, decree, or injunction order declaring all or a portion of this Code to be unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful is reversed or vacated by a court of competent jurisdiction, the provisions contained in this Code shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Sec. 1.5)  
Sec. 34-1-6. - Effective date. 
These regulations shall take effect ten days after their final passage, approval, and publication as provided by law. 
(Sec. 1.6) 
Editor's note— The effective date was November 30, 2000.  
ARTICLE II. - LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 34-2-1. - Purpose. 
This article provides the general rules for interpreting language and the definition of terms within the Unified Land Development Code.  
Sec. 34-2-2. - Rules for interpreting language. 
For the purpose of this Code, the following rules shall be observed: 
(a)  Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in section 34-2-3; if any term is not defined in section 34-2-3, said term shall have its standard English dictionary meaning. 
(b)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
(c)  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(d)  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged to be used or occupied" as well as "constructed", "altered", "converted", "rented", "leased", or "intended to be used". 
(e)  Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
(f)  The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary. 
(g)  The term city (when used alone or in conjunction with another word or words) shall mean the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
(h)  Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive application of the provisions set forth thereunder. 
(i)  References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only that subsection. 
(Sec. 2.1)  
Sec. 34-2-3. - Definition of terms. 
For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this Code, and unless otherwise stated in this Code, the following words and phrases shall have a meaning as indicated herein. If any term is not defined in this article, it shall have its standard English dictionary meaning. 
Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement. 
Access easement. An easement created by deed or other instrument that provides a way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property which does not have frontage on a road. 
Accessory use or structure. A use or structure which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in association with, and serves a principal use; is subordinate in purpose, area, and extent to the principal use served; and is located on the same lot as the principal use, or on an adjoining lot in the same ownership as that of the principal use. 
Accident potential zone (APZ). See "clear zone." 
Adequate public facilities. Facilities determined to be capable of supporting and servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the proposed development/subdivision as determined by the city council. 
Adjoining lot. A lot that shares all or part of a common point or line with another lot. 
Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses, provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities. 
Airport. Any area of land and/or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft associated with MidAmerica Airport or Scott Air Force Base (AFB), and utilized or to be utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes. 
Airport hazard. Any structure or object of natural growth or use of land within the airport environs, that obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or which is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft. 
Airport hazard area. Any area of land upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in this Code, including any such area which has been declared to be an "airport hazard area" by St. Clair County in connection with any airport approach plan recommended/adopted by the county. 
Airport manager. The St. Clair County MidAmerica Airport Manager. 
Alley. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
Alter. A physical change or an addition. The term "alter" includes renovation, modification, rehabilitation or restoration, but does not include changing the copy on an institutional bulletin board sign, or other legal changeable copy sign. 
Alteration. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 
Amendment. A change in the provisions of this Code, properly effected in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein. 
Antenna, accessory. An antenna and supporting structure attached to a building or located on the same lot as a building, designed and used for an amateur radio or citizen band radio (including such antenna used for transmitting and receiving), a similar communication device that only receives a radio frequency (RF) signal or any receive-only home television antenna. 
Antenna, communication. Any device that transmits and/or receives radio waves for voice, data or video communications purposes including, but not limited to VHF and UHF television; FM or AM radio; two-way radio, cellular telephone, personal communications services (PCS) or other wireless telephone, fixed point microwave, low power television, or other similar wireless communications and common carriers. This definition does not include small satellite dish antenna that only receive a signal, any other receive-only antenna including a satellite earth station, any receive-only home television antenna, or any accessory antenna as herein defined which does not exceed 50 feet in height. 
Antenna, concealed communication. A communication antenna as herein defined which is completely contained within a church steeple, a cupola, or other structure and not visible from outside such structure. 
Antenna, whip. An antenna that is cylindrical in shape, less than six inches in diameter, up to 18 feet in height, and transmits signals in a 360-degree direction. Also commonly referred to as omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennae. 
Applicant. Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out construction of a development or redevelopment from the City of Mascoutah. 
Area, gross. See "land area, gross." 
Area of sign. See "sign area, gross." 
Arterial (street) minor. A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route through the city with intersections at grade, and on which traffic control devices are used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic as depicted on the transportation plan map in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
Arterial (street), principal. A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route connecting the city to surrounding cities, and on which traffic control devices may be used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic as depicted on the transportation plan map in the City's Comprehensive Plan. Principal arterial streets include all limited access roads in the city. 
Assisted living facilities. Establishments primarily engaged in providing residential and personal care services without on-site nursing care for the elderly or other persons who are unable to fully care for themselves. The care typically includes room, board, supervision, and assistance in daily living, such as housekeeping services. 
Average density. A technique where lots may be reduced in size and buildings sited closer together provided the total development density does not exceed that which could be constructed on the site under conventional zoning and the remaining land is utilized for open space or public purposes. 
Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or other non-rigid material that is mounted to a pole, building or other structure by a frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag or any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
Bed and breakfast inn. An operator-occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five guest rooms for rent, in operation for more than ten nights in a 12-month period. No meals shall be provided to guests except for breakfast. Bed and breakfast inns do not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments. 
Billboard. A sign that identifies or communicates a commercial or noncommercial message related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located. 
Block. An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways (except alleys, pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless the exterior boundary is a street or highway) or bounded by a combination of street, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines. 
Bond. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the city council. 
Buffer. An area that contains extensive landscape material and/or a decorative wall or similar material designed to screen from view a particular land use or activity. Noise too! 
Buildable area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard, dedicated lands and open space requirements of this Code has been met. 
Building. Any enclosed structure designed, constructed or used for residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or agricultural purpose or accessory thereto. 
Building height. The vertical distance from the lowest grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Building permit. A permit issued by the city for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building and the related ground and surface preparation prior to and after completion of construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building. 
Bulk standards. Specifications in this Code that provide minimum building setbacks, and maximum building height, building coverage, and floor area ratio requirements. 
Bulletin board sign. A wall sign or freestanding sign located on the premises of a place of worship or school, on government-owned property, or a city-owned sign placed on other property, which contains changeable copy information such as the names of individuals connected with the institution, general announcements of events or activities occurring at the institution or within the city, or similar messages. 
Caliper. The diameter of a tree measured six inches above ground level. 
Canopy. A shelter or protective cover projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid materials over a rigid framework which is either ground supported or which can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
Canopy sign. Any sign that is a part of or attached to a canopy or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. 
Changeable copy. Message information on a sign face which is altered manually through the use of attachable letters, numbers and symbols. 
Change of use. Any use which substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land, such as a conversion from a residential use to a commercial use. For commercial and industrial uses, any conversion from a use in a three-digit NAICS code group to a use in a different three-digit group is considered a change of use. 
Channel. Any defined river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, on-stream lake or impoundment, Karst area (sinkhole), flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
Child care center. A facility which regularly provides day care for less than 24-hour per day for four or more children not related to the operator. A child care center shall include the terms "day care center", "part day child care facility", and "day care home" as defined by Chapter 225, Act 10, Section 2 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
Church or place of worship. A building or set of buildings used for the purpose of worship and customarily related activities. 
City. The City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
Clear zone/accident potential zones I and II (APZ I and II). The clear zone starts at the end of the runway and extends outward 3,000 feet at a width of 3,000 feet. APZ I extends from the clear zone an additional 5,000 feet. APZ II extends from APZ I an additional 7,000 feet. 
Clearing. Any activity which removes the natural vegetative ground cover. 
Collector street. A street which carries or is proposed to carry intermediate volumes of traffic from local access and subdivision feeder streets to arterial streets and which may or may not be continuous as depicted on the transportation plan map in the city's Comprehensive Plan. 
Commercial message. Any sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
Commercial use. A use or activity that is primarily limited to Commercial districts and which includes retail sales, personal services, business services, offices and similar uses involved in commerce. 
Commercial vehicle. Any motor vehicle which is designed or used principally for business, governmental or nonprofit organizational purposes or for carrying passengers for hire, and has a platform, cabinet, box, rack, compartment, or other facility for transportation of materials, equipment, and items other than the personal effects of private passengers. 
Common ground. That part of a subdivision which is established, such that it is not subject to private individual ownership by subdivision lot owners, and is available for nonexclusive common use and enjoyment by the subdivision lot owners, subdivision occupants, their families and guests on a nonexclusive basis. Such areas are normally owned by a controlling entity of the respective subdivisions and governed by restrictive covenants. 
Common ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, entities, partnerships, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockbroker, partner or associate, or a member of his family, owns an interest in each corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association. 
Communication tower. A freestanding structure more than 50 feet tall designed or used as a base for any communication antenna. A communication tower shall not be considered a utility substation for purposes of this Code. 
Community-integrated living arrangements. A living arrangement certified by a community mental health or developmental services agency where eight or fewer recipients with mental illness or recipients with a developmental disability reside under the supervision of the agency. 
Community living facilities. A transitional residential setting which provides guidance, supervision, training and other assistance to ambulatory or mobile adults with a mild or moderate developmental disability with the goal of eventually moving these persons to more independent living arrangements. Residents are required to participate in day activities, such as vocational training, sheltered workshops or regular employment. A community living facility shall not be a nursing or medical facility and shall house no more than 20 residents, excluding staff. 
Comprehensive Plan. The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the city council to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the city. The Comprehensive Plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs regarding the locations, character, and extent of highways, bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, residential, commercial or industrial land uses, parks, etc. 
Conditional use. A use that would not be appropriate generally throughout a zoning district because of potential danger, smoke, noise or odor, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would not be detrimental to public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
Conduit. Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or movement of water, whether open or closed. 
Construction plan. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design or improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the city as a condition of the approval of the plat. 
Construction sign. A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the owners and/or contractors having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
Copy. Message information on a sign face. 
Corner lot. See "lot, corner." 
Covered walkway. A pedestrian space under a structure constructed of rigid material extending from, attached to and supported by a building, but not including an awning, canopy or similar object constructed or non-rigid material. 
Covered walkway sign. A sign hung from the ceiling of a covered walkway in front of a retail store. 
Cul-de-sac. A short minor local street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and having the other end permanently terminated by a turn-around for vehicles; the term may also be used to refer solely to said turn-around. 
Day-night sound level (Ldn). A cumulative aircraft noise index that estimates the exposure to aircraft noise at a certain geographic point and relates the estimated exposure to an expected community response which is the yearly day-night sound level described in decibels. 
Dedicate. To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land, or improvement to the City or other public entity without compensation. 
Design criteria. Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements. 
Detention basin. A facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release by gravity of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm. 
Develop. To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefore. 
"Developer". The owner of land proposed to be developed, subdivided, or redeveloped or the developer's representative who is responsible for any undertaking that requires review and/or approval under these regulations. See also "Subdivider." 
Development. A project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of land; any of which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the city's water or wastewater sewer system. 
Development administrator. The city manager, or his duly authorized representative, appointed by the mayor and city council, who shall administer certain provisions of this Code. 
Development agreement. An agreement between the city council and the developer through which the city council agrees to vest development use or intensity or refrain from interfering with subsequent phases of development through new legislation in exchange for the provision of public facilities or amenities by the developer in excess of those required under current community regulations. 
District. Any section or area of the city for which the zoning regulations governing the use, placement of structures, yard and setback requirements, and size and dimension criteria are uniform throughout the city. 
Duplex. A residential building divided into two dwelling units. 
Dwelling, attached. A one-family dwelling attached to one or more other one-family dwellings by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, single-family. A building, detached from other buildings, designed for or occupied exclusively by one family as a single housekeeping unit. A single-family dwelling does not include a mobile home. 
Dwelling, multiple-family. A residential building containing three or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms in a residential building or portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used, or intended for use as a complete, independent living facility for no more than one family, and which includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A dwelling unit must have direct access to the outside or to a public hallway. 
Easement. A grant by a property owner of the right of use of his land by another party for a specific purpose. 
Election sign. A temporary sign supporting a candidate and/or issue on the ballot in an impending election. 
Erect. To build, construct, install, attach, hang, place, inscribe, suspend or affix, and shall include the painting of wall signs. 
Erosion. The general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall, flowing water, wind or wave action. 
Escrow deposit. A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the completion of improvements within a subdivision. 
Family. Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit or up to three unrelated individuals. 
Farm. A parcel of land of not less than three acres, in one ownership, that is used primarily for the commercial, soil-dependent cultivation of agricultural crop production and/or for the raising of livestock, but not including a feedlot. 
Fence. An outdoor freestanding structure of any material or combination of materials erected for confinement, screening or partition purposes. 
Fill. Any act by which earth, clay, silt, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material, is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Financial security. The letter of credit or cash escrow provided by the applicant to secure its promises in the subdivision improvement agreement. 
Finished grade. The vertical location of the ground surface after grading work is completed in accordance with the engineering plans. 
Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, institution or business. 
Flexible zoning. Zoning which permits uses of land and density of buildings and structures different from those which are allowed as of right within the zoning district in which the land is situated. Flexible zoning applications shall include, but not be limited to, all conditional uses, planned development procedures and average density zoning projects. 
Flood fringe. That area as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on either side of the floodway. This area is subject to inundation from the base flood but conveys little or no flow. 
Floodplain. That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation which is subject to inundation. The floodplain as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). This area is the collective combination of the regulatory floodway and the flood fringe. 
Floodway. The channel and that portion of the floodplain, including on-stream lakes, adjacent to a stream or watercourse which is needed to store and convey the anticipated existing and future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than 0.1 foot increase in stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage and no more than a ten percent increase in velocities. 
Floor area. The outside dimensions of all enclosed floor area under roof, excluding garages, open and screened porches, carports, terraces, and patios. 
Floor area ratio. The gross floor area of all principal buildings on a lot divided by the area of the lot. 
Freestanding sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure including low monument signs and pole signs. 
Frontage. All of the property abutting and measured along the street right-of-way line. 
Frontage road. A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway (usually a limited access highway). 
Gasoline service station. Any structure or land used for retail sales and dispensing of motor vehicle fuels or oils, whether self-service or not, and whether retail sales of vehicle fuels is a principal or accessory use. A service station may furnish supplies, equipment and minor repair services, including tires, to vehicles incidental to selling and dispensing of motor vehicle fuels and oils. 
Grade. The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed as a percentage. Synonym for "slope". 
Grading. The excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill. 
Green space. Land devoted to park, recreation or other open space which is not part of an individual lot occupied by another principal use such as a house. 
Gross sign area. See "sign area, gross." 
Health, safety or general welfare. The purpose for which municipalities may adopt and enforce land use regulations for the prevention of harm or promotion of public benefit to the community; commonly referred to as the police power. 
Hedge. A row of closely planted shrubs or low-growing trees forming a fence or boundary. 
Home occupation. Any occupation or activity carried on within a residential property where the activity is conducted only by members of the family living within the residence, where products are not offered for sale from the premises, where no evidence of the occupation is visible or audible from the exterior of the residential property, where traffic is not generated in excess of that customary at residences, and where no commercial vehicles are kept on the premises or parked overnight on the premises. (See section 34-7-17) 
Homeowners' association. An organization, whether or not incorporated, which operates under and pursuant to recorded covenants or deed restrictions, through which each owner of a portion of a subdivision be it a lot, parcel, site, plot, unit, condominium, or any other interest is automatically a member as a condition of ownership and each such member is subject to a charge or assessment for a prorated share of expense of the association which may become a lien against the lot, parcel, site, plot, unit, condominium, or other interest of the member. 
Impervious surface. That area of property that is covered by materials other than soil and vegetation and that has no intended capacity to absorb stormwater, such as parking lots, driveways, sidewalks, patios, tennis courts, roofs and other structures. 
Improvements. Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer, catch basin, water main, street light, newly-planted tree, off-street parking area, or other facility necessary for a subdivision or development. 
Improvements plans. The engineering plans showing types of materials and construction details for the structures and facilities to be installed in, or in conjunction with, a subdivision including, but not limited to, grading, erosion control, streets, wastewater sewers, storm sewers, stormwater retainage systems, water mains, and hydrants. 
Incidental sign. A sign which is generally informational and has a purpose secondary to the use of the premises on which it is located, such as "credit cards accepted here", "loading only", "telephone", or similar information. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the premises shall be considered incidental. 
Individual sewage disposal system. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device. 
Infiltration. The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces. 
Institutional use. A use that provides a public service and is operated by a federal, state or local government, public or private utility, public or private school or college, tax-exempt organization, and/or a place of religious assembly. Examples include: Public agency, public safety and emergency services, essential and utility services, cultural, service and religious facilities, public/private health facilities or other similar uses. 
Intersection. The point at which two or more public rights-of-way (generally streets) meet. 
Junk vehicle. Any vehicle that has had its engine, wheels or other parts removed, damaged, altered, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle has been incapable of being driven under its own motor power for a period of at least seven days, or a vehicle which is not currently registered or licensed by the Illinois Secretary of State or similar licensing authority of another state. 
Land area, gross. For land proposed to be developed, used, redeveloped, or subdivided, the entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for subdivision, including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for street and alley rights-of-way and for public uses. 
Ldn. See "day-night sound level (Ldn)." 
Ldn contour. A line linking together a series of points of equal cumulative noise exposure based on the Ldn metric. Such contours are developed based on aircraft flight patterns, number of daily aircraft operations by type of aircraft and time of day, noise characteristics of each aircraft and typical runway usage patterns. 
Life care facility. A place or places in which a provider undertakes to provide a resident with nursing services, medical services or personal care services, in addition to maintenance services, for a term in excess of one year or for life pursuant to a life care contract. The term also means a place or places in which a provider undertakes to provide such services to a non-resident. 
Limited access highway. A freeway or expressway providing a trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property and other persons have no legal right to access to or egress from, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the trafficway. 
Livestock. Animals which have historically been bred, reared and utilized for the production of meat, wool, leather, milk, eggs and similar products, including, but not limited to, cows, hogs, sheep, goats, catfish and fowl which are raised on a commercial basis. 
Local access street. A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and used for access to abutting property. 
Lot. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
Lot, corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets with frontage on two or more adjacent sides. 
Lot, double frontage. A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two approximately parallel streets. 
Lot, interior. A lot whose side lot lines do not abut upon any street. 
Lot area. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lines of a lot. 
Lot depth. The mean distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
Lot improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object situated on a lot. 
Lot line. A line of record bounding a lot thereby dividing such lot from another lot or from a right-of-way. 
Lot line adjustment. A minor subdivision plat in which the boundary line between two legal lots of record is moved to transfer land from one lot to another, or from each lot to the other. 
Lot of record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of this Code. 
Lot width. For lots with parallel side lot lines, the shortest distance between the side lot lines. For lots where the side lot lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be the length of a straight line measured at right angles to the axis of the lot at the front setback required for the district in which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
Low monument sign. A freestanding sign located adjacent to a road right-of-way with a single pedestal base where the pedestal base is at least 50 percent of the width of the sign face. 
Major site plans. A major site plan is defined as a plan for the development of a parcel of land that contains no buildings or for which the existing buildings are to be removed and a new building or buildings constructed. In addition, a major site plan shall be required for any development that is adding more than 5,000 square feet of new impermeable surface to a site. A major site plan must be approved by the planning commission and the city council. 
Major subdivision. See "subdivision, major." 
Minor site plans. A minor site plan is defined as plans for new construction, the expansion, change in use, or addition(s) to a site that already contains a building (or buildings) and any development which adds less than 5,000 square feet of new impermeable surface to a site. A minor site plan may be approved by the development administrator if it meets all of the requirements of the Unified Land Development Code. Projects approved by the development administrator do not exempt the application from required architectural review per article XI. 
Minor subdivision. See "subdivision, minor." 
Mobile home. A structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons. The term mobile home shall include manufactured homes constructed after June 30, 1976, in accordance with the Federal "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974". 
Mobile home park. A tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of land upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for five or more independent mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude the tracts of land from common licensure as a mobile home park if they are maintained and operated jointly. A motorized recreational vehicle shall not be construed as being a part of a mobile home park. 
Model home. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision and which will not be permanently occupied during its use as a model. 
Natural. Conditions resulting from physical, chemical and biological processes without intervention by man. 
Noise level reduction (NLR). The difference between the exterior and interior sound level, expressed in decibels, which is achieved by the intervening structure. 
Non-conforming building or structure. A building or structure whose size, dimensions or location was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited or further restricted under the terms of this Code. 
Non-conforming lot. A lot whose area, dimensions or location was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited or further restricted under the terms of this Code. 
Non-conforming sign. Any sign that was lawfully erected but no longer conforms to the requirements of this Code. 
Non-conforming use. A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited or further restricted under the terms of this Code. 
Nonconformity, site-related. A characteristic of the site, such as off-street parking or loading, landscaping, drainage or similar matters which are incidental to the principal use of the property but which do not satisfy current city standards, as established in this Code. 
Non-residential subdivision. A subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. 
Nursing home. A place, whether operated for profit or not, or a county home for the infirm and chronically ill which provides, through its ownership or management, personal care, sheltered care or nursing for three or more persons, not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage. It includes skilled nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities as those terms are defined in Title XVIII and Title XIX of the Federal Social Security Act. 
Off-premises sign. Any sign, except a billboard as defined herein, which advertises or identifies a property, business or address other than the property, business or address where the sign is displayed. 
Off-site. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the common ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
Off-site sign. See "off-premises sign." 
Official map. The land use plan map, thoroughfare plan map, and water and wastewater plan map contained in the city's Comprehensive Plan. 
On-premises permanent sign. A sign pertaining primarily to the use of the premises on which the sign is located and which may contain, but is not limited to, any of the following information: the name of the owner, occupant, management, business or building; the address; the type of business, profession, service or activity; and the type or types of products offered. 
Outdoor restaurant. An eating or drinking establishment which has an unroofed area or a covered area which is not enclosed by walls where patrons may be served food and/or beverages. 
Outdoor storage. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, material, or merchandise in the same place for more than 24 hours unless such goods, material, or merchandise have been authorized through the issuance of a permit for a temporary outdoor display or temporary seasonal display. The parking of motor vehicles, in operating condition, which are used in the operation of a commercial establishment shall not be considered outside storage. 
Permitted use. A use allowed by right in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Planned development procedure. A tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or unified control, which includes two or more principal buildings or uses and follows applicable procedures of this Code. 
Planning commission. The planning commission of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
Plat, final. The detailed layout of all or a portion of a subdivision showing the boundaries of and location of individual properties, streets, easements and required setbacks, and including engineering drawings and supporting material indicating the subdivider's plan of the subdivision which is presented to the city council for final approval and, if approved, may be filed with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. 
Plat, preliminary. Initial engineering maps, drawings, and supportive material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision which is submitted to the planning commission and city council for consideration and preliminary approval. 
Pole sign. A freestanding sign elevated above ground level by one or more narrow structures or supports that are anchored in the ground and that is independent from any building or other structure, but not including a billboard. 
Police power. Inherent, delegated, or authorized legislative power for purposes of regulation to secure health, safety, and general welfare. 
Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, which is designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs converted to A- or T-frames, menu and sandwich board signs, and any inflatable sign other than a special event balloon. 
Premises. Any land together with any structures occupying it. 
Principal use. The primary use of a lot or premises occupying the major portion of all buildings and structures. 
Private street. A non-public street providing access to and owned by abutting properties. 
Projecting sign. Any sign attached to, and extending more than 14 inches from a wall which is supported by such wall. 
Public improvement. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
Real estate sign. Any sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of real estate. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping or travel use, or for other recreational transportation, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, self-propelled motor homes, boats and snowmobiles. 
Reserve. To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by the city (or other government entity) for public purposes. 
Reserve strip. A narrow strip of land between a public street and adjacent lots which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or property deed as land over which vehicular travel is not permitted. 
Residential sign. A sign on a residentially-zoned lot that contains a political, religious or other noncommercial message. 
Resubdivision. Any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions. 
Right-of-way. Land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, wastewater sewer line, storm sewer line, or other similar use. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Satellite dish antenna. A device or structure used to transmit and/or receive radio, television or electromagnetic waves or signals between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses through a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh or bar configured and generally in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. This definition includes, but is not limited to, satellite earth stations, television-reception-only (TVROs), and satellite microwave antennae. 
Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the front, side or rear lines of the lot and the front, side and rear lines of the building including porches, carports, and accessory uses subject to yard encroachment provisions of this Code. For lots fronting on curvilinear streets, the front setback shall be measured from a line perpendicular to the chord line to the nearest point of a structure. 
Setback, required. The minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the buildable area of a lot necessary to meet the yard requirements of the applicable zoning district. The required setback line shall be parallel to the lot line. 
Shopping center. A group of three or more commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site. The total gross leasable floor area of such a center shall generally be greater than 10,000 square feet. 
Shrub. A woody plant of relatively low height, having several stems arising from the base and lacking a single trunk; a bush. 
Sidewalk. A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the standards of this Code, generally abutting or near the curb line of the street. 
Sign. Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public, but not including a church steeple. 
Sign area, gross. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of parallelograms, triangles, circles, ellipses or combinations thereof, enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, but not including structural supports which are not an integral part of the sign; except that in the case of an individual letter sign erected on a wall only two-thirds of the entire area of the enclosing parallelograms, triangles, circles, ellipses or combinations thereof, shall be counted as the gross area of the sign. Where a sign has two or more faces, the gross area of all such faces shall be included in determining the total gross area of the sign. 
Sign face. The area or display surface used for the message. 
Sign frontage. The lineal distance along the street in front of the premises; or absent frontage on a street, the length along the front of the ground floor of a building occupied by a separate and distinct use and the length along the side of the ground floor of a building occupied by a separate and distinct use when the side of such building faces a street; or the width of a tenant space measured along the ground floor of a building occupied by a separate and distinct use which does not face a street but faces a parking lot. 
Sign height. For all signs except billboards, the vertical distance measured from the elevation of the center line of the adjacent right-of-way at the point closest to the sign to the highest point of the sign. 
Sign permit. A document certifying that the plans for the proposed sign comply with all applicable city ordinances and requirements. 
Sinkhole (Karst areas). A land surface depression or blind valley which may or may not have surface openings to cavernous underground areas and which is the result of water movement through slits and jointed limestone. These conditions make such areas unstable and susceptible to subsidence and surface collapse. Fractures in the limestone may channel runoff water to public or private water supplies, making those sources especially susceptible to groundwater contamination. 
Snipe sign. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a utility pole, tree, fence or similar object not designed to support a sign. 
Special event balloon. A temporary sign which is inflated by air or gas and which promotes an extraordinary happening. 
Special event sign. A temporary sign announcing or promoting an event sponsored by a governmental or nonprofit organization. Such event could include a Fourth of July celebration, or other seasonal or annual event. 
Special use. A use of land in the airport overlay zoning district which requires a permit prior to being established or expanded. 
Stop work order. A written notice from the development administrator or other appropriate city employee to the owner, contractor or agents of the owner requiring all affected parties to cease work on a site pending review, approval and/or modification of necessary permits to ensure compliance with all city ordinances and requirements. 
Stormwater runoff. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground or are collected in channels or conduits. 
Storm sewer. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater. 
Stream. Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine or natural or man-made drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
Street. A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through way, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an alley or a way for pedestrian use only. 
Street tree, approved. A deciduous hardwood tree with a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches and with a clear trunk of at least six feet which is suitable for urban environments, is tolerant of disease and salt, and is included within one of the following species: 
(a)  Thornless Honey Locust (Gleditsia triacanthos "inermis"). 
(b)  Red Maple (Acer rubrum). 
(c)  Sugar Maple (Acer saccharum). 
(d)  Hedge Maple (Acer campestre). 
(e)  Seedless Green Ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica "Marshall Seedless"). 
(f)  White Ash (Fraxinus Americana). 
(g)  Ironwood (Ostrya virginiana). 
(h)  Pin Oak (Quercus palustris). 
(i)  Willow Oak (Quercus phellos). 
(j)  Red Oak (Quercus rubra). 
(k)  Little Leaf Linden (Tilia cordata). 
(l)  Silver Linden (Tilia tomentosum). 
Structure. Anything constructed, erected or located on the ground, or attached to something having or requiring a fixed location on the ground including a building, sign, billboard, fence, tennis court, parking lot, driveway or similar feature, but not including a regulation mail box. 
Subdivide. The act or process of creating a subdivision. 
Subdivider. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as defined in this Code. 
Subdivision. The division and recording in accordance with law of a parcel of land into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership for development, sale or lease. 
Subdivision, major. All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including, but not limited to, subdivisions of three or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of city facilities or the creation of any public improvements. 
Subdivision, minor. Any subdivision containing not more than two lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the extension of city facilities or the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, official map or this Code, including lot line adjustments. The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners where such sale or exchange does not create additional lots shall not be considered as a minor subdivision. A division of land (for agricultural purposes), in parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement or access, is not a minor subdivision. 
Subdivision direction sign. A temporary sign intended to direct the general public to a subdivision under development and limited to the name of the subdivision, a directional arrow and written directions. 
Subdivision feeder street. A facility designed to collect traffic from local access streets and channel it to the collector street system. Direct access to subdivision feeder streets is allowed although the major portion of lots within a subdivision should have access to a local access street. Subdivision feeder streets will be of relatively limited continuity, but have more continuity than local access streets. 
Subdivision improvement agreement. A contract entered into by the applicant and the city by which the applicant promises (bonds) to complete the required public improvements within the subdivision within a specified time period following final plat approval. 
Subdivision information sign. A temporary sign intended to inform the general public about a subdivision under development. 
Temporary advertising sign. A temporary sign or signs displayed so as to attract attention to the sale of merchandise or services, or a change in policy or in the status of a business. 
Temporary improvement. Improvements built and maintained by a subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the performance bond. 
Temporary sign. A sign which is not illuminated and is not permanently installed or affixed to any sign, structure, building or lot. 
Temporary use. A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
Topography. The relief features or surface configurations of an area of land. 
Tract. A lot. The term "tract" is used interchangeably with the term "lot", particularly in the context of subdivision, where a "tract" is subdivided into several lots, parcels, sites, plots, units, condominiums, tracts, or other interests. 
Tree. A plant having a permanently woody main stem or trunk, ordinarily growing to a considerable height, and usually developing branches at some distance from the ground. 
Trim. Materials that are minor parts of a building facade which complement the design of the building or perform a function, including, but not limited to, fascias, window sashes, gutters, scuppers, leader heads, lear boards, and rakes. 
Unkempt or unsightly sign. A sign that, in the opinion of the development administrator or the development administrator's designee, is clearly in disrepair, is missing part of its copy, has letters or other copy that are broken, missing or so faded that they are difficult to read from the street, is not securely affixed to either the ground or some other supporting structure, contains an illegible message, contains rust or peeling or flaking paint, or has damage to its face which is clearly visible from the street. 
Used car sales. A lot or premises where two or more used vehicles are offered for sale concurrently or where four or more used vehicles are offered for sale over a period of one year. 
Vacate. To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision, and to so note on the final plat recorded with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. 
Variance. A relaxation by the board of zoning appeals of the dimensional regulations of this Code where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions extraordinary to the property and not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Code would result in practical difficulties or undue hardship. 
Vested rights. Right to initiate or continue the establishment of a use which will be contrary to a restriction or regulation coming into effect when the project associated with the use is completed. 
Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to, and within 14 inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign face. A wall sign may extend above the eaves of a roof provided that it does not extend above the highest point of the roof. 
Watershed. All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same stream, creek, ditch, lake, marsh, stormwater facility, groundwater or depressional area. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
Window sign. Any sign, pictures, symbol or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed immediately inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot line unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in section 34-3-2. 
Yard front. A yard extending across the full width of a lot between any building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. On corner lots, all yards which abut a street are considered front yards. 
Yard rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
Yard, required. The minimum setback distance for each yard established by the minimum yard dimensions in the zoning district requirements. 
Yard side. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear lot line between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building, or a yard which is not a front or year yard. 
(Sec. 2.2; Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 12-15, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 34-2-4. - Diagram showing yard locations and yard setback lines on a typical lot. 
As a supplement to the definitions contained in this article and to facilitate a better understanding thereof, and of yards, required yards and yard setback lines in general, a diagram entitled, "Diagrammatic Display of Yard Locations and Yard Setback Lines of a Typical Lot" is hereby annexed to this Code and made a part hereof with the same force and effect as though fully set forth herein. Should there be any conflict between the text of this Code and the information displayed in the diagram, the text of this Code shall prevail. 
(Sec. 2.3)  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Purpose. This article provides supplementary regulations to be used in administering and interpreting the intent of the Unified Land Development Code. 
 
Sec. 34-3-1. - Height exceptions and limitations. 
The building height limitations stipulated in the applicable zoning districts shall not apply to the following, provided that no such structure exceeds the height limits for airport approach areas, as established in this Code: 
(a)  Air conditioning units. 
(b)  Antennae. 
(c)  Chimneys. 
(d)  Church steeples. 
(e)  Communication towers. 
(f)  Elevator towers. 
(g)  Flag poles. 
(h)  Parapet walls. 
(i)  Silos. 
(j)  Utility transmission towers. 
(k)  Windmills. 
(l)  Similar structures. 
No structure shall be erected to a height that would encroach into or through any established public or private airport approach plan, prepared in accordance with the criteria established by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Sec. 3.1)  
Sec. 34-3-2. - Yard encroachments. 
Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as herein provided or as otherwise permitted in this Code. 
(a)  Structural overhangs. Cornices, awnings, eaves, gutters or other similar structural overhangs at least seven feet above grade may extend up to two feet into any required yard, provided that no such overhang shall extend to within four feet of any property line. 
(b)  Sills and belt courses. Sills, belt courses and similar ornamental features may extend six inches into any required yard. 
(c)  Air conditioners and similar mechanical equipment. Air conditioning equipment, sprinkler system controls and similar mechanical equipment (including utility's pad mounted equipment) may project into any required yard provided that the equipment is mounted in a manner contiguous to the building. 
(d)  Fire escapes, outside stairways, balconies, chimneys, and flues. Open or enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways, balconies, and chimneys and flues may project up to four feet into any required yard, provided such projections shall not unduly obstruct light and ventilation. 
(e)  Swimming pools and related structures. Swimming pools may be located in a required rear yard provided they are no closer than ten feet to any rear property line, or five feet to any easement, whichever distance is greater. Decks or patios constructed in conjunction with any swimming pool may be located within a required rear yard provided that they are not located within an easement or closer than five feet to any property line. 
(f)  Trellises, play equipment, outdoor furniture and similar objects. Trellises and trelliswork, play equipment, wires, lights, outdoor furniture, mailboxes, ornamental entry columns and gates, and outdoor equipment are allowed within required yards. 
(g)  Unenclosed porches, steps and paved terraces. An unroofed porch, steps or paved terrace area may project into the front yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet. 
(h)  Gasoline pumps and islands. Gasoline pumps and pump islands, associated with either a service station or as an accessory facility, may be located within a front yard, provided they are located no closer than 15 feet to any public right-of-way. 
(i)  Fences, walls and hedges. Fences, walls and hedges are allowed within required yards, subject to the provisions of section 34-3-6. 
(j)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings or sheds may be located within a required side or rear yard, provided a minimum of five feet is maintained from the side or rear property line and the structure is clear of any easements. 
(k)  Parking areas and driveways. Off-street parking areas may encroach into the required front yard setbacks providing that the encroachment does not extend into a required landscape buffer along the street frontage. Parking areas and driveways may encroach into required side yards of multiple-family residential and non-residential districts. 
(l)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be located within any required yard. 
(m)  Satellite dish antennae. Satellite dish antennae less than one meter in diameter may encroach into any required yard. Satellite dish antennae less than two meters in diameter may encroach into required yards in commercial and industrial districts. 
(Sec. 3.2)  
Sec. 34-3-3. - Parking of commercial vehicles in residential areas. 
No commercial vehicle which is used for hauling explosives, gasoline, liquefied petroleum products, or any other hazardous material shall be permitted to be parked in a residential area except for short periods of time (less than one hour). No commercial vehicles shall be parked on any residentially used lot, in the street abutting such lot, or on residentially-zoned land, except: 
(a)  Commercial vehicles not exceeding one ton rated capacity used by the resident of the premises, limited to one per premises and parked off-street in a garage, carport or driveway. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles temporarily parked on a lot for the purpose of providing construction, transportation, or other services specifically for the location where such vehicles are parked. 
(Sec. 3.3)  
Sec. 34-3-4. - Parking or storage of vehicles. 
No junk vehicle shall be parked, and no motor vehicle frame, vehicle body, or vehicle body part shall be stored, on residentially-zoned property except when parked or stored in a completely enclosed garage or building. A single vehicle maintained for restoration purposes may be stored on the property. Said vehicle must be fully covered when restoration is not in progress, and restoration effort must be apparent to periodic code enforcement observation. 
A maximum of three vehicles may be parked in an unenclosed area on a single-family-zoned lot. Except, however, that if there are more than three licensed drivers permanently residing on the premises, there may be one vehicle for each licensed driver. This section does not preclude the parking of automobiles by persons visiting a single-family home. 
(Sec. 3.4)  
Sec. 34-3-5. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Authorization. Accessory uses are permitted in all zoning districts as provided herein. 
(b)  Use limitations. 
(1)  No accessory structure shall be built prior to the construction of the principal structure. 
(2)  No accessory structure shall be occupied or utilized unless the principal structure to which it is accessory is occupied or utilized. 
(3)  All accessory uses and structures shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the zoning district in which located. 
(4)  No accessory structure shall be used as a dwelling. 
(5)  All accessory uses and structures shall comply with the following height regulations, except as provided in section 34-3-1: 
(a)  No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height in any residential district. Exceptions may be allowed by the development administrator when the required height is to accommodate aesthetic compatibility with the main structure. 
(b)  No accessory building shall exceed 25 feet in height in any commercial or industrial district. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  If an accessory-type building shares a structural wall with a principal building, it shall be deemed to be a part of the principal building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this Code applicable to a principal building. 
(2)  If an accessory building is detached from the principal building, it shall be located at least ten feet from the principal building. 
(3)  No accessory use or structure shall be located in any required corner visibility triangle as established in section 34-3-8. 
(4)  No accessory structure, except those exempted by section 34-3-2, shall be located within a front yard. 
(Secs. 3.5.1—3.5.3)  
Sec. 34-3-6. - Fences, walls and hedges. 
(a)  Easements and rights-of-way. Fences, walls and hedges shall not be constructed on or over any dedicated public drainage or public rights-of-way. Construction may be allowed in utility easements; however, owners are responsible to replace or remove, at their cost, fences, walls and hedges that might be removed or damaged during utility repairs/ improvements by the city or other approved entities. The city will attempt to notify owners in advance about required removals but reserves the right to remove a fence, wall, or hedge in an easement without advance notice, as emergency or other scheduling considerations warrant. Notice of this provision will be displayed on the city's fence permit application. Trees are prohibited in all easements and all public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Front yard. Fences not exceeding 48 inches in height may be erected in the front yard of any lot. 
(c)  Side yard. Fences not exceeding six feet in height may be erected in the side yard of any lot provided they do not extend beyond the front setback line. 
(d)  Rear yard. Fences not exceeding six feet in height may be erected in the rear yard of any lot. 
(e)  Prohibited materials. No barbed wire, electrical elements, or other hazardous materials shall be maintained as a fence or part of a fence or wall in a residential district. 
(f)  Placement offences. 
(1)  Fences may be erected along lot lines. 
(2)  All structural or supporting members of any fence must be constructed to be within or toward the area to be enclosed. This provision will not preclude home owners to share a fence on the property line. 
(Secs. 3.6.1—3.6.6; Ord. No. 12-15, § 1, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 34-3-7. - Nonconformities. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to permit the continuation of those lots, structures, uses, characteristics of uses, or combinations thereof which were lawful before the passage of this Code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Code or future amendments. It is the further purpose and intent of this section to allow nonconforming lots, structures, uses, characteristics of uses, and combinations thereof to continue subject to specific conditions or limitations. 
(b)  Continuation of nonconformities. Nonconformities may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
(c)  Expansion or change of nonconformities. 
(1)  No nonconformity shall be enlarged or changed to a different nonconformity, except upon a determination by the development administrator that the change results in a lessening of the degree of nonconformity or that the development improves the character of the area to such a degree warranting the improvement. 
(2)  Additions to nonconforming structures containing conforming uses shall be permitted if the additions comply with setback and other applicable site-related regulations. 
(3)  Additions to structures on a nonconforming lot, which are below the threshold of a major site plan, may be permitted provided that such addition is in conformance with all other applicable laws and ordinances of the city and does not create a nonconforming use or structure or increase the existing site-related nonconformity. Any addition exceeding the threshold for a minor site plan shall require all site-related nonconformities to be terminated and brought into compliance with all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Repair or alteration of nonconformities. Repairs, maintenance and improvements of nonconformities may be carried out, provided that such work does not increase the cubic content of the building or the floor or ground area devoted to the nonconforming use or in any way increases or creates a site-related nonconformity. The preceding requirement does not prevent compliance with applicable laws or requirements relative to the safety and sanitation of a building occupied by a nonconforming use. 
(e)  Reconstruction of nonconformities after catastrophe. Any nonconforming structure, use or establishment containing a site-related nonconformity which is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, collapse, wind or other catastrophe to such an extent that the cost of repair or reconstruction will exceed 50 percent of the building's value as shown on the tax assessment roll at the time of the damage shall be deemed to be terminated. No repair or reconstruction may occur except when such repair or reconstruction results in the conversion of the previous nonconformity to a conforming structure, use and/or site. In the event that damage to a nonconformity may be repaired by an investment of less than 50 percent of the appraised value of the nonconformity as shown on the tax assessment roll at the time of the damage, such repair shall be permitted and the nonconformity may continue. 
(f)  Cessation of nonconformities. All nonconformities shall be considered terminated and shall not thereafter be reestablished if any nonconforming use of land or structure or establishment having a site-related nonconformity ceases operation for a continuous period of 180 days or more, or if a nonconforming structure is removed for a continuous period of 180 days or more. 
(g)  Certain mobile homes declared nonconforming. On the effective date of this Code, all mobile homes within the city located on individual lots outside of a mobile home park are declared nonconforming uses. A mobile home within a mobile home park lawfully created prior to the effective date of this Code shall not be considered a nonconforming use. 
(h)  Nonconforming lots of record. Any lot which was lawfully created and recorded prior to the enactment or amendment of this Code, but does not meet the minimum size and/or dimension requirements of the zoning district in which it is located shall be considered a legal nonconforming lot of record. A legal nonconforming lot of record may be used, conveyed, or sold the same as if it were a conforming lot. 
(Secs. 3.7.1—3.7.8)  
Sec. 34-3-8. - Required corner visibility. 
On every corner lot, the triangle formed by the street lines of such lot and a line drawn between points on such street lines which are 30 feet from the intersection thereof shall be clear of any structure or planting of such nature and dimension as to obstruct lateral vision; provided that this requirement shall generally not apply to the trunk of a tree (but not branches or foliage) or a post, column or similar structure which is no greater than one foot in cross section or diameter. Lateral vision shall be maintained between a height of 30 inches and ten feet above the average elevation of the existing surface of both streets measured along the center lines adjacent to the visibility triangle. 
(Sec. 3.8)  
Sec. 34-3-9. - Trash enclosures. 
All refuse generated by any commercial or industrial establishment located within any district shall be stored in tightly covered containers and placed in a visually screened area. For such uses, trash containers or dumpsters shall be located within a building or within an enclosed structure surrounded by six-foot high walls. Such trash enclosures shall not be located in the front yard of any lot and shall be located next to a parking lot rather than within a parking lot. 
(Sec. 3.9)  
Sec. 34-3-10. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  No swimming pool, whether public or private, shall be located in a front yard or closer than ten feet to any side or rear lot line. 
(b)  Every swimming pool, including above ground pools that are more than two feet deep 
(1)  shall apply for and receive a swimming pool permit. 
(2)  shall be enclosed by a wall or fence at least four feet in height. The passage through such wall or fence shall be equipped with a self-closing gate. 
(c)  Swimming pool installation shall comply with the Mascoutah Building Code. 
(Sec. 3.10)  
Sec. 34-3-11. - Elevation of building pads. 
Structures built on slab floors shall be built no less than 15 inches above adjacent center line of roadway elevation. Structures built in a floodplain shall have the buildable area raised to meet floodplain requirements.  
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 34-4-1. - Establishment of districts. 
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the use of land, buildings and structures; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the intensity of land use, the incorporated area of Mascoutah is divided into districts as follows: 
Agricultural districts 
AG 	Agricultural 
	
Residential districts 
RS-10 	Single-family residential 
RS-8 	Single-family residential 
RS-5 	Single-family residential 
RT 	Two-family residential 
RM 	Multiple-family residential 
RMH 	Mobile home residential 
	
Commercial districts 	
O 	Office 
NC 	Neighborhood commercial 
DC 	Downtown commercial 
GC 	General commercial 
	
Industrial districts 	
LI 	Light industrial 
GI 	General industrial 
AP 	Airport 
  
Sec. 34-4-2. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the various zoning districts are hereby fixed and established as shown in the accompanying zoning map. This zoning map is on file in the office of the city clerk. This map is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code as if the matters and information set forth by said maps were fully described herein. 
(b)  Measurement of boundaries. The boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map shall be determined by the boundaries as shown and outlined thereon and when not clearly so determined, by use of the scale shown on said maps unless actual dimensions are noted. Scale and field measurements and map dimensions shall be figured from the center line of streets, highways, alleys and railroad rights-of-way as appropriate. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of said boundaries, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Center line as boundary. Where district boundaries lie on or within streets, highways, road rights-of-way or railroad rights-of-way, the district boundaries shall be the center line of the same. 
(2)  District boundaries which bisect blocks. Where district boundary lines approximately bisect blocks, the boundaries shall be the median lines of such blocks between the center line of boundary streets. 
(3)  District boundaries dividing parcels of land. In subdivided property or where a district boundary divides a subdivided lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by the use of a scale appearing on the district map. Where a district boundary divides a platted lot, the zone classification of the greater portion shall prevail throughout the lot. 
(4)  Action in case of uncertainty. In case any further uncertainty exists, the board of zoning appeals shall interpret the intent of the zoning map as to the location of such boundaries. 
(5)  Street and right-of-way abandonments. Where a public road, street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply. 
(6)  Excluded areas. Unless areas are classified on or by the official zoning map of the city, or the appropriate classification can be established by the rules above, such areas shall be considered to be classified as AG, agricultural district, until such time as the land is rezoned by the city council. 
(7)  Amendment to the official zoning map. No changes or amendments to the official zoning map shall be initiated, except in compliance and conformity with all procedures and requirements of this Code. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized change in the official zoning map. 
(c)  Annual publication. In accordance with state law, if any changes are made in the zoning districts or regulations during a calendar year, the city clerk shall publish the official zoning map of the city not later than March 31 st of the following year. 
(d)  Zoning of annexed areas. Any territory hereafter annexed to the city shall have a zoning classification indicated in the annexation ordinance. If such classification is not indicated in the annexation ordinance, the land shall automatically be zoned as RS-10, single-family residential district, until duly changed by an amendment to this Code except under the following conditions: 
(1)  The city council, with the recommendation of the planning commission, may annex any territory as any other zoning district or districts herein established if all legal requirements for zoning the property at the time of the annexation are recorded. 
(2)  Any existing agricultural area within St. Clair County of five acres or more may be annexed to the city as AG, agricultural district, without a public hearing. 
(Secs. 4.2.1—4.2.4)  
Sec. 34-4-3. - Regulation of uses. 
It is the intent of this Code to permit certain uses, not otherwise illegal, to locate in specified zoning districts, either as a permitted use, a conditional use, or a PDP. 
(a)  Permitted uses. No structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any structure or land or combination thereof be used, unless the use to which the structure and/or land is to be put is listed in the permitted use section of the applicable zoning district and the use fully complies with all of the applicable district regulations, except for nonconformities, accessory uses and conditional uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses. No conditional use, as designated within this Code, shall hereafter be established unless such use has been approved pursuant to the provisions of article VII, division IV and article XIII, division II. Any existing use which was a permitted use prior to the adoption of this Code and which is designated as a conditional use by this Code may continue as if it were approved as a conditional use. 
(c)  Uses constructed within "other" zone districts. Development made within zones that differ from those intended within the original zone, shall comply with the regulations of the actual development made. Example: Residential uses (actual development) made within commercial districts (original zone) shall comply with the corresponding residential zone requirements. 
(d)  Uses not specifically listed. This Code acknowledges that not every acceptable use can be listed in these regulations and, therefore, allows the development administrator the authority to determine those uses that are similar, which may be deemed "permitted uses". Development administrator decisions are appealable. 
(Sec. 4.3)  
Sec. 34-4-4. - Establishment of size, dimension and access criteria. 
In order to carry out the purpose and intent and provisions of this Code, size and dimension criteria for particular zoning districts are hereby established. Such size and dimension criteria shall be applied in accordance with this section and other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(a)  Lot size requirements. 
(1)  Reduction of lot size or yards. No lot or yard existing on the effective date of this Code shall thereafter be reduced in size, dimension, or area below the minimum requirements set out herein, except by reason of a portion being acquired for public use in any manner, including dedication, condemnation, or purchase. Lots or yards created after the effective date of this Code shall meet the minimum requirements established herein. 
(2)  Applicability to all uses. Unless otherwise specified in this Code, all permitted uses and all conditional uses shall be subject to the lot size requirements specified for a given district, unless other minimum requirements are specified for such uses elsewhere in this Code. 
(3)  Structure built on two lots. A building constructed on a site consisting of two lots must be located either within the required setback from the common or center lot line, or the lots must be merged into one lot. 
(4)  Lots of record less than minimum size. Any lot of record at the time of the adoption of this Code which contains less lot area or width than required in the district in which it is located may be used for a use in such district provided that the lot has a minimum width of 30 feet. This provision shall not be construed to permit more than one dwelling unit on a lot with less lot area per family than required for the district in which such lot is located. 
(5)  Use of lots in single-family districts. In single-family districts, every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than the principal building and the customary accessory buildings on one lot or parcel of land. 
(b)  Minimum yard requirements. 
(1)  Generally. Minimum yard requirements shall be as specified for a given zoning district. The yard requirements shall apply to all buildings and structures, as they relate to the respective lot lines, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code or as exempted in subsection 34-4-4(b)(2). 
(2)  Exemptions. The following structures shall be exempt from the minimum yard requirements set forth in this Code; underground utility equipment, clothes lines, flag poles, regulation mail boxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, light poles, or any similar structure or device (See section 34-3-2). 
(c)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall apply to all structures located in the zoning district except those structures and appurtenances excluded in section 34-3-1 or conditional uses which have a maximum height specified in this Code. Except, however, that any existing or proposed structure located in an area subject to height hazard limitations of MidAmerica Airport or Scott Air Force Base, shall be subject to the requirements of section 34-6-2 of this Code. 
(d)  Access required. No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has permanent easement of access to, a public or private street. 
(e)  Building coverage. Most zoning districts provide limitations for building coverage. This provision is to prevent over building of structures on lots. Clearly, the coverage limitations include all enclosed structures. Covered patios/decks (open on at least two sides), unenclosed breezeways/walkways, and similar open structures are not included in building coverage ratios. 
(Sec. 4.4)  
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - "AG" AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "AG", agricultural district, is to provide areas for farms and closely-related agricultural uses as well as uses requiring large amounts of land. It is further intended to provide for residential uses on relatively large tracts of land which may accommodate farm-related accessory uses such as the breeding, raising and keeping of one or more varieties of animals. The "AG" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as agricultural on the city's land use plan map. The "AG" district may also be established in areas of the city designated as low-density residential on the comprehensive land use plan map if the property is currently devoted to agricultural use. 
(Sec. 5.1.1)  
Sec. 34-5-2. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used and land may be used for one or more of the following. 
(a)  Animal production including the following: 
(1)  Beef cattle ranching and farming. 
(2)  Dairy cattle and milk production. 
(3)  Poultry and egg production. 
(4)  Sheep and goat farming. 
(5)  Animal aquaculture. 
(6)  Other animal production. 
(b)  Cemeteries. 
(c)  Crop production. 
(d)  Fishing lakes, including fee fishing or clubs, provided that no building, parking lot, or other intense use is located nearer than 500 feet to any dwelling on an adjacent lot or nearby lot. 
(e)  Forestry and logging. 
(f)  Residential uses including only the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings—Number and scale consistent with housing to support a farm. 
(g)  Support activities for agriculture and forestry. 
(h)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(i)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Sec. 5.1.2)  
Sec. 34-5-3. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "AG" district. Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.1.3)  
Sec. 34-5-4. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "AG" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Communication towers. 
(b)  Correctional institutions. 
(c)  Mining activities. 
(d)  Major public and private utilities, including water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, power generating facilities, transmission towers, and similar uses. 
(e)  Solid waste landfill. 
(Sec. 5.1.4)  
Sec. 34-5-5. - Regulation of agricultural activities. 
(a)  Livestock. No accessory building used or intended to be used to shelter livestock shall be erected closer than 300 feet to a dwelling existing on an adjoining lot or nearby lot nor shall it be erected closer than 200 feet to any residentially-zoned property. Fences shall be erected or other means shall be taken to prevent livestock from approaching any spot closer than 300 feet to any dwelling on an adjoining lot or nearby lot or within 200 feet of any residentially-zoned property. 
(b)  Feeding. No pens for feeding swine, nor any feeding lot, shall be located within 500 feet of a non-agricultural zoning district. 
(c)  Farm equipment and commodities. Agricultural equipment and commodities (including, but not limited to, baled crops, fertilizer, pesticides and herbicides) shall not be stored outdoors closer than 200 feet from any residentially-zoned property. Except, however, that such material may be stored in a building located not less than 100 feet from any residentially-zoned property. 
(Sec. 5.1.5)  
Sec. 34-5-6. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.1.6)  
Sec. 34-5-7. - Dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	3 acres 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	150 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	200 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	25 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	10 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	25 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum lot coverage: 	20 percent 
(i) 	Minimum district size: 	5 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.1.7)  
Secs. 34-5-8, 34-5-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - "RS-10" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-10. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "RS-10", single-family residential district, is to provide areas for single-family residential uses of a suburban character. It is further intended to provide for other uses which are customarily found with and are not detrimental to single-family residences. The "RS-10" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as low-density residential on the city's land use plan map. This district may also be used in areas designated as medium-density residential on the city's land use plan map. 
Although RS-10 is predominantly a residential district, this zone also accommodates recreational, religious, educational, and other community uses as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood. 
(Sec. 5.2.1)  
Sec. 34-5-11. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Residential uses including the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(c)  Elementary and secondary schools without residential facilities. 
(Sec. 5.2.2)  
Sec. 34-5-12. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "RS-10" district. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.2.3)  
Sec. 34-5-13. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "RS-10" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq.: 
(a)  Child care centers. 
(b)  Public administration including the following: 
(1)  Executive, legislative and other general government support. 
(2)  Police protection. 
(3)  Fire protection. 
(4)  Other justice, public order and safety activities. 
(c)  Religious organizations. 
(d)  Residential care facilities including the following: 
(1)  Community-integrated living arrangements. 
(e)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(1)  Golf courses and country clubs. 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(f)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(Sec. 5.2.4)  
Sec. 34-5-14. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.2.5)  
Sec. 34-5-15. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.2.6)  
Sec. 34-5-16. - RS-10 dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	10,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	80 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	25 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	10 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	25 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum density: 	4.3 dwelling units per acre 
(i) 	Maximum building coverage: 	25 percent 
(j) 	Minimum district size: 	5 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.2.7; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 8-18-08)  
Secs. 34-5-17—34-5-19. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - "RS-8" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "RS-8", single-family residential district, is to provide areas for single-family residential uses of an urban character. It is further intended to provide for other uses which are customarily found with and are not detrimental to single-family residences. The "RS-8" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as low-density residential or medium-density residential on the city's land use plan map. 
Although RS-8 is predominantly a residential district, this zone also accommodates recreational, religious, educational, and other community uses as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood. 
(Sec. 5.3.1)  
Sec. 34-5-21. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Residential uses including the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  State of Illinois Certified Modular Dwellings. 
(b)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(c)  Elementary and secondary schools without residential facilities.  
Sec. 34-5-22. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "RS-8" district. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.3.3)  
Sec. 34-5-23. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "RS-8" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. 
(a)  Child care centers. 
(b)  Public administration including the following: 
(1)  Executive, legislative and other general government support. 
(2)  Police protection. 
(3)  Fire protection. 
(4)  Other justice, public order and safety activities. 
(c)  Religious organizations. 
(d)  Residential care facilities including the following: 
(1)  Community-integrated living arrangements. 
(e)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(1)  Golf courses and country clubs. 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(f)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(Sec. 5.3.4)  
Sec. 34-5-24. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.3.5)  
Sec. 34-5-25. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec. 5.3.6)  
Sec. 34-5-26. - RS-8 dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	8,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	70 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	25 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	10 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	25 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum density: 	5.0 dwelling units per gross acre 
(i) 	Maximum building coverage: 	30 percent 
(j) 	Minimum district size: 	5 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.3.7)  
Secs. 34-5-27—34-5-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - "RS-5" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-30. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "RS-5", single-family residential district, is to provide areas for single-family residential uses of an urban character. It is further intended to provide for other uses which are customarily found with and are not detrimental to single-family residences. The "RS-5" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as medium-density residential on the city's land use plan map. 
Although RS-5 is predominantly a residential district, this zone also accommodates recreational, religious, educational, and other community uses as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood. 
(Sec. 5.4.1)  
Sec. 34-5-31. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Residential uses including the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  State of Illinois Certified Modular Dwellings. 
(c)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(d)  Elementary and secondary schools without residential facilities. 
(Sec. 5.4.2)  
Sec. 34-5-32. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "RS-5" district. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.4.3)  
Sec. 34-5-33. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "RS-5" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. 
(a)  Child care centers. 
(b)  Public administration including the following: 
(1)  Executive, legislative and other general governmental support. 
(2)  Police protection. 
(3)  Fire protection. 
(4)  Other justice, public order and safety activities. 
(c)  Religious organizations. 
(d)  Residential care facilities including the following: 
(1)  Community-integrated living arrangements. 
(e)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(1)  Golf courses and country clubs. 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(f)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(Sec. 5.4.4)  
Sec. 34-5-34. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.4.5)  
Sec. 34-5-35. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.4.6)  
Sec. 34-5-36. - RS-5 dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	5,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	50 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	20 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	5 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	20 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum density: 	8.0 dwelling units per gross acre 
(i) 	Maximum building coverage: 	35 percent 
(j) 	Minimum district size: 	5 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.4.7)  
Secs. 34-5-37—34-5-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - "RT" TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-40. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "RT", two-family residential district, is to provide areas for single-family and two-family residential uses of an urban character. It is further intended to provide for other uses which are customarily found with and are not detrimental to two-family residences. The "RT" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as medium-density residential on the city's land use plan map. 
Although RT is predominantly a two-family unit residential district, this zone also accommodates recreational, religious, educational, and other community uses as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood. 
(Sec. 5.5.1; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-41. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Residential uses including the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Duplexes. 
(b)  Elementary and secondary schools without residential facilities. 
(c)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration 
(Sec. 5.5.2; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-42. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "RT" district. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.5.3; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-43. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "RT" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. 
(a)  Child care centers. 
(b)  Public administration including the following: 
(1)  Executive, legislative and other general government support. 
(2)  Police protection. 
(3)  Fire protection. 
(4)  Other justice, public order and safety activities. 
(c)  Religious organizations. 
(d)  Duplexes w/zero lot line design. 
(e)  Residential care facilities including the following: 
(1)  Community-integrated living arrangements. 
(f)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(1)  Golf courses and country clubs. 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(g)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses 
(Sec. 5.5.4; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-44. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the Planned Development Procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.5.5; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-45. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.5.6; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-46. - RT dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	
	Multi-Family (duplexes, condo, town homes, etc.) 	6,000 square feet 
	Single Family Residences 	6,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum Lot Width: 	
	Multi-Family (duplexes, condo, town homes, etc.) 	60 feet 
	Single Family Residences 	60 feet 
(c) 	Minimum Lot Depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum Front Yard: 	20 feet 
(e) 	Minimum Side Yard: 	
	Multi-Family (duplexes, condo, town homes, etc.) 	10 feet 
	Single Family residences 	10 feet 
(f) 	Minimum Rear Yard: 	20 feet 
(g) 	Maximum Building Height: 	35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum Density: 	12 dwelling units per gross acre 
(i) 	Maximum Building Coverage: 	40 percent 
(j) 	Minimum District Size: 	2 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.5.7; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Secs. 34-5-47—34-5-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - "RM" MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-50. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "RM", multiple-family residential district, is to provide areas for multiple-family residential uses of an urban character. It is further intended to provide for other uses which are customarily found with and are not detrimental to multiple-family residences. The "RM" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as medium-density residential on the city's land use plan map. 
Although RM is a multiple family unit residential district, this zone also accommodates recreational, religious, educational, and other community uses as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood. 
(Sec. 5.6.1)  
Sec. 34-5-51. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Residential uses including the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Duplexes. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(b)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(c)  Elementary and secondary schools without residential facilities.  
Sec. 34-5-52. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "RM" district. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.6.3)  
Sec. 34-5-53. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "RM" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. 
(a)  Life care facilities. 
(b)  Public administration including the following: 
(1)  Executive, legislative and other general government support. 
(2)  Police protection. 
(3)  Fire protection. 
(4)  Other justice, public order and safety activities. 
(c)  Religious organizations. 
(d)  Residential care facilities including the following: 
(1)  Community-integrated living arrangements. 
(e)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(1)  Golf courses and country clubs. 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(f)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(Sec. 5.6.4)  
Sec. 34-5-54. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all uses in the "RM" district, based on the procedures in section 34-13-11 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.6.5)  
Sec. 34-5-55. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.6.6)  
Sec. 34-5-56. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.6.7)  
Sec. 34-5-57. - RM dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	5,000 square feet for single-family dwellings 
		6,000 square feet for duplexes 
		10,000 square feet for multiple-family and non-residential uses 
		Buildings for more than four dwellings shall not exceed the maximum density per gross acre listed in this section 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	50 feet for single-family dwellings 
		60 feet for duplexes 
		120 feet for all multiple-family and non-residential uses 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	25 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	5 feet for single-family dwellings 
		6 feet for duplexes 
		6 inches per foot of height of multiple-family and non-residential uses 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	25 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum density: 	20 dwelling units per gross acre 
(i) 	Maximum building coverage: 	45 percent 
(j) 	Minimum district size: 	2 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.6.8)  
Secs. 34-5-58, 34-5-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - "RMH" MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-60. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "RMH", mobile home residential district, is to provide areas for mobile home residential development in appropriate areas of the city. It is further intended to provide for other uses which are customarily found with and are not detrimental to mobile homes. The "RMH" district is considered consistent with provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as medium-density residential on the city's land use plan map. 
(Sec. 5.7.1)  
Sec. 34-5-61. - Permitted uses. 
In the "RMH" district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(a)  Residential uses. 
(1)  Mobile homes. 
(b)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Sec. 5.7.2)  
Sec. 34-5-62. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "RMH" district. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.7.3)  
Sec. 34-5-63. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "RMH" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. 
(a)  Child care centers. 
(b)  Residential uses. 
(1)  Single family homes. 
(2)  Duplexes. 
(3)  Multiple family - within density requirements. 
(c)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(1)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(d)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(Sec. 5.7.4)  
Sec. 34-5-64. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.7.5)  
Sec. 34-5-65. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  The provisions of section 34-7-11, standards for mobile home parks, supplement the regulations contained in this section. 
(b)  Buffer yards. Mobile home parks located adjacent to single-family zoning districts shall provide a 50-foot separation (yard) between the mobile home park and any adjacent single-family districts. Distance may include the street right-of-way. Buffering which is heavily landscaped and which shall contain no structures, must be a minimum depth of 25 feet. 
(Sec. 5.7.6)  
Sec. 34-5-66. - RMH dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot/space size: 	Lot size—5 acres 
		Space size—4,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot or space width: 	40 feet 
(c) 	Minimum front yard: 	10 feet 
(d) 	Minimum side yard: 	5 feet (15 combined) 
(e) 	Minimum separation between mobile homes: 	20 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet 
(g) 	Minimum setback from park property line: 	25 feet 
(h) 	Maximum lot or space coverage: 	40 percent 
(i) 	Maximum building height: 	20 feet 
(j) 	Minimum district size: 	10 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.7.7)  
Secs. 34-5-67—34-5-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - "O" OFFICE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-70. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "O", office district, is to provide areas for the development of offices, institutional uses and selected service activities at accessible locations. The "O" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land located outside of the downtown area which is designated as office-residential on the city's land use plan map. 
(Sec. 5.8.1)  
Sec. 34-5-71. - Permitted uses. 
The "O" district is designed to allow a broad range of office and institutional uses provided that no outdoor storage is conducted except as otherwise provided herein. Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Residential uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. *To assure compatibility, especially in smaller lot configurations, site plan submittal requirements must be met and the residential zone designation (RS-5, RS-8, RS-10) shall be determined with all standards maintained. 
(b)  Commercial/retail. 
(1)  None. 
(c)  Office and professional uses. 
(1)  Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping and payroll services. 
(2)  Advertising and related services. 
(3)  Architectural, engineering and related services. 
(4)  Computer systems design and related services. 
(5)  Health and medical services (doctors and dentists). 
(6)  Legal services. 
(7)  Professional office uses. 
(d)  Service uses. 
(1)  Banking/financial. 
(2)  Barber shops. 
(3)  Beauty salons. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(5)  Child care centers. 
(6)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(7)  Fire suppression/safety stores. 
(8)  Health club (e.g. YMCA) and recreational facilities. 
(9)  Individual and family services. 
(10)  Insurance services. 
(11)  Nail salons. 
(12)  Photography. 
(13)  Real estate businesses, including rental/lease services. 
(14)  Shoe repair. 
(15)  Tanning salons. 
(16)  Travel service. 
(17)  Veterinary and pet care facilities. 
(e)  Institutional. 
(1)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(a)  Performing arts companies. 
(b)  Museums, historical sites and similar institutions. 
(2)  Church/religious facilities. 
(3)  Postal services. 
(4)  Public administration offices. 
(5)  Utility uses including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(f)  Additional uses. 
(1)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Sec. 5.8.2; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 8-18-08)  
Sec. 34-5-72. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "O" district. These include but are not limited to: 
(a)  Residential uses are allowed as an accessory use provided that they are located on the second floor of the building or at the rear of the building. 
(b)  Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. 
(c)  A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.8.3)  
Sec. 34-5-73. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "O" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Other uses found in more intense (commercial) districts that may be suitable for the office district. 
(b)  Permitted uses that are determined by the development administrator to have conditions which may require a higher level of review and design constraint.  
Sec. 34-5-74. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.8.4)  
Sec. 34-5-75. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "O" district, based on the procedures in section 34-13-11. 
(Sec. 5.8.5)  
Sec. 34-5-76. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec. 5.8.6)  
Sec. 34-5-77. - "O" dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	5,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	50 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	15 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	None, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least 10 feet. If a side yard is not required but is provided, it shall be at least five feet in width. 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	2 stories or 35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum building coverage: 	30 percent—Residential 
		N/A—Non-residential uses 
(i) 	Minimum district size: 	1 acre 
 
(Sec. 5.8.7)  
Secs. 34-5-78, 34-5-79. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - "NC" NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-80. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "NC", neighborhood commercial district, is to provide areas for the development of retail sales and selected service activities at accessible locations. The "NC" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land located outside of the downtown area which is designated as commercial on the city's land use plan map. 
(Sec. 5.9.1)  
Sec. 34-5-81. - Permitted uses. 
The "NC" district is designed to allow a range of commercial/retail, office professional, service and institutional uses provided that no outdoor storage is conducted except as otherwise provided herein. Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Commercial/retail. 
(1)  Antique and art stores. 
(2)  Bakery. 
(3)  Book store. 
(4)  Camera and photography store. 
(5)  Candle shops. 
(6)  Candy and confectionary store. 
(7)  Cemetery memorial dealers. 
(8)  Clothing store. 
(9)  Collectors shops tailor/dressmaking. 
(10)  Computer stores. 
(11)  Convenience stores. 
(12)  Drug store. 
(13)  Dry goods or notions store. 
(14)  Electronics and appliance stores, including repair when incidental to retail sales. 
(15)  Florists. 
(16)  Furniture and home furnishings stores. 
(17)  Garden/home supply. 
(18)  Gift shop. 
(19)  Grocery store. 
(20)  Hardware store. 
(21)  Hobby store. 
(22)  Ice cream store. 
(23)  Jewelry store. 
(24)  Liquor store (only as part of shopping complex). 
(25)  Music stores. 
(26)  Office supplies. 
(27)  Pet stores. 
(28)  Restaurant and cafe. 
(29)  Shoe store. 
(30)  Sporting goods. 
(31)  Stationery stores. 
(32)  Tobacco store. 
(33)  Toy store. 
(b)  Office and professional uses. 
(1)  Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping and payroll services. 
(2)  Advertising and related services. 
(3)  Architectural, engineering and related services. 
(4)  Computer systems design and related services. 
(5)  Health and medical services (doctors and dentists). 
(6)  Legal services. 
(7)  Professional office uses. 
(8)  Specialized design services. 
(c)  Service uses. 
(1)  Banking/financial. 
(2)  Barber shops. 
(3)  Beauty salons. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(5)  Caterers. 
(6)  Child care centers. 
(7)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(8)  Fire suppression/safety stores. 
(9)  Health club (e.g. YMCA) and recreational facilities. 
(10)  Individual and family services. 
(11)  Insurance services. 
(12)  Nail salons. 
(13)  Photography. 
(14)  Real estate businesses, including rental/lease services. 
(15)  Shoe repair. 
(16)  Tanning salons. 
(17)  Traveler accommodation including the following: 
(a)  Hotels (except casino hotels) and motels. 
(b)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(18)  Travel service. 
(19)  Veterinary and pet care facilities. 
(d)  Institutional. 
(1)  Arts, entertainment and recreation including the following: 
(a)  Performing arts companies 
(b)  Museums, historical sites and similar institutions. 
(2)  Church/religious facilities. 
(3)  Postal services. 
(4)  Public administration offices. 
(5)  Utility uses including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(e)  Additional uses. 
(1)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(2)  Residential uses are considered appropriate use in commercial zones. To assure compatibility, especially in smaller lot configurations, site plan submittal requirements must be met and the residential zone designation (RS-8, RS-10, etc.) shall be determined with all standards maintained. 
(Sec. 5.9.2)  
Sec. 34-5-82. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "NC" district. These include but are not limited to: 
(a)  Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, is allowed as an accessory uses. 
(b)  A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(c)  Outdoor sales/displays not placed on public property nor hindering adequate on-site parking. (Separate permit required.) 
(Sec. 5.9.3)  
Sec. 34-5-83. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "NC" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Gasoline stations. 
(b)  Restaurants with outdoor seating areas. 
(c)  Restaurants with dancing and/or floorshows, and/or drive-through car service, and/or alcoholic beverages may be permitted as an accessory use, subject to a conditional use permit process. 
(d)  Recreational facilities. 
(e)  Other uses found in more intense commercial districts that may be suitable for the neighborhood commercial district. 
(f)  Permitted uses that are determined by the development administrator to have conditions which may require a higher level of review and design constraint.  
Sec. 34-5-84. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.9.4)  
Sec. 34-5-85. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "NC" district based on the procedures in section 34-13-11. 
(Sec. 5.9.5)  
Sec. 34-5-86. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.9.6)  
Sec. 34-5-87. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  Temporary outdoor displays. Temporary outdoor displays of merchandise may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in subsection 34-13-6(a). Duration of seasonal displays may be extended by the development administrator. 
(b)  Temporary seasonal displays. Temporary seasonal displays may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-32. 
(c)  Festivals. Festivals may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-33. 
(Sec. 5.9.7)  
Sec. 34-5-88. - "NC" dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	10,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	100 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	25 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	None, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least 10 feet. If a side yard is not required but is provided, it shall be at least five feet in width. 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	2 stories or 35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum building coverage: 	N/A 
(i) 	Minimum district size: 	2 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.9.8)  
Sec. 34-5-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - "DC" DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-90. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "DC", downtown commercial district, is to enhance the character of downtown by permitting selected retail sales and service activities in the downtown area. The "DC" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land in the downtown area, which is designated as commercial on the city's land use plan map. 
(Sec. 5.10.1)  
Sec. 34-5-91. - Permitted uses. 
This is a zone allowing a variety of commercial activities appropriate for a downtown with "old town" charm. Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Less intense commercial uses. All uses permitted in the "NC", neighborhood commercial zone, as permitted within this zone. 
(b)  Commercial/retail. 
(1)  Automotive parts, accessories and tire stores. 
(2)  New and used car dealers. 
(3)  Motorcycle, boat, and other motor vehicle dealers. 
(4)  Theaters. 
(5)  Vehicle repair services. 
(c)  Office and professional uses. 
(d)  Service uses. 
(1)  Business schools and computer and management training. 
(2)  Cable networks and program distribution. 
(3)  Cosmetology and barber schools. 
(4)  Funeral homes and funeral services. 
(5)  Health care and social assistance including the following: 
(a)  Residential care facilities including assisted living, life care, and nursing home facilities. 
(b)  Physical rehabilitation/vocational rehabilitation services. 
(6)  Local messengers and local delivery. 
(7)  Office machinery and equipment rental and leasing. 
(8)  Radio and television broadcasting. 
(9)  Rental and leasing services including the following: 
(a)  Passenger car rental and leasing. 
(b)  Formal wear and costume rental. 
(c)  Video tape and disc rental. 
(10)  Repair and maintenance including electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance. 
(11)  Technical and trade schools. 
(e)  Institutional. 
(1)  Convention and visitors bureaus. 
(2)  Parking lots and garages. 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Urban transit systems. 
(f)  Additional uses. 
(1)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(2)  Residential uses are considered appropriate use in commercial zones. To assure compatibility, especially in smaller lot configurations, site plan submittal requirements must be met and the residential zone designation (RS-8, RS-10, etc.) shall be determined with all standards maintained. 
(Sec. 5.9.2)  
Sec. 34-5-92. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "DC" district. These include but are not limited to: 
(a)  Residential uses are allowed provided that they are located on the second floor of the building or at the rear of the building. 
(b)  Concealed communication antennas, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. 
(c)  A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(d)  Outdoor sales/displays not placed on public property or hindering adequate on-site parking. (Separate permit required.) 
(Sec. 5.10.3)  
Sec. 34-5-93. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "DC" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Gasoline stations. 
(b)  Restaurants with outdoor seating areas. 
(c)  Other uses found in more intense commercial districts that may be suitable for the downtown commercial district. 
(d)  Permitted uses that are determined by the development administrator to have conditions which may require a higher level of review and design constraint. 
(Sec. 5.10.4)  
Sec. 34-5-94. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.2.5)  
Sec. 34-5-95. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "DC" district based on the procedures in section 34-13-11 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.10.5)  
Sec. 34-5-96. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities are not required in the "DC" district. 
(Sec 5.10.6)  
Sec. 34-5-97. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  Temporary outdoor displays. Temporary outdoor displays of merchandise may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-31. 
(b)  Temporary seasonal displays. Temporary seasonal displays may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-32. Duration of seasonal displays may be extended by the development administrator. 
(c)  Festivals. Festivals may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-33. 
(Sec. 5.10.7)  
Sec. 34-5-98. - "DC" dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	5,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	50 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	None 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	None, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least 10 feet. If a side yard is not required but is provided, it shall be at least five feet in width. 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet 
(g) 	Gasoline station pumps: 	Gasoline pumps must be setback 15 feet from any street line; 25 feet from any side or rear lot line; and 50 feet from any residentially-zoned land. 
(h) 	Maximum building height: 	3 stories or 45 feet 
(i) 	Maximum building coverage: 	N/A 
 
(Sec. 5.10.8)  
Sec. 34-5-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - "GC" GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "GC", general commercial district, is to permit more intense retail sales and various service activities in appropriate areas. The "GC" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land designated as commercial on the city's land use plan map. 
(Sec. 5.11.1)  
Sec. 34-5-101. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Less intense commercial uses. All commercial uses permitted in the "NC", neighborhood commercial, and the "DC", downtown commercial zone, are permitted within this zone. 
(b)  Commercial/retail. 
(1)  Publishing industries. 
(2)  Gasoline stations. 
(3)  Restaurants with outdoor seating. 
(c)  Office and professional uses. 
(d)  Service uses. 
(1)  Construction. 
(2)  Couriers and messengers. 
(3)  Motor vehicle towing. 
(4)  Repair and maintenance including automotive, commercial and industrial machinery and equipment. 
(e)  Institutional. 
(f)  Additional uses. 
(1)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Sec. 5.9.2; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 34-5-102. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "GC" district unless such accessory use is specifically listed as a conditional use in section 34-5-103. These include but are not limited to: 
(a)  Residential uses are allowed provided that they are located on the second floor of the building or at the rear of the building. 
(b)  Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. 
(c)  A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(d)  Outdoor sales/displays not placed on public property nor hindering adequate on-site parking. (Separate permit required.) 
(Sec. 5.11.3)  
Sec. 34-5-103. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "GC" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Communication towers based on the performance standards in section 34-7-21. 
(b)  Pet crematoriums. 
(c)  Permitted uses that are determined by the development administrator to have conditions which may require a higher level of review and design constraint 
(d)  Outdoor storage. 
(Sec. 5.11.4)  
Sec. 34-5-104. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.2.5)  
Sec. 34-5-105. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "GC" district based on the procedures in section 34-13-11 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.11.5)  
Sec. 34-5-106. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec. 5.11.6)  
Sec. 34-5-107. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  Temporary outdoor displays. Temporary outdoor displays of merchandise may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-31. 
(b)  Temporary seasonal displays. Temporary seasonal displays may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-32. Duration of seasonal displays may be extended by the development administrator. 
(c)  Festivals. Festivals may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-33. 
(Sec. 5.11.7)  
Sec. 34-5-108. - "GC" dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	10,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	100 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	25 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	None, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least 10 feet. If a side yard is not required but is provided, it shall be at least five feet in width. 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	20 feet 
(g) 	Gasoline station pumps: 	Gasoline pumps must be setback 15 feet from any street line; 25 feet from any side or rear lot line; and 50 feet from any residentially-zoned land. 
(h) 	Maximum building height: 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 
(i) 	Maximum building coverage: 	N/A 
 
(Sec. 5.11.8)  
Sec. 34-5-109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - "LI" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-110. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "LI", light industrial district, is to encourage the development and redevelopment of those areas, which are designated as industrial on the city's land use plan map. The "LI" district is further intended to allow for light industrial and selected intensive industrial uses. 
(Sec. 5.12.1)  
Sec. 34-5-111. - Permitted uses. 
The "LI" district is designed to allow a wide range of light manufacturing, storage and wholesale uses. Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Administrative and support services including the following: 
(1)  Business support services. 
(2)  Investigation and security services. 
(3)  Services to buildings and dwellings. 
(4)  Other support services. 
(b)  Apparel manufacturing. 
(c)  Beverage and tobacco product manufacturing. 
(d)  Building material and garden equipment and supplies dealers. 
(e)  Computer and electronic product manufacturing. 
(f)  Construction. 
(g)  Converted paper product manufacturing. 
(h)  Couriers and messengers. 
(i)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(j)  Electrical equipment, appliance and component manufacturing. 
(k)  Fabricated metal product manufacturing. 
(l)  Food manufacturing including the following: 
(1)  Animal food manufacturing. 
(2)  Grain and oilseed milling. 
(3)  Sugar and confectionery product manufacturing. 
(4)  Fruit and vegetable preserving and specialty food manufacturing. 
(5)  Dairy product manufacturing. 
(6)  Bakeries and tortilla manufacturing. 
(7)  Other food manufacturing. 
(m)  Furniture and home furnishings stores. 
(n)  Furniture and related product manufacturing. 
(o)  Gasoline stations. 
(p)  Leather and allied product manufacturing. 
(q)  Lessors of miniwarehouses and self-storage units. 
(r)  Machinery manufacturing. 
(s)  Medical and diagnostic laboratories. 
(t)  Miscellaneous manufacturing. 
(u)  Miscellaneous store retailers including the following: 
(1)  Manufactured (mobile) home dealers. 
(2)  All other miscellaneous store retailers. 
(v)  Motion picture and sound recording industries including the following: 
(1)  Motion picture and video production. 
(2)  Motion picture and video distribution. 
(3)  Postproduction services and other motion picture and video industries. 
(4)  Sound recording industries. 
(w)  Nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing including the following: 
(1)  Clay product and refractory manufacturing. 
(2)  Glass and glass product manufacturing. 
(x)  Nonstore retailers. 
(y)  Printing and related support activities. 
(z)  Professional, scientific and technical services including the following: 
(1)  Architectural, engineering and related services. 
(2)  Specialized design services. 
(3)  Computer systems design and related services. 
(4)  Management, scientific and technical consulting services. 
(5)  Scientific research and development services. 
(6)  All other professional, scientific and technical services. 
(aa)  Public administration including the following: 
(1)  Executive, legislative and other general government support. 
(2)  Police protection. 
(3)  Fire protection. 
(bb)  Publishing industries. 
(cc)  Repair and maintenance including the following: 
(1)  Automotive repair and maintenance. 
(2)  Electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial machinery and equipment (except automotive and electronic) repair and maintenance. 
(dd)  Rental and leasing services including the following: 
(1)  General rental center. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial machinery and equipment rental and leasing. 
(ee)  Support activities for transportation including the following: 
(1)  Support activities for road transportation. 
(2)  Packing and crating. 
(ff)  Technical and trade schools. 
(gg)  Transit and ground passenger transportation. 
(hh)  Truck transportation. 
(ii)  United States Postal Service. 
(jj)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(kk)  Warehousing and storage. 
(ll)  Wholesale trade. 
(mm)  Wood product manufacturing. 
(nn)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(oo)  Special uses. 
(1)  Heliport. 
(2)  Hotel. 
(3)  Parking structures. 
(4)  Parks and recreation facilities. 
(5)  Restaurants. 
(6)  Kennels and hospitals. 
(7)  Veterinarian clinics. 
(8)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(9)  Fuel and ice. 
(10)  Radio and television studios. 
(11)  Retail sales. 
(12)  Seasonal uses. 
(Sec. 5.12.2)  
Sec. 34-5-112. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "LI" district. Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.12.3)  
Sec. 34-5-113. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "LI" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Communication towers based on the performance standards in section 34-7-21. 
(b)  Major public and private utilities, including water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, power generating facilities, transmission towers, and similar uses. 
(c)  Other uses found in more intense commercial districts that may be suitable for the light industrial district. 
(d)  Permitted uses that are determined by the development administrator to have conditions which may require a higher level of review and design constraint. 
(Sec. 5.12.4)  
Sec. 34-5-114. - Planned development procedure. 
Developments may be approved based on the planned development procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.2.5)  
Sec. 34-5-115. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "LI" district based on the procedures in section 34-13-11 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.12.5)  
Sec. 34-5-116. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec. 5.12.6)  
Sec. 34-5-117. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  Temporary outdoor displays. Temporary outdoor displays of merchandise may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-31. 
(b)  Temporary seasonal displays. Temporary seasonal displays may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-32. Duration of seasonal displays may be extended by the development administrator. 
(c)  Festivals. Festivals may be allowed by the development administrator based on the permit process outlined in section 34-13-33. 
(Sec. 5.11.7)  
Sec. 34-5-118. - Dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	20,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	100 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	30 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	5 feet, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least 25 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet, unless the rear of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet 
(g) 	Screening required: 	Any tract of land adjacent to a residential zoning district or adjacent to a street shall provide screening along the lot line that abuts the adjacent residentially-zoned lot or street. The screening shall be in the form of evergreen plant material and/or a decorative wall with a minimum height of 4 feet. Such screening shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission who may require the screen to be up to 6 feet high between any industrially-zoned lot and an adjacent residentially-zoned lot. 
(h) 	Gasoline station pumps: 	Gasoline pumps must be setback 15 feet from any street line; 25 feet from any side or rear lot line; and 50 feet from any residentially-zoned land. 
(i) 	Maximum building height: 	2 stories or 60 feet 
(J) 	Maximum building coverage: 	N/A 
(K) 	Minimum district size: 	5 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.12.7)  
Sec. 34-5-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - "GI" GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-120. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "GI", general industrial district, is to encourage the development and redevelopment of selected areas that are designated as industrial on the city's land use plan map. The "GI" district is further intended to allow for light industrial and selected intensive industrial uses. 
(Sec. 5.13.1)  
Sec. 34-5-121. - Permitted uses. 
The "GI" district is designed to allow a wide range of light manufacturing, wholesale and medium-industrial uses. Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  All uses listed in "LI" light industrial district. 
(b)  Plastics and rubber products manufacturing. 
(c)  Textile mills. 
(d)  Textile product mills. 
(e)  Transportation equipment manufacturing. 
(f)  Truck transportation. 
(g)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(h)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Sec. 5.13.2)  
Sec. 34-5-122. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "GI" district. Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.13.3)  
Sec. 34-5-123. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "GI" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Animal slaughtering and processing. 
(b)  Cement and concrete product manufacturing. 
(c)  Chemical manufacturing. 
(d)  Communication towers based on the performance standards in section 34-7-21. 
(e)  Lime and gypsum product manufacturing. 
(f)  Major public and private utilities, including water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, power generating facilities, transmission towers, and similar uses. 
(g)  Mining. 
(h)  Motor vehicle parts (used) wholesalers and recyclable material wholesalers based on the criteria in section 34-7-21. 
(i)  Other nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing. 
(j)  Paper manufacturing. 
(k)  Petroleum and coal products manufacturing. 
(l)  Primary metal manufacturing. 
(Sec. 5.13.4)  
Sec. 34-5-124. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "GI" district based on the procedures in section 34-13-11 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.13.5)  
Sec. 34-5-125. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec. 5.13.6)  
Sec. 34-5-126. - Dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	40,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	150 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	150 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	30 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	5 feet, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least 25 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet, unless the rear of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet 
(g) 	Screening required: 	Any tract of land adjacent to a residential zoning district or adjacent to a street shall provide screening along the lot line that abuts the adjacent residentially-zoned lot or street. The screening shall be in the form of evergreen plant material and/or a decorative wall with a minimum height of 4 feet. Such screening shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission who may require the screen to be up to 6 feet high between any industrially-zoned lot and an adjacent residentially-zoned lot. 
(h) 	Gasoline station pumps: 	Gasoline pumps must be setback 15 feet from any street line; 25 feet from any side or rear lot line; and 50 feet from any residentially-zoned land. 
(i) 	Maximum building height: 	2 stories or 60 feet 
(j) 	Maximum building coverage: 	N/A 
(k) 	Minimum district size: 	10 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.13.7)  
Secs. 34-5-127—34-5-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - "AP" AIRPORT DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-130. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "AP", airport district, is to protect and encourage the development of those areas which are designated as airport on the city's land use plan map. 
(Sec. 5.14.1)  
Sec. 34-5-131. - Permitted uses. 
The "AP" district is designed to allow general aviation type uses as well as a number of commercial, institutional, light manufacturing, and wholesale uses. Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Air transportation, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Air commuter carriers. 
(2)  Air cargo carriers. 
(3)  Air passenger carriers. 
(4)  Helicopter passenger carriers. 
(5)  Air courier services. 
(6)  Helicopter rides for scenic and sightseeing transportation. 
(7)  Air taxi services. 
(8)  Charter services. 
(9)  Air freight. 
(10)  Fighting forest fires using specialized water bombers. 
(11)  Aerial gathering of geophysical and/or other surveying and mapping services. 
(12)  Air ambulance services. 
(13)  Specialized flying schools. 
(14)  Recreation aviation clubs. 
(15)  Certain more intense support uses, such as fueling operations, aircraft cleaning operations, maintenance and repair operations, etc. 
(b)  All uses permitted within the "GC" general commercial district. 
(c)  All uses permitted within the "LI" light industrial district. 
(d)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Sec. 5.14.2)  
Sec. 34-5-132. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "AP" district or within the "GC" or "LI" districts. Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Sec. 5.14.3)  
Sec. 34-5-133. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "AP" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
(a)  Communication towers based on the performance standards in section 34-7-21. 
(b)  Major public and private utilities, including water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, power generating facilities, transmission towers, and similar uses. 
(c)  Restaurants with outdoor seating areas. 
(d)  Conditional uses found within the "GC" or "LI" districts. 
(Sec. 5.14.4)  
Sec. 34-5-134. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "AP" district based on the procedures in section 34-13-11 et seq. 
(Sec. 5.14.5)  
Sec. 34-5-135. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.14.6)  
Sec. 34-5-136. - Dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	20,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	100 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	150 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	30 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	5 feet, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least 25 feet 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet, unless the rear of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet 
(g) 	Screening required: 	Any tract of land adjacent to a residential zoning district or adjacent to a street shall provide screening along the lot line that abuts the adjacent residentially-zoned lot or street. The screening shall be in the form of evergreen plant material and/or a decorative wall with a minimum height of 4 feet. 
(h) 	Gasoline station pumps: 	Gasoline pumps must be setback 15 feet from any street line; 25 feet from any side or rear lot line; and 50 feet from any residentially-zoned land. 
(i) 	Maximum building height: 	3 stories or 60 feet 
(j) 	Maximum building coverage: 	N/A 
(k) 	Minimum district size: 	200 acres 
 
(Sec. 5.14.7)  
Secs. 34-5-137—34-5-139. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - "PDP RESIDENTIAL 8.1" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT IN A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, adopted November 21, 2005, amended division 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 15, §§ 34-5-140—34-5-152, pertained to "residential PDP" single-family residential district in a planned development. 
 
Sec. 34-5-140. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the "PDP residential 8.1," single-family residential district in a planned development, is to provide for single-family residential uses in a planned format, developed as a unit. This "PDP residential 8.1" district consists of conventionally subdivided lots with certain flexibilities, which are consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, and meet the spirit and intent of the Unified Land Development Code. It further provides an additional choice in the type of residential environments available to the community. It provides permanent preservation of common open spaces and preserves natural vegetation and topographic features. 
PDP RES 8.1 is predominantly a residential district, which uses the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-141. - Permitted uses. 
Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following. 
(a)  Single-family residential dwellings. 
(b)  Passive and active open space and storm retention basins. 
(c)  Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-142. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "PDP RESIDENTIAL 8.1" district. Public utility facilities are expressly permitted as an accessory use. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-143. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "PDP RESIDENTIAL 8.1" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. 
(a)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(b)  Utility uses including the following: 
(1)  Minor public and private utilities, including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-144. - Planned development procedure. 
(This is a planned development project.) 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-145. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
A minimum of two garaged parking spaces are required per unit. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-146. - Final development plan design criteria. 
PDP Residential 8.1. Development shall adhere to the following specific design criteria: 
(a) 	Average lot size PDP site: 	10,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot size: 	8,000 square feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot width: 	67 feet 
(d) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(e) 	Minimum front yard: 	25 feet 
(f) 	Minimum side yard: 	10 feet 
(g) 	Minimum rear yard: 	25 feet 
(h) 	Maximum building height: 	35 feet 
(i) 	Maximum building coverage: 	30 percent 
(j) 	No building or structure, other than boundary and/or retaining walls, fences, signs, detention facilities, and/or light standards shall be located within the required setbacks. 
(k) 	Every residence shall be required to have a minimum two car garage. 
(l) 	50 percent of total residences shall be required to have an exterior of a minimum 25 percent of brick composition. 
 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-147. - Access and roadway improvements, including sidewalk. 
(a)  Dedicating a 30-foot strip of right-of-way along the northern property line for a future east-west collector roadway, as specified by the development administrator. 
(b)  Dedicating a five-foot strip of right-of-way along Illinois Route 4, as specified by the development administrator. 
(c)  Any existing road easements within this tract not utilized shall be vacated. 
(d)  Access to this development from Illinois Route 4 shall be provided with two street approaches as directed by the city. 
(e)  Internal subdivision streets. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-148. - Landscape requirements. 
(a)  A 25-foot landscape buffer easement shall be provided between the commercial development and the residential development. 
(b)  A 25-foot landscape buffer outlot along Illinois Route 4. 
(c)  All new landscaping materials shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Deciduous trees shall be a minimum two and one-half inches in caliper. 
(2)  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum six feet in height 
(3)  Shrubs shall be a minimum diameter of 24 inches. 
(4)  Flowering trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches in caliper. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-149. - Signs. 
Signs for this development shall be in accordance with article X, sign regulations of the City of Mascoutah Unified Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 4-5-150. - Retaining walls. 
All retaining walls in excess of three feet shall be constructed of concrete, an interlocking concrete block system, or a boulder style wall system as approved on the Final Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-151. - Green space requirements. 
Shall be per the City of Mascoutah 2005 adopted Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
Sec. 34-5-152. - Linkage to city Unified Land Development Code. 
For regulations not specifically addressed in the PDP Residential 8.1 Code, including general administrative processes and regulations, the city's Unified Land Development Code provisions shall be used, as interpreted by the development administrator. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 11-21-05)  
DIVISION 16. - COMMUNITY FACILITY AND OPEN SPACE "CF" DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34-5-153. - Purpose. 
The purpose of land designated community facilities "CF", is to provide areas for the development of institutional uses, parks/open space and selected service activities at strategic locations in Mascoutah. It also should allow for combinations those public and quasi-public uses and other uses which may be compatible permitted uses. The "CF" district is considered consistent with and designed to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan for land which is designated as _______ and _______, on the city's land use plan map. 
(Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-154. - Permitted uses. 
The "CF" district is designed to allow a broad range of community facilities institutional uses, open space/parks, and buffer uses office and institutional uses provided herein. Buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following: 
(1)  Community facilities: 
a.  Open space; 
b.  Schools, libraries and post offices; 
c.  Public and private recreational facilities, non-commercial; 
d.  Establishments for the care of pre-school children; 
e.  Fire and police stations, and other public and quasi-public facilities; community service centers; 
f.  Public utility uses, structure and facilities; 
g.  Residential, single family; 
h.  Museums, historical sites and similar institutions; 
i.  Other community facility uses consistent with the purpose of these regulations which are found to be compatible with the surrounding permitted uses; 
j.  Accessory uses and structures clearly incidental to any of the above uses; 
k.  Utility uses including substations, lift stations, water towers and similar uses; 
(2)  Open space uses: Development of land as open space, neighborhood parks, community park, and Drainage easements, and those portions of elementary and junior high school sites to be developed as joint-use recreation areas in conjunction with adjacent park uses. 
a.  Parks, playgrounds and ball fields/ sports fields; 
b.  Hardcourt games including, but not limited to volleyball, basketball, tennis, etc; 
c.  Equestrian, pedestrian and bicycle trails; 
d.  Equestrian facilities (but not including boarding and rental facilities); 
e.  Swimming pools; 
f.  Ponds and lakes (including fishing); 
g.  Picnicking; 
h.  Overnight group camping (restricted to regional park areas); 
i.  Public utility lines and attended structures and facilities; 
j.  Such other uses, facilities and events as deemed appropriate and compatible by the planning commission; 
l.  Accessory uses and structures clearly incidental to any of the above uses; 
m.  Public administration offices; 
(3)  Buffer space uses: The lands developed as buffer space are intended to provide a separation between the problematic uses (treatment plant) and residential development. 
a.  Parks: playgrounds and trails for pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian use; 
b.  Flood control channels and utility easements; 
c.  Other passive recreation uses; 
4.  Detached single family dwellings: With traditional accessory structures. 
5.  Additional uses: Additional uses determined to be similar and consistent with those listed above. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" use's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the use to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(Sec. 5.8.2; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-155. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Uses and structures customarily accessory to a permitted use may be allowed within the "CF" district. These include but are not limited to: 
(a)  Concealed communication antenna, as defined in article II, are allowed as an accessory use. 
(b)  A communication antenna may be allowed based on the criteria in section 34-7-18. 
(Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-156. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be allowed within the "CF" district subject to the criteria established in section 34-13-4 et seq. and the performance standards contained in section 34-7-21. 
• Power plants. 
• Wastewater treatment plants w/ storage ponds. 
• Power sub-stations—Generating plants. 
• Water storage, treatment, pumping facilities, spreading, spraying, purification, and similar or accessory uses/facilities. 
• Equestrian facilities that include boarding and rental uses and facilities. 
• Permitted uses that are determined by the development administrator to have conditions which may require a higher level of review and design constraint. 
(Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-157. - Site plan required. 
A site plan shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in the "CF" district, based on the procedures in section 34-13-11. 
(1)  Site development standards. 
• Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. Structures in excess of 35 feet in height shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
• Building setbacks: The minimum building setback from any property line abutting a residential area shall be a distance equal to the height of the building, except in no case shall the setback be less than 20 feet. 
• Off-street parking requirements: Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the provisions of chapter 34, article IX of the Code. 
• Signs: Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 34, article X of the Code. 
• Lighting: All lighting, exterior and interior, shall be designed and located to combine direct rays to the premises and away from adjacent properties. 
• Loading: All loading shall be performed on the site. Where ever possible, loading platforms and areas shall be screened from view from adjacent streets, highways, and residential areas. 
• Trash and storage areas: All storage, including cartoons, container or trash shall be shielded from view within a building or area enclosed by a wall not less than six feet in height. No such area shall be located within 50 feet of any residential zoned area unless it is fully enclosed. 
• Screening abutting residential areas: An opaque screen shall be installed along all site boundaries where the premises abut areas zoned for residential uses. The screening shall have a total height of not less than six feet and not more than seven feet. 
• Landscaping: Where ever possible landscaping, consisting of a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, ground cover, and/or hardscape shall be installed and maintained subject to the following standards: 
• Boundary landscaping: abutting public streets is required to a minimum depth of 15 feet. 
• An additional amount of Landscaping, equal to at least five percent of the net usable area of the parcel is required and a minimum of ten percent of such landscaping shall be located in the area devoted to parking. 
• Separation: Any landscaped area shall be separated from an adjacent vehicular area by a wall or curb at least six inches higher than the adjacent vehicular area or shall in some manner be protected from vehicular damage. 
• Maintenance: Required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and healthy condition. This shall include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings. 
(2)  Site development standards—Special provisions. Uses, facilities, structures, and improvements proposed for land within easements shall be approved by the appropriate utility agency. 
• Architectural review approval shall be required for all structures and facilities, excluding utility transmission lines (including electric, gas, water, irrigation, sewer, telephone, and TV cable). 
(Sec 5.8.5; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-158. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements are specified in article IX. 
(Sec 5.8.6; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-159. - "CF" dimensional regulations. 
(a) 	Minimum lot size: 	5,000 square feet 
(b) 	Minimum lot width: 	50 feet 
(c) 	Minimum lot depth: 	100 feet 
(d) 	Minimum front yard: 	15 feet 
(e) 	Minimum side yard: 	None, unless the side of the lot abuts land zoned residential in which case there shall be a side yard of at least ten feet. If a side yard is not required but is provided, it shall be at least five feet in width. 
(f) 	Minimum rear yard: 	10 feet 
(g) 	Maximum building height: 	2 stories or 35 feet 
(h) 	Maximum building coverage: 	30 percent—Residential 
N/A—Non-residential uses 
(i) 	Minimum district size: 	1 acre 
 
(Sec. 5.8.7; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 34-5-160—34-5-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 34-6-1. - Purpose. 
Overlay zones are designed to provide additional regulations for certain areas of the city which require special protection during development, or which receive consideration for a modification in the strict interpretation of district regulations. These areas include the airport overlay district, whose boundaries are depicted on the city's zoning map, and areas which have or will be designated as planned developments based on the procedures in section 34-6-30 et seq. Once established, an overlay zone will appear on the city's official zoning map. 
(Sec. 6.1)  
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT OVERLAY (AO) DISTRICT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, adopted June 20, 2011, amended division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 34-6-2—34-6-16, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the original ordinance adopting Unified Land Development Code; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-17-10. 
 
Subdivision 1. - Establishment and purpose 
 
Sec. 34-6-2. - Airport overlay (AO) district established; purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby established a zoning district entitled airport overlay (AO) district, including subarea districts, with the expressed intent to provide for uses and unique design requirements for lands adjacent to and within runway protection zones, accident potential zones, airspace zones, and noise zones for the environs of Scott Air Force Base and the MidAmerica St. Louis Airport. 
(b)  The purpose of the airport overlay (AO) district is to establish land use controls that promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare, and including: 
(1)  To provide for and protect the long term mission, operation, and viability of Scott Air Force Base (AFB) and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport from hazardous, injurious, and/or other conditions that could adversely affect airport operations and safety and/or that would be incompatible with airport operations and functions. 
(2)  To protect the use, enjoyment, and values of land and development in the airport environs from injurious and hazardous conditions and incompatibility of uses. 
(3)  To promote proper land use arrangement and development, public and private services and facilities, and a desirable environment to achieve and sustain physical, social, and economic activities, which are compatible with Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport. 
(4)  To provide standards for new or redeveloped buildings within the noise attenuation zone to be constructed with materials and in such manner that aircraft noise be reduced by the structure to an interior level that has no adverse impact on the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents. 
(5)  To maintain an open process of regional coordination, negotiation, and interpretation of airport influence districts and cooperation with other affected local governments to achieve these goals. 
(6)  To inform citizens in the vicinity of Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport of the potential impacts of airport influence districts on the use of their properties. 
(7)  To preserve the economic development potential that Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport brings to the area. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 2. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 34-6-3. - Interpretation; definitions. 
(a)  Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. Except as otherwise specifically defined below for purposes of this division, definitions generally applicable within the Unified Land Development Code shall apply herein. 
Nothing contained within this division shall be construed as or applied to be substantially inconsistent with an airport approach plan adopted by IDOT Division of Aeronautics, pursuant to 620 ILCS 25/12. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Accident potential zones (APZ). As applied to military airfields, those areas which are identified as being significantly impacted by accident potential from aircraft. APZ-1 is an area normally beyond the clear zone that possesses a significant potential for accidents. APZ-2 is an area normally beyond APZ-1 that has a measurable potential for accidents. Both the APZ-1 and APZ-2 are the same width as the clear zone. APZ-1 extends from the clear zone an additional 5,000 feet. APZ-2 extends from APZ-1 an additional 7,000 feet. 
Air installation compatible use zone (AICUZ). A study conducted by the Air Force to evaluate the effect on noise and accident potential on surrounding property and to promote compatible land use that reduces the risks to public health and safety. 
Air Force. the United States Air Force as represented by the Base Community Planner for Scott Air Force Base or such other designee. 
Airport. Any area of land or water that is designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft and related use associated with Scott Air Force Base or MidAmerica St. Louis Airport and utilized or to be utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes. 
Airport environs. The geographic area that is affected by the airport air traffic operations and defined on the basis of those areas immediately affected by noise exposure, clear zones, runway protection zones, APZ-1 and APZ-2 areas, height hazard zones, and areas of airport influence property. These areas constitute the airport overlay (AO) district established in this division. 
Airport hazard. Any structure or object of natural growth or use of land within the airport environs that obstructs the air space required for the flight of taking off, maneuvering or landing at an airport or which is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft. 
Airport hazard area. Any area of land or water, or both, upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented by this division. 
Clear zone (CZ). A defined area extending outward from the end of each runway of Scott Air Force Base. The clear zones are considered an area of high accident potential. The clear zone starts at the end of the runway and extends outward 3,000 feet at a width of 3,000 feet. 
Decibel (dB). A unit for measuring the relative loudness of sound or sound pressure equal approximately to the smallest degree of difference of loudness or sound pressure ordinarily detectable by the human ear, the range of which includes about 130 decibels on a scale beginning with one for the faintest audible sound. 
Decibel A-weighted scale (dBA). The unit of noise level measured in accordance with the "A-weighted scale" which replicates the response characteristics of the ear. This scale is a quantity, in decibels, read from a standard sound-level meter with A weighting circuitry. The A-space weighting discriminates against lower frequencies according to a relationship approximating, and more accurately reflecting the auditory sensitivity and response of the human ear. The A-scale sound level measures approximately the relative "noisiness" or "annoyance" of common sounds. 
Development application. Any request to the local governing body for rezoning, subdivision (major or minor), zoning variance, permit for a non-conformity, final site plan approval, special use permits, sign permits for freestanding or illuminated signs, mobile home permits, or in the case of building permits, permits to increase the existing square footage by 50 percent or more or over 35 in height, or permits otherwise determined by the director to have any potential impact within the district intended to be addressed by this division. A request to approve a change to the future land use map of the approved Comprehensive Plan shall also be considered a development application within this section. 
Director. The public works director, or other designee, as the staff person assigned to administer, interpret, and implement the standards, criteria, and procedures of this Unified Land Development Code. 
DNL. Day night level. See level, day night sound level (Ldn). Acoustical industry standards often use the abbreviations DNL and Ldn interchangeably. 
Electronic display signs. Signs that show changeable copy, graphic displays or video displays. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The federal agency responsible for the safety of civil aviation and the regulation of U.S. commercial space transportation. 
Height, airport. In the airport environs, for purpose of determining the height of any structure, tree, or other object, including communication towers, the height is the elevation above mean sea level (MSL). For calculation purposes, this is the sum of the elevation of the site and the height of the structure, including any appurtenances. 
Level, day night sound level (Ldn). A basic measure for quantifying noise exposure. The day/night average level, or the 24-hour equivalent continuous sound level (time averaged A-weighted sound level) from midnight to midnight, obtained after the addition of ten dBA to sound levels measured from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Noise contour. A line on the AO-4 map linking together a series of points of equal cumulative noise exposure based on the day/night average level (Ldn) measurement. Such contours are developed based on aircraft flight patterns, number of daily aircraft operations by type of aircraft, and time of day noise characteristics of each aircraft and typical runway usage patterns. 
Nit. A unit of visible-light intensity, commonly used to specify the brightness of a cathode ray tube or liquid crystal display computer display. One nit is equivalent to one candela per square meter. 
Noise level reduction (NLR). Amount of noise reduction required through construction and incorporation of sound attenuation material to reduce interior noise level. The difference between the exterior and interior sound level, expressed in decibels. 
Owner. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, commanding officer of any local military base, or any other legal entity having legal or equitable title to or sufficient proprietary interest in or to any property subject to this Unified Land Development Code. 
Participating local governments. The coordinating local governments in St. Clair County, Illinois participating in the RAB and adopting an airport overlay code substantially in the form of or consistent with this division. 
Primary surface. A ground surface longitudinally centered on the runway. The dimensions and limits of the primary surface shall be those prescribed in Department of Defense (DoD) height and obstruction criteria for Scott AFB and in Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) Part 77 for MidAmerica St. Louis Airport. 
Runway. A defined area on an airport or airfield prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. For purposes of this division and compliance with other applicable laws, the runways of Scott Air Force Base or MidAmerica St. Louis Airport shall be considered Precision Instrument Runways unless otherwise hereinafter designated. 
Runway protection zone (RPZ). An area off the runway end of a civilian airport designated by the FAA to enhance the protection of people and property on the ground. 
SLCUM. The Standard Land Use Coding Manual, which provides a general numeric coding scheme that uses two, three, four, or more digits to identify land use activities and allow for the flexible categorization of new land uses. 
Sound attenuation. The reduction in sound level which occurs between the source and the receiver. 
Sound level. The level of sound pressure measured with a sound level meter and one of its weighting (frequency) networks. When A-weighing is used, the sound level is expressed as dBA. 
Sound transmission class (STC). is an integer rating of how well a building partition attenuates airborne sound. In the USA, it is widely used to rate interior partitions, ceilings/floors, doors, windows and exterior wall configurations. 
Structure: Any object whether permanent or temporary, including, but not limited to a building, tower, crane, smokestack, earth formation, overhead transmission line, or flagpole; to also include mobile and tethered objects. 
Unified Land Development Code. The Unified Land Development Code of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, as amended, including this Division. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-4. - Acronyms. 
AFB—Air Force Base. 
AICUZ—Air installation compatible use zone. 
APZ—Accident potential zone. 
CZ—Clear zone. 
dB—Decibels. 
dBA—Weighted decibels. 
DoD—Department of Defense. 
FAA—Federal Aviation Administration. 
IDOT—Illinois Department of Transportation. 
Ldn—Day-night sound level. 
NLR—Noise level reduction. 
RAB—Regional advisory board. 
RPZ—Runway protection zone. 
SLUCM—Standard Land Use Coding Manual. 
STC—Sound transmission class. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 3. - Boundaries and Maps 
 
Sec. 34-6-5. - Airport overlay district; district boundaries. 
(a)  [In general.] Certain airport environs are identified and established by this division for property within and around Scott Air Force Base (AFB) and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport (MidAmerica) within St. Clair County, Illinois. These environs have been identified through Federal Aviation Regulations Part 77 and data provided to St. Clair County by the United States Air Force as part of the 2008 Joint Land Use Study and the 2009 Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) report. Areas within the airport environs are subject to regulation beyond the other requirements of the Unified Land Development Code. These additional restrictions, designated as the airport overlay (AO) district, provide an enhanced level of protection in support of the continued operations of Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport. 
(b)  Establishment and interpretation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the airport overlay (AO) district and subarea districts are hereby enacted and established as set forth on the series of four maps incorporated in section 34-6-7 of this division (district maps), with precise boundaries being determined by scaling distances and features shown on these maps. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the airport districts, as shown on the airport overlay (AO) district maps, the director shall make the necessary determination of the boundary based on the purposes of this division and underlying mapping data. Any property owner contesting the location of a district boundary affecting his or her property shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case in accordance with the appeal procedures established in the Unified Land Development Code and in subdivision 9 of this division. The adopted district maps may include areas outside the territorial boundaries of the city in order to promote coordination with other participating local governments. The regulations of this airport overlay district shall not be deemed to extend to any property outside such territorial boundaries to which the city lacks jurisdiction to impose such regulation. 
(c)  Split parcels. For purposes of regulation of parcels that appear split by the district boundary lines, only that portion of a parcel that falls within the district shall be subject to the provisions and standards of this division. 
(d)  Boundary changes. The boundaries of the airport overlay (AO) district may be subject to change reflecting new military mission activity and/or aviation operations at Scott AFB and MidAmerica Airport. Scott AFB and MidAmerica Airport shall communicate the results of updated analyses of noise and air safety zones, including AICUZ reports and FAA studies, to affected local governments. The Director shall notify the Air Force, MidAmerica Airport and other local governments that have adopted airport zoning regulations in the environs of Scott Air Force Base and MidAmerica Airport of changes to the district boundary lines as shown in the maps in section 34-6-7 to promote the coordinated and consistent application of airport overlay regulations. Other coordinating local governments may adopt more stringent regulations than the minimum requirements in this division. Boundary changes to the AO district or subarea districts shall be adopted pursuant to the procedures applicable to amendments to the Unified Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-6. - Subareas; overlap. 
To carry out the purpose of this district, the airport overlay (AO) district is composed of four overlapping subarea districts that establish different levels of restrictions based on airport boundary areas of influence, safety areas based on hazard zones and structure height regulations, and noise contours as follows. Properties or portions of properties located within multiple subareas shall comply with the standards established for each of those subareas in which the property is located. 
(a)  AO-1 primary planning influence area. The primary planning influence area designates the subarea that primarily includes standards for avigation easements and lighting as described in subdivision 5 of this division. 
(b)  AO-2 safety zones area. The safety zones area designates the subarea that primarily includes standards for land use, density, and design as designated in subdivision 6 of this division. The boundary of this area is determined by FAA and DoD imaginary surfaces definitions for military and civilian airfields (clear zone, runway protection zone, accident potential zone 1 and accident potential zone 2) in effect on the effective date of this division in conjunction with any other relevant safety area data obtained by the director. 
(c)  AO-3 height restriction area. The height restriction area designates the subarea that primarily includes standards for controlling height as described in subdivision 7 of this division. The boundary of this area is determined by a combination of measurements including a 1,500-foot buffer around Scott Air Force Base and Imaginary Surfaces definitions for military and civilian airfields in effect on the effective date of this division, in conjunction with any other relevant height restriction data obtained by the director. 
(d)  AO-4 noise zones area. The noise zones area designates the subarea that primarily includes standards for the attenuation of noise and residential land use controls as specified in subdivision 8 of this division. This boundary is determined by applying the noise contours published by the DoD for Scott Air Force Base in conjunction with any other relevant noise data obtained by the director. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-7. - Maps. 
The following four maps, Figures 7.A — 7.D, are incorporated as an integral part of the Unified Land Development Code. These maps are hereby adopted and incorporated as an amendment to the official zoning map whether maintained separately or integrated within a single document: 
(a)  AO-1 primary planning influence area. 
(b)  AO-2 safety zones area. 
(c)  AO-3 height restriction area. 
(d)  AO-4 noise zones area. 
Figure 7.A 
 
Figure 7.B 
 
Figure 7.C 
 
Figure 7.D 
 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 4. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 34-6-8. - General use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Unified Land Development Code, no use whether permitted in the underlying zoning district, or by planned use, special use permit, or otherwise, may be made of land or water within the airport overlay (AO) district so as to: 
(a)  Create electrical interference with navigational signals, radar, or radio communications between Scott Air Force Base and MidAmerica St Louis Airport and the aircraft. 
(b)  Cause confusion or otherwise make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights. 
(c)  Result in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport. 
(d)  Impair visibility of the airport. 
(e)  Emit or discharge smoke (e.g., exhaust from a smoke stack), that interferes with the health and safety of pilots and the public in the use of the airport, or that is otherwise detrimental or injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public in the use of the airport. 
(f)  Emit thermal discharge (e.g., steam from a power plant), that interferes with the pilot's vision in the use of the airport. 
(g)  Cause significant air turbulence (e.g., exhaust from a peaker plant) where aircraft limit loads may be exceeded. 
(h)  Cause any other kind of emission that may cause a safety of flight issue. 
(i)  Create a bird or wildlife strike hazard that in any way endangers or interferes with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft using or intending to use the airport. 
(j)  Create a vertical obstruction that physically intrudes on protected airspaces around the airport. 
(k)  Concentrate people within zones to unduly expose them to noise or aircraft accident risk. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-9. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The director is hereby granted the authority to issue clarification and interpretation of this division and the items and uses set forth in the attached land use compatibility tables consistent with the intent and language of this division. 
(b)  Notification. The director shall make reasonable efforts to provide notice to all person filing a development application in the AO district that the respective property is located either partially or wholly within the AO district, and may be subject to aircraft over-flight and the standards and requirements of this division. 
(c)  Field testing. When field inspection indicates that the construction is not in accordance with the approved plans, the director may order such corrective action as may be necessary to meet the height and noise attenuation requirements, including but not limited to, stop work orders until such corrections are made. 
(d)  Inspections of height and of noise attenuation work shall be performed during the required building construction inspection process. 
(e)  Any person who violates this act or any orders, regulations, or rulings promulgated or made pursuant to this division shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement procedures established in the Unified Land Development Code. 
(f)  State airport hazard zoning regulations. In the event of conflict between any airport hazard zoning regulations promulgated by IDOT Division of Aeronautics pursuant to 620 ILCS 25/17 and contained at Title 92, Part 16 of the Illinois Administrative Code and any airport zoning regulation set forth in this division or any other applicable regulations provided in the Unified Land Development Code, pursuant to 620 ILCS 25/18, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-10. - Development application consultation procedures. 
(a)  The director shall submit to the Air Force a copy of development applications for properties within the AO district as graphically shown on Appendix A ("Process Chart") and implemented as follows: 
(1)  AO-2 district. If the application or impact is on property within the AO-2 district, all development applications relating thereto, shall be sent to Scott AFB for review. 
(2)  AO-1, AO-3, and AO-4 districts. If the application or impact is in an AO district subarea other than the AO-2 district, development applications that meet one of the following criteria shall be sent to Scott AFB for review: 
(i)  Increase of an existing structure or construction of a new structure whose height is 100 feet or higher above the ground level of the runway. Towers, antennae, lighting, silos, or any similar structures that are 100 feet above the ground level of the runway or higher shall be subject to review. 
(ii)  Request for any outdoor lighting applications, temporary lighting, obstruction marking or lighting, and illuminated signs that do not meet the lighting standards established within section 34-6-14. 
(iii)  Application for a human-made use that could attract high levels of birds or wildlife, such as retention ponds, roosting habitats on buildings, landscaping, putrescible-waste disposal operations, wastewater treatment plants, and surface mining. 
(iv)  Application for a use or permit that could create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport and aircraft, including emergency and public safety communications systems, power lines, transformers, television broadcast and radio transmitters, and telecommunication towers. 
(v)  Applications for a use or permit that could create air-borne emissions or materials limiting visibility such as smoke, steam, dust, gases or projectiles of any type. 
(b)  The director shall send all appropriate development applications, as determined in the above section, to the Air Force for review. Applications can be mailed to: 
Base Community Planner 
375 CES/CEAO 
702 Hangar Road, Bldg 56 
Scott AFB IL 62225-5035 
618-256-4270 
(c)  Optional consultation with MidAmerica St. Louis Airport. For any development application within the height restriction zone, airport overlay (AO-3) district or the noise zones, airport overlay (AO-4) district, the director may choose to mail and/or email notice to the MidAmerica St. Louis Airport at: 
Director, Engineering & Planning 
MidAmerica St. Louis Airport 
9768 Airport Boulevard, Box 3 
Mascoutah, IL 62258 
618-566-5325 
tom.goode@flymidamerica.com 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-11. - Regional advisory board. 
The State of Illinois allows for the use of eminent domain authority to resolve incompatible land uses in the environs of Scott Air Force Base and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport pursuant to 620 ILCS 25/33. To reduce the need for the use of eminent domain and to better coordinate airport zoning and planning, a Regional Advisory Board (RAB) is established. The purpose of the RAB is to review potentially incompatible Development Applications within a specific geography around Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport and provide comment to the applicable local government receiving the application. 
(a)  Established. The regional advisory board (RAB) is hereby authorized and established as an advisory intergovernmental body to coordinate and review land use decisions in the AO-2 district. The RAB shall be deemed to exist immediately and shall include all qualified members similarly authorizing such establishment. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  The RAB shall consist of one representative from each of the following five entities, appointed by local governing authorities ("participating local governments"): 
(i)  St. Clair County. 
(ii)  The City of Lebanon. 
(iii)  The City of Mascoutah. 
(iv)  The City of O'Fallon. 
(v)  The Village of Shiloh. 
(2)  In addition, one Air Force representative and one representative of MidAmerica St. Louis Airport shall serve on the RAB as non-voting, ex-officio members. 
(3)  The RAB shall designate a chairperson among the five participating local government representatives to conduct meetings and coordinate with the Air Force on administrative support and the distribution of background materials. The RAB chair shall rotate among the participating local government representatives every two years. In the event that any member fails to adopt authority for the RAB or subsequently withdraws from participation, the membership shall continue with the remaining authorized members. 
(4)  The representative on the RAB for the City of Mascoutah shall be the mayor, who may from time-to-time designate another person to attend meetings of the RAB and act on the RAB on behalf of the City of Mascoutah. 
(c)  Meetings. 
(1)  The RAB shall meet if the Air Force renders an opinion that a development application subject to review under section 34-6-10 is incompatible. 
(2)  The RAB may also establish and publish a regular meeting schedule. Meetings shall be public. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson. 
(d)  Rules. 
(1)  The RAB shall adopt operating procedures for the conduct of meetings and business of the RAB. 
(2)  The RAB shall adhere to the provisions of this division with regard to the review and approval of site development plans. 
(3)  The RAB shall keep a record of its transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(e)  Duties. 
(1)  The RAB shall review development applications and present an advisory finding to the local jurisdiction responsible for approval of applications in the geographic areas designated as AO-2 district. 
(2)  Any time the FAA, DoD, or IDOT Division of Aeronautics, amends, deletes, or creates regulations affecting the standards set forth in this division, the RAB shall review such amended, deleted, or new regulations and advise the participating local governments as to necessary or appropriate changes to this division. 
(3)  The RAB shall act only as an advisory body. 
(f)  Procedures and responsibilities. 
(1)  Within the airport overlay (AO) district, the members shall consult with the Air Force on those development applications that have potential impacts on Scott AFB based on criteria established in section 34-6-10. 
(2)  The Air Force shall review these actions within a 30-calendar-day period commencing on the day the Air Force receives a development application, and then render an advisory opinion of compatible/incompatible for those actions inside the AO-2 district. The Air Force may recommend conditions of approval to mitigate any negative impacts of those actions within the AO-1 district. 
(3)  The Air Force shall evaluate the compatibility of the development application based on consistency with land use guidance established in the joint land use study and air installation compatible use zone program. 
(4)  If no response is rendered from the Air Force within 30 days, the local government may consider the Air Force recommendation as being compatible. 
(5)  If the Air Force finds an application within the AO-2 district to be incompatible, the RAB shall meet within a 30-calendar-day period following an incompatible finding. The Air Force shall provide administrative support for the scheduling of the RAB meeting and the distribution of necessary background materials. 
(6)  The RAB shall render a recommendation, which the city shall consider. 
(7)  The city shall not make a final decision without a recommendation from the RAB; provided that if the RAB does not provide its recommendation within 30 days of receipt of the application, a final decision may proceed without such recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 5. - AO-1: Primary Planning Influence Area 
 
Sec. 34-6-12. - Purpose and generally. 
(a)  The purpose of this subdivision is to require that new or redeveloped facilities within the primary planning influence area, airport overlay (AO-1) district, be constructed in such a manner to mitigate impacts on aircraft operators and therefore protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(b)  The AO-1 district designates the area that primarily includes standards for consultation with the Air Force, notification, and lighting. 
(c)  Establishment of primary planning influence area. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district or districts in which they are located. The boundaries of the AO-1 district are shown on the map in subdivision 3. 
(d)  Consultation. Development applications on properties within the AO-1 district shall require consultation with the Air Force to the extent required per section 34-6-10 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-13. - Avigation easements. 
(a)  All applications for subdivision approval for any structure requiring plan approval in the AO-1 district, to the extent consistent with applicable requirements of law, shall include the dedication of an avigation easement to the city. The dedicated avigation easement shall allow property owners to develop land in accordance with the applicable zoning district and regulations, and shall also convey a clear right to maintain flight operations in navigable airspace over the property, consistent with federal statutes and regulations, and shall submit the property to compliance with the regulations set forth in this division. The easement shall be recorded with the deed to a property and shall run in perpetuity with the land. 
(b)  The applicant for all final subdivision plats within an AO district shall place a reference to the applicability of AO district regulations to the subdivision on the recorded plat. 
(c)  The city shall maintain publicly available maps of the airport overlay district to facilitate the disclosure of potential airport environs impacts as part of real estate transactions. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-14. - Lighting. 
The following standards shall apply to all lands within the AO-1 district, unless otherwise stated. 
(a)  Nonresidential uses and multi-family residential. 
(1)  The light source of outdoor lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded and downward facing so as not to allow any light above the horizontal, as measured at the luminaire. 
(2)  Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be placed so as to not cause excessive glare or light trespass. 
(3)  On-site parking areas shall be constructed of asphalt, dyed concrete or other non-reflective paving surfaces. 
(4)  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective. 
(5)  Canopy lighting shall be designed to conceal the illumination source and the lighting fixture shall not extend below the canopy skirt. 
(6)  Exterior sign lights shall be shielded and oriented downward with respect to the sign. 
(b)  Single-family and agricultural uses. Single-family residential and agricultural uses are exempt from the standards contained in this section 34-6-14, provided that such uses do not affect the safety of the public or persons utilizing Scott Air Force Base or MidAmerica St. Louis Airport. 
(c)  Electronic display signs. Electronic display signs shall be permitted within the AO-1 district under the following conditions: 
(1)  The maximum brightess of electronic signs shall not exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours, or of 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn. 
(2)  Any image or message or portion thereof displayed on the sign shall have a minimum duration of fifteen seconds and shall be of static display. 
(3)  Electronic signs are prohibited in the AO-2 district. 
(4)  Electronic display signs shall comply with all other applicable regulations set forth in the Unified Land Development Code. 
(d)  Temporary lights. Special use permits shall be required for temporary lights such as spot lights. A permit may be granted if, upon review, the Director finds that the proposed lighting will not create excessive glare, sky glow, or light trespass. 
(e)  Lighting plan. Within the AO-1 district, a lighting plan shall be included as part of the required site plan submittal or subdivision construction drawings which shall contain but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The location of the site where the outdoor light fixtures will be installed; 
(2)  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each outdoor light fixture, both proposed and any already existing on the site; and 
(3)  A description of the outdoor light fixtures including but not limited to manufacturer's catalog cuts and drawings. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 6. - AO-2: Safety Zones Area 
 
Sec. 34-6-15. - Purpose and generally. 
(a)  The purpose of this subdivision is to require that land and structures located within safety zones around the Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis airfields are developed to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public and to mitigate hazards of potential aircraft mishaps. 
(b)  The safety zones area, airport overlay (AO-2) district, designates the area that primarily includes standards for land use, density and design, in addition to those requirements established for all properties within the AO-1 district. 
(c)  Establishment of safety zones. 
(1)  Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. 
(2)  The boundaries of the military safety zones as determined by the air installation compatible use zone (AICUZ) program are shown on the map in section 34-6-7. There are three military safety zones: 
(i)  CZ: Clear zone. 
(ii)  APZ-1: Accident potential zone 1. 
(iii)  APZ-2: Accident potential zone 2. 
(3)  The Federal Aviation Administration designates a runway protection zone (RPZ) for civilian airports as shown on the map in section 34-6-7. There is one civilian safety zone: 
(i)  RPZ: Runway protection zone. 
(d)  Consultation. All development applications on properties within the AO-2 district shall require consultation with the Air Force as per section 34-6-10 of this division. 
(e)  Design regulations. Properties within the AO-2 district shall also comply with all the standards established per subdivision 5 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-16. - Use regulations in safety zones. 
(a)  Use regulations in AO-2: CZ and RPZ. No uses or structures shall be permitted in the CZ and RPZ except roadways, underground utilities, agriculture and permanent passive open space. Bridges above the ground level of the runway, timber activities and silvaculture shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Use and design regulations in AO-2: APZ-1. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are listed on Table 16.1, provided that no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
(i)  Manufacturing or above-ground bulk storage of flammable liquids, gases, or other explosive materials is prohibited. 
(ii)  No use shall be permitted that emits smoke, steam, dust, gases or projectiles of any type that may interfere with safe aircraft operation. 
(iii)  No residential development of any type is permitted. This includes short-and long-term hotels, lodgings, campsites, RV parks, mobile home parks, group homes, dormitories, or any accommodations where over-night residency is expected. 
(iv)  Active parks with facilities intended to support organized activity or concentrations of users, such as athletic fields, buildings or structures for recreational activities, concessions, courts, or playgrounds are prohibited. 
(v)  Places of large assemblies shall be prohibited to protect the general public against the grave consequences of an aircraft mishap. Places where the mobility-challenged and youth regularly assemble are also prohibited. 
(vi)  Public transportation passenger terminals shall not be permitted in the APZ-1. 
(vii)  Regionally-significant above-ground utility lines or sub-stations, such as high-tension power lines or public transportation transmission wires, shall not be permitted in the APZ-1. 
(3)  Maximum assembly. Maximum assembly shall be limited to 25 people per acre per hour over a 24-hour period, and shall not be more than 50 people per acre at any one time. 
(4)  Lot coverage. 
(i)  The maximum gross acreage for all buildings on any single lot is ten percent. Use restrictions shall comply with Table 16.1 of this division. Height restrictions shall comply with subdivision 7, height restrictions, of this division. 
(ii)  For industrial uses, in addition to all other limitations on concentrations of people, a sliding scale of employment density per shift and maximum acreage coverage shall be utilized as shown in Figure 16.A. 
(iii)  A planned development approach is encouraged to maximize flexibility in layout and guide buildings away from the centerline of the runway. 
(c)  Use and Design Regulations in AO-2: APZ-2. 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Permitted uses are listed on Table 16.1, provided that no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(ii)  Single-family residential density shall be limited to one dwelling unit per acre within the APZ-2, provided that any smaller subdivided lot existing as of the date of this article shall not be prohibited from use for single-family due solely to failure to comply with this supplemental density limitation. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
(i)  Manufacturing or above-ground bulk storage of flammable liquids, gases, or other explosive materials is prohibited. 
(ii)  No use shall be permitted that emits smoke, steam, dust, gases or projectiles of any type that may interfere with safe aircraft operation. 
(iii)  Higher density housing is prohibited. This includes multi-family housing, attached single-family housing, short- and long-term hotels, lodgings, campsites, RV parks, mobile home parks, group homes, or dormitories. 
(iv)  Places of large assemblies shall be prohibited to protect the general public against the grave consequences of an aircraft mishap. Places where the mobility-challenged and youth regularly assemble are also prohibited. 
(3)  Lot coverage. 
(i)  The maximum gross acreage for all nonresidential buildings on any single lot is 20 percent. Use restrictions shall comply with Table 16.1 of this division. Height restrictions shall comply with subdivision 7, height restrictions, of this division. 
(ii)  For industrial uses, in addition to all other limitations on concentrations of people, a sliding scale of employment density per shift and maximum acreage coverage shall be utilized as shown in Figure 16.B. 
(iii)  A planned development approach is encouraged to maximize flexibility in layout and guide buildings away from the centerline of the runway. 
 
 
(d)  Permitted land uses in AO-2: Safety zones. 
(1)  Table 16.1 describes those uses that are permissible within the areas designated as safety zones. Within Table 16.1, the designation with the letter "Y" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the Unified Land Development Code and this division. 
(2)  The designation with the letters "PS" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the Unified Land Development Code, and the supplemental standards specified for the use. Supplemental standards are contained in sections 34-6-16(a), (b), and (c). 
(3)  The designation with the letter "N" indicates the land use is prohibited. 
(4)  Any land use that is not identified in Table 16.1 is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar by the director. A requested use shall be considered substantially similar when the characteristics of the requested use are equivalent in type, intensity, degree, or impact when compared to a permissible use named in Table 16.1. Such characteristics include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  Typical numbers of employees and public located on the property at any given time; 
(ii)  Typical hours of operation; 
(iii)  Generation of noise, light pollution, odor, smoke, dust, electromagnetic interference, or vibration; 
(iv)  Bulk of structures and large equipment storage; 
(v)  Use of outdoor storage; 
(vi)  Typical airspace intrusion; 
(vii)  Attractiveness to birds and wildlife; 
(viii)  Customary functions of the use. 
(5)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to a permitted principal structure or use are permitted so long as they are within the intent, purpose, or objectives of these regulations. 
(6)  Temporary uses and structures are permitted so long as they are within the intent, purpose, or objectives of these regulations. 
Table 16.1 
Land Use 		AO-2 DISTRICT SAFETY ZONES 
SLCUM 	Name 	CZ/RPZ 	APZ1 	APZ2 
10 	Residential 			
11 	Household units 			
11.11 	Single units; detached 	N 	N 	PS 
11.12 	Single units; semi detached 	N 	N 	N 
11.13 	Single units; attached row 	N 	N 	N 
11.21 	Two units; side-by-side 	N 	N 	N 
11.22 	Two units; stacked 	N 	N 	N 
11.31 	Apartments; walk up 	N 	N 	N 
11.32 	Apartments; elevator 	N 	N 	N 
12 	Group quarters 	N 	N 	N 
13 	Residential hotels 	N 	N 	N 
14 	Mobile home parks or courts 	N 	N 	N 
15 	Transient lodgings 	N 	N 	N 
16 	Other residential 	N 	N 	N 
20 	Manufacturing 			
21 	of Food & kindred products 	N 	PS 	PS 
22 	of Textile mill products 	N 	PS 	PS 
23 	of Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and similar materials 	N 	PS 	PS 
24 	of Lumber and wood products (except furniture) 	N 	PS 	PS 
25 	of Furniture and fixtures 	N 	PS 	PS 
26 	of Paper & allied products 	N 	PS 	PS 
27 	of Printing, publishing, and allied industries 	N 	PS 	PS 
28 	of Chemicals and allied products 	N 	PS 	PS 
29 	of Petroleum refining & related industries 	N 	PS 	PS 
30 	Manufacturing 			
31 	Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products 	N 	PS 	PS 
32 	Stone, clay and glass products 	N 	PS 	PS 
33 	Primary metal industries 	N 	PS 	PS 
34 	Fabricated metal products 	N 	PS 	PS 
35 	Professional and scientific instruments 	N 	PS 	PS 
39 	Miscellaneous manufacturing 	N 	PS 	PS 
40 	Transportation, Communications and Utilities 			
41 	Railroad, rapid rail transit and street railroad transportation 	N 	PS 	Y 
42 	Motor vehicle transportation 	N 	PS 	Y 
43 	Aircraft transportation 	N 	PS 	Y 
44 	Marine craft transportation 	N 	PS 	Y 
45 	Highway & street right-way 	PS 	Y 	Y 
46 	Automobile parking 	N 	PS 	Y 
47 	Communications 	N 	PS 	Y 
48 	Utilities 	N 	PS 	Y 
48.23 	Natural or manufactured gas storage and distribution points 	N 	N 	N 
49 	Other transportation communications and utilities 	N 	PS 	Y 
50 	Trade 			
51 	Wholesale trade 	N 	PS 	Y 
52 	Retail trade -building materials, hardware and farm equipment 	N 	PS 	PS 
53 	Retail trade - general merchandise 	N 	PS 	PS 
54 	Retail trade - food 	N 	PS 	PS 
55 	Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories 	N 	PS 	PS 
55.3 	Gasoline service stations 	N 	N 	N 
56 	Retail trade - apparel and accessories 	N 	PS 	PS 
57 	Retail trade - furniture, home furnishings and equipment 	N 	PS 	PS 
58 	Retail trade - eating and drinking establishments 	N 	N 	PS 
59 	Other retail trade 	N 	PS 	PS 
60 	Services 			
61 	Finance, insurance and real estate services 	N 	N 	PS 
62 	Personal services 	N 	N 	PS 
62.4 	Cemeteries 	N 	PS 	PS 
63 	Business services 	N 	PS 	PS 
63.7 	Warehousing and storage services 	N 	PS 	PS 
64 	Repair services 	N 	PS 	PS 
65 	Professional services 	N 	N 	PS 
65.1 	Hospitals, nursing homes 	N 	N 	N 
65.1 	Other medical facilities 	N 	N 	N 
65.11 	Physician services 	N 	N 	N 
65.12 	Dental services 	N 	N 	N 
66 	Contract construction services 	N 	PS 	PS 
67 	Governmental services 	N 	N 	PS 
68 	Educational services 	N 	N 	N 
69 	Miscellaneous services 	N 	PS 	PS 
70 	Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational 			
71 	Cultural activities (including churches) 	N 	N 	PS 
71.2 	Nature exhibits 	N 	PS 	Y 
72 	Public assembly 	N 	N 	N 
72.1 	Auditoriums, concert halls 	N 	N 	N 
72.11 	Outdoor music shell, amphitheaters 	N 	N 	N 
72.2 	Outdoor sport arenas, spectator sports 	N 	N 	N 
73 	Amusements 	N 	N 	N 
74 	Recreational activities (including golf course & riding stables) 	N 	PS 	Y 
75 	Resorts and group camps 	N 	N 	N 
76 	Parks 	N 	PS 	PS 
76.1 	Parks - General recreational (active) 	N 	N 	PS 
76.2 	Parks - leisure and ornamental (passive) 	N 	PS 	PS 
79 	Other cultural, entertainment and recreation 	N 	PS 	PS 
80 	Resources Production and Extraction 			
81 	Agriculture (except livestock) 	PS 	Y 	Y 
81 	Livestock farming and animal breeding 	N 	Y 	Y 
82 	Agricultural related activities 	N 	PS 	Y 
83 	Forestry activities and related services 	N 	Y 	Y 
84 	Fishing activities and related services 	N 	PS 	Y 
85 	Mining activities and related services 	N 	PS 	Y 
89 	Other resources production and extraction 	N 	PS 	Y 
 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 7. - AO-3: Height Restriction Area 
 
Sec. 34-6-17. - Purpose and generally. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to require that new or redeveloped buildings within the height restriction area, airport overlay (AO-3) district, be constructed to prevent interference with safe aircraft operation and to maintain a visually permeable and physically secure buffer that lowers the vulnerability of personnel on the base to outside attacks. 
(b)  The AO-3 district designates the areas that primarily include standards for controlling height. Except as otherwise provided herein for this district, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained in the AO-3 district to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations established in this subdivision 7 or those established and enforced by the FAA, DoD, or IDOT Division of Aeronautics. 
(c)  Establishment of height restriction areas. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. The boundaries of the AO-3 installation buffer and height hazard restriction areas are shown on the map in section 34-6-7. There are two height restriction areas within the AO-3 district: 
(1)  "Height hazard area": A height hazard area as shown on the map depicted in Figure 7.C encompassing all of the AO-3 district and defined by the airport imaginary surfaces described in sections 16.50—16.110 of the State Airport Hazard Zoning regulations, Title 92, Part 16 of the Illinois Administrative Code. 
(2)  "Installation buffer": A subarea of the AO-3 district being a buffer extending 1,500 feet from the boundaries of Scott Air Force Base, as shown on map depicted in Figure 7.C and establishing supplemental height restrictions in the AO-3 district. 
(d)  Consultation. Development applications on properties within the AO-3 district established by reference to Scott Air Force Base shall require consultation with the Air Force to the extent required by section 34-6-10 of this division. 
(e)  Design regulations. Properties within the AO-3 district shall also comply with all the standards established per subdivision 5 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-18. - Area regulations. 
(a)  "AO-3: Installation buffer area." 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  All uses are permitted as defined by the underlying zoning district, except for those listed as a prohibited use below. 
(ii)  Single-family residential density shall be limited to two dwelling units per acre within installation buffer. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
(i)  Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within the installation buffer. 
(ii)  Multi-family housing shall not be permitted within the installation buffer. 
(iii)  Group homes, dormitories, or hotels and overnight lodging sites shall not be permitted within the installation buffer. 
(3)  Maximum height. The maximum height of any structure within the installation buffer for shall be 35 feet. 
(b)  "AO-3: Height hazard area." 
(1)  Maximum height. 
(i)  The maximum height of any structure or object of natural growth in the AO-3 subarea shall be determined by the limits of the airport imaginary surfaces described in Sections 16.50—16.110 of the State Airport Hazard Zoning regulations, Title 92, Part 16 of the Illinois Administrative Code. 
(ii)  The airport imaginary surfaces are based on the imaginary surfaces in 14 C.F.R. Part 77, effective October 1, 2002, and are visually represented on the Airport Airspace sheet of the Airport Layout Plan for MidAmerica St. Louis Airport dated January 7, 2009 and adopted by the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics. Sample graphic depictions of the airport imaginary surfaces are contained in appendix B to this division. The drawings in appendix B are for illustrative purposes only. 
(iii)  No structures are permitted within the clear zone/runway protection zone as defined by section 34-6-16(a). 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-19. - Height exceptions and limitations. 
(a)  The building height limitations stipulated in the AO-3 district, shall apply to all structures within this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Air conditioning units. 
(2)  Antennae. 
(3)  Chimneys. 
(4)  Church steeples. 
(5)  Communication towers. 
(6)  Elevator towers. 
(7)  Flag poles. 
(8)  Parapet walls. 
(9)  Silos. 
(10)  Utility transmission towers. 
(11)  Windmills. 
(12)  Similar structures. 
(13)  Landscaping. 
(b)  No structure shall be erected to a height that would encroach into or through any established public or private airport approach plan, prepared in accordance with the criteria established by the Department of Defense and/or the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 8. - AO-4: Noise Zones Area 
 
Sec. 34-6-20. - Purpose and generally. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to require that new or redeveloped buildings within the noise zones area, airport overlay (AO-4) district, be constructed with materials and in such manner that aircraft noise is reduced by the structure to an interior level which has no adverse impact on the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(b)  The AO-4 district designates the area that primarily includes standards for the attenuation of noise. 
(c)  Establishment of noise zones. 
(1)  Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. The boundaries of the noise contour zones are shown on the map in subdivision 3. There are four applicable noise zones: 
(i)  NZ 1: Area within the noise zone where the DNL is between 65 and 69 dB. 
(ii)  NZ 2: Area within the noise zone where the DNL is between 70 and 74 dB. 
(iii)  NZ 3: Area within the noise zone where the DNL is between 75 and 79 dB. 
(iv)  NZ 4: Area within the noise zone where the DNL is greater than 80 dB. 
(2)  Other industry-standard noise zones exist around the airfields. However, all land uses are considered compatible with noise levels below 65 dB. Noise zone 4 is only located on federally controlled land. 
(d)  Consultation. Development applications on properties within the AO-4 district shall require consultation with the Air Force to the extent required by section 34-6-10 of this division. 
(e)  Design regulations. Properties within the AO-4 district shall also comply with all the standards established per subdivision 5 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-21. - Use regulations in noise zones. 
(a)  Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 1. 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Permitted uses are listed on Table 21.1, provided that no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying zoning district. When regulations within the airport overlay district overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
(ii)  Single-family residential density shall be limited to one dwelling unit per acre within the NZ-1. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
(i)  Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within the NZ-1. 
(ii)  Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted within the NZ-1. 
(3)  Sound attenuation. 
(i)  To the extent permitted by law, sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 25 dB is required for all new or expanded hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care centers, schools, movie theaters, auditoriums, churches, and places of worship and meditation. The requirements of this section shall apply only to the area of expansion. Expansion shall include any such work that results in an increase of the cubic content of the building or the floor or ground area devoted to the noise sensitive use or in any way increases or creates a site-related nonconformity. 
(ii)  Sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 25 dB are required for all new residential construction within the NZ-1. 
(b)  Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 2. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are listed on Table 21.1, provided that no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying zoning district. When regulations within the airport overlay district overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
(i)  Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within the NZ-2. 
(ii)  Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted within the NZ-2. 
(iii)  All residential uses, including hotels and overnight lodging sites, shall be prohibited within the NZ-2. 
(3)  Sound attenuation. 
(i)  To the extent permitted by law, sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB is required for all new or expanded hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care centers, schools, movie theaters, auditoriums, churches and places of worship and meditation. 
(ii)  Sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 25 dB is required for all new or expanded structures containing office, business, retail and wholesale trade uses. Within new or expanded industrial structures, those portions of the building where the public is received, offices are located, and other places where low noise levels are normally expected shall utilize sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 25 dB. 
(c)  Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 3. 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  Permitted uses are listed on Table 21.1, provided that no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying zoning district. When regulations within the airport overlay district overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
(i)  Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within the NZ-3. 
(ii)  Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted within the NZ-3. 
(iii)  All residential uses, including hotels and overnight lodging sites, shall be prohibited within the NZ-3. 
(iv)  All hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care centers, schools, movie theaters, auditoriums, churches and places of worship and meditation are prohibited. 
(3)  Sound attenuation. 
(i)  Sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB is required for all new or expanded structures containing office, business, retail and wholesale trade uses. Within new or expanded industrial structures, those portions of the building where the public is received, offices are located, and other places where low noise levels are normally expected shall utilize sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB. 
(d)  Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 4. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are listed on Table 21.1, provided that no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying zoning district. When regulations within the airport overlay district overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
(i)  Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within the NZ-4. 
(ii)  Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted within the NZ-4. 
(iii)  All residential uses, including hotels and overnight lodging sites, shall be prohibited within the NZ-4. 
(iv)  All hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care centers, schools, movie theaters, auditoriums, churches and places of worship and meditation are prohibited within the NZ-4. 
(3)  Sound attenuation. Sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB is required for all new or expanded structures containing office, business, retail and wholesale trade uses. Within new or expanded industrial structures, those portions of the building where the public is received, offices are located, and other places where low noise levels are normally expected shall utilize sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB. 
(e)  Permitted land uses in AO-4: Noise zones. 
(1)  Table 21.1 describes those uses that are permissible within the areas designated as noise zones. Within Table 21.1, the designation with the letter "Y" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the Unified Land Development Code and this division. 
(2)  The designation "PS 25" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the Unified Land Development Code and demonstrating noise reduction materials have been incorporated into the design and construction of proposed development in a manner that achieves a noise level reduction of 25 dB. 
(3)  The designation "PS 30" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the Unified Land Development Code and demonstrating noise reduction materials have been incorporated into the design and construction of proposed development in a manner that achieves a noise level reduction of 30 dB. 
(4)  The designation with the letter "N" indicates the land use is prohibited. 
(5)  The recommendations for permitted and prohibited types of facilities or land uses by noise level reduction are based on the U.S. Department of Transportation and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) charts for aircraft noise avoidance. 
Table 21.1 
Land Use 	AIRPORT OVERLAY AO-4 NOISE ZONES (dB) 
SLCUM 	Name 	NZ 1 
65—69 	NZ 2 
70—74 	NZ 3 
75—79 	NZ 4 
80+ 
10 	Residential 
11 	Household Units 
11.11 	Single units; detached 	PS 25 	N 	N 	N 
11.12 	Single units; semi detached 	N 	N 	N 	N 
11.13 	Single units; attached row 	N 	N 	N 	N 
11.21 	Two units; side-by-side 	N 	N 	N 	N 
11.22 	Two units; stacked 	N 	N 	N 	N 
11.31 	Apartments; walk up 	N 	N 	N 	N 
11.32 	Apartments; elevator 	N 	N 	N 	N 
12 	Group quarters 	N 	N 	N 	N 
13 	Residential hotels 	N 	N 	N 	N 
14 	Mobile home parks or courts 	N 	N 	N 	N 
15 	Transient lodgings 	N 	N 	N 	N 
16 	Other residential 	N 	N 	N 	N 
20 	Manufacturing 
21 	of Food & kindred products 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
22 	of Textile mill products 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
23 	of Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and similar materials 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
24 	of Lumber and wood products (except furniture) 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
25 	of Furniture and fixtures 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
26 	of Paper & allied products 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
27 	of Printing, publishing, and allied industries 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
28 	of Chemicals and allied products 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
29 	of Petroleum refining & related industries 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
30 	Manufacturing 
31 	Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
32 	Stone, clay and glass products 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
33 	Primary metal industries 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
34 	Fabricated metal products 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
35 	Professional and scientific instruments 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
39 	Miscellaneous manufacturing 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
40 	Transportation, Communications and Utilities 
41 	Railroad, rapid rail transit and street railroad transportation 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 25 	PS 25 
42 	Motor vehicle transportation 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 25 	PS 25 
43 	Aircraft transportation 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 25 	PS 25 
44 	Marine craft transportation 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 25 	PS 25 
45 	Highway & street right-way 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 25 	PS 25 
46 	Automobile parking 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
47 	Communications 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 25 	N 
48 	Utilities 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
49 	Other transportation communications and utilities 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 25 	N 
50 	Trade 
51 	Wholesale trade 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
52 	Retail trade-building materials, hardware and farm equipment 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
53 	Retail trade- general merchandise 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
54 	Retail trade- food 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
55 	Retail trade- automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
56 	Retail trade- apparel and accessories 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
57 	Retail trade- furniture, home furnishings and equipment 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
58 	Retail trade- eating and drinking establishments 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
59 	Other retail trade 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
60 	Services 
61 	Finance, insurance and real estate services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
62 	Personal services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
62.4 	Cemeteries 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
63 	Business services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
64 	Repair services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
65 	Professional services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 
65.1 	Hospitals, nursing homes 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 	N 
65.1 	Other medical facilities 	PS 25 	PS 30 	PS 30 	N 
66 	Contract construction services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
67 	Governmental services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
68 	Educational services 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 	N 
69 	Miscellaneous services 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
70 	Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational 
71 	Cultural activities (including churches) 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 	N 
71.2 	Nature exhibits 	Y 	N 	N 	N 
72 	Public assembly 	Y 	N 	N 	N 
72.1 	Auditoriums, concert halls 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 	N 
72.11 	Outdoor music shell, amphitheaters 	N 	N 	N 	N 
72.2 	Outdoor sport arenas, spectator sports 	Y 	Y 	N 	N 
73 	Amusements 	Y 	Y 	N 	N 
74 	Recreational activities (including golf courses, riding stables, water recreation) 	Y 	PS 25 	PS 30 	N 
75 	Resorts and group camps 	Y 	Y 	N 	N 
76 	Parks 	Y 	Y 	N 	N 
79 	Other cultural, entertainment and recreation 	Y 	Y 	N 	N 
80 	Resources Production and Extraction 
81 	Agriculture (except livestock) 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 
81.5-81.7 	Livestock farming and animal breeding 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 
82 	Agricultural related activities 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 
83 	Forestry activities and related services 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 
84 	Fishing activities and related services 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
85 	Mining activities and related services 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
89 	Other resources production and extraction 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-22. - Attenuation. 
(a)  Minimum noise attenuation requirements and standards. Where a particular structure contains different occupancy uses, the more stringent requirements shall apply, except where it is architecturally possible to achieve the appropriate noise level reduction for each different use and the uses are acoustically separated by a wall or partition with a minimum STC of 25. 
(b)  Compliance use above minimum. In any instance where noise level reduction is required by this division, all plans and specifications are to be certified by a recognized acoustical specialist for compliance. 
(c)  Noise reduction. 
(1)  Buildings, structures, and active outdoor recreation space shall be located at the greatest distance from the noise source, taking maximum advantage of existing topographical features to minimize noise impacts, and within zoning district requirements such as required setbacks. 
(2)  Buildings and structures shall be oriented to minimize exposure to the noise source and building openings, such as windows, shall be located away from the noise source. The amount of passive outdoor recreational space where individuals would be subject to noticeable or severe levels of noise should be minimized. Landscaping materials should be used to deflect noise. Noise attenuation shall be accomplished as follows: 
(i)  All mechanical ventilation systems shall provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements as provided in the Building Code for the proposed occupancy without the need to open any exterior doors or windows. 
(ii)  The perimeter of all exterior windows and door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction. 
(iii)  Fireplaces shall be equipped with well-fitted chimney cap devices. 
(iv)  All ventilation ducts, except range hoods, connecting interior space to outdoors shall be provided with a bend such that no direct line of sight exists from exterior to interior through the vent duct. 
(v)  Doors and windows shall be constructed so they are close-fitting. Weather-stripping seals shall be incorporated to eliminate all edge gaps. 
(vi)  All penetration through exterior walls by pipes, ducts, conduits and the like shall be caulked airtight to the exterior construction. 
(d)  Existing residences. Any existing residence may be added to, structurally altered, or repaired without conforming to the referenced specifications provided the property owner signs a waiver indicating notification of said specifications and provided that all generally-applicable requirements of the Building Code are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Subdivision 9. - Supplemental Procedures 
 
Sec. 34-6-23. - Generally. 
(a)  The purpose of this subdivision 9 is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this division. There are several ways that potential relief from hardship is addressed, including through nonconforming development, the grant of a variance, the grant of a special use permit, or through appeal. 
(b)  All cases shall be administered in accordance with the appeal, variance, nonconforming use, and special use permit procedures established in the Unified Land Development Code, provided that all such procedures shall comply with applicable procedures set forth in the Airport Zoning Act, 620 ILCS 25/24, 27, 28, and 29. 
(c)  This division provides supplemental requirements beyond those required by applicable state or federal law. The failure of the city to specifically or precisely conform to any notice, review, or other procedural requirement herein shall not invalidate any action or approval of the city unless such invalidation is required by law. 
(d)  Avigation easement. As a condition of approval of a development application in an airport overlay (AO) district subarea, including the application for a variance, rezoning or special use permit prior to receiving final approval of the application, the applicant may be required to convey to the appropriate authority an avigation easement consistent with the avigation easement described in section 34-6-13 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-24. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals established and existing under the Unified Land Development Code is hereby established as and shall serve as the board of appeals under this division. The board of appeals shall exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the director in the enforcement of the airport zoning regulations of this division. 
(2)  To hear and decide specific variances under this division. 
(b)  All appeals and variances shall be administered in accordance with the appeal and variance procedures established in the Unified Land Development Code, provided that: 
(1)  The vote of a majority of the members of the board of appeals shall be sufficient for all purposes, including the reversal of any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the director, or a decision in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the airport zoning regulations, or to effect any variation in such regulations. 
(2)  Meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman of the board of appeals and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, may administer oaths or affirmations and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of appeals shall be public. The board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the board of appeals and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-25. - Appeals. 
(a)  Except as provided below, appeals shall be made in a manner consistent with procedures for appeals established within the Unified Land Development Code, article XIV, division 2. 
(b)  All appeals must be taken within a reasonable time by filing with the director and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The director shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the director certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the director's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by order of the board of appeals on notice to the director and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time, consistent with the times and procedures for notice, hearing and decision of appeals provided in the Unified Land Development Code. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this division and the Airport Zoning Act, 620 ILCS 25/1 et seq., reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director from which the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-26. - Variances. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, variance applications shall be made in a manner consistent with the procedures for variances established within the Unified Land Development Code, article XIV, division 3. 
(b)  Any person(s) seeking a variance from the height limitations of this division shall include as part of their variance application a determination from the FAA as to whether the proposed construction or alteration for which the variance is being sought would be a hazard to air navigation, pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in 14 C.F.R. Part 77. 
(c)  All persons aggrieved by a decision of the board of appeals on a variance requested pursuant to this division may appeal the decision to the city council. The city council shall hold a hearing on the application on appeal. Notice of the hearing by the city council shall be provided in the same manner that notice is provided by the board of appeal and hearings shall be conducted following substantially the same procedures provided for hearings on variances by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-27. - Nonconformities. 
(a)  Structures and uses existing on the effective date of this division shall not be required to change in order to comply with these regulations, except where otherwise required by law or where a threat to public safety warrants a determination that the ongoing use is a public nuisance. The nonconforming use requirements of this section shall otherwise apply to the future applicability of the standards and requirements contained herein, provided that the requirements of this section shall be supplemented by provisions of the Unified Land Development Code governing non-conformities which do not conflict with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before any nonconforming structure or object of natural growth may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, a permit must be secured from the director, authorizing such replacement, change or repair. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming structure or tree or nonconforming use to be made or become higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this division or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
(c)  Whenever the director determines that a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, destroyed, deteriorated, or decayed: (a) no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations; and (b) whether application is made for a permit under this section or not, the director may by appropriate action compel the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree, at his own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, or equip such object as may be necessary to conform to the regulations. 
(d)  If the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for ten days after notice thereof, the director may proceed to have the object so lowered, removed, reconstructed, or equipped and shall have a lien, upon behalf of the city, upon the land whereon it is or was located, in the amount of the cost and expense thereof. Such lien may be enforced by the city by an action for the enforcement thereof, as in the case of other liens. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
Sec. 34-6-28. - Airport hazard marking. 
In granting any development application, the director or board of appeals may, if it deems such action advisable to effectuate the purposes of this division and the Airport Zoning Act, 620 ILCS 25/1 et seq., and reasonable in the circumstances, so condition such grant, consistent with 620 ILCS 25/25, as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the state or the city, as the case may be, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11) 
 
APPENDIX B—AIRPORT IMAGINARY SURFACES 
OBSTRUCTION IDENTIFICATION SURFACES 
FEDERAL AVIATION REGULATIONS PART 77 
DIM 	ITEM 	DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS (FEET) 
		VISUAL RUNWAY 	NON-PRECISION 
INSTRUMENT RUNWAY 	PRECISION 
INSTRUMENT 
RUNWAY 
PIR 
		A 	B 	A 	B 	
					C 	D 	
A 	Width of primary surface and approach surface width at inner end 	250 	500 	500 	500 	1,000 	1,000 
B 	Radius of horizontal surface 	5,000 	5,000 	5,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 
		VISUAL 
APPROACH 	NON-PRECISION 
INSTRUMENT APPROACH 	PRECISION 
INSTRUMENT 
APPROACH 
		A 	B 	A 	B 	
					C 	D 	
C 	Approach surface width at end 	1,250 	1,500 	2,000 	3,500 	4,000 	16,000 
D 	Approach surface length 	5,000 	5,000 	5,000 	10,000 	10,000 	* 
E 	Approach slope 	20:1 	20:1 	20:1 	34:1 	34:1 	* 
 
• A - Utility runways. 
• B - Runways larger than utility. 
• C - Visibility minimums greater than ¾ mile. 
• D - Visibility minimums as low as ¾ mile. 
• * - Precision instrument approach slope is 50:1 for inner 10,000 feet and 40:1 for an additional 40,000 feet. 
 
 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 6-20-11)  
DIVISION 3. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE (PDP) 
 
Sec. 34-6-30. - Purpose and intent. 
The planned development procedure, or PDP, is intended to provide for development incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. A planned development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots or provide for nontraditional techniques of development which are consistent with the intent of the city's Comprehensive Plan and meet the spirit and intent of the Unified Land Development Code. The further purpose of the PDP is to permit the following: 
(a)  A maximum choice in the type of environment available to the public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict application of the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas and facilities. 
(c)  A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic and geologic features. 
(d)  A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better development and design and the construction of aesthetic amenities. 
(e)  An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings, and other facilities. 
(f)  A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare. 
(g)  Innovations in residential, commercial, and recreational development so that growing demands of population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said buildings. 
(Sec. 6.3.1)  
Sec. 34-6-31. - PDP size and density controls. 
(a)  The minimum size of any PDP shall be five acres. 
(b)  The maximum residential density of any PDP shall be controlled by the underlying zoning district(s) and the maximum floor area ratios listed in subsection 34-6-35(h). 
(Sec. 6.3.2)  
Sec. 34-6-32. - Application procedure and area plan. 
(a)  The amendment of an area plan or the designation of a portion of the city as a planned development must be initiated by an application with the proposed area plan, accompanied by the required fee and filed with the development administrator. The application must be verified by the owner or owners of record or the contract purchasers. The application must be filed at least 20 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which it is to be first considered. 
(b)  Applications. The application must include the following information. The city may require that this information be included on or filed with designated forms: 
(1)  The name of the proposed PDP development. 
(2)  Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner(s) of record, and engineer, surveyor or designer responsible for the planning, engineering, survey and design. 
(3)  Acreage in the entire planned development. 
(4)  Legal description of the entire planned development. 
(5)  Five copies of proposed deed restrictions, protective covenants, and homeowners' association Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws. 
(6)  Signature(s) of applicant(s) and owner(s) certifying the accuracy of the requested information. 
(7)  Payment of the required application fee. 
(8)  A recent certificate of title to the property showing ownership. 
(9)  A list containing the names and addresses of all owners of property located within 250 feet of the property to be designated a planned development. 
(10)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the development administrator. 
(c)  Area plans. The application must be accompanied by 16 copies of the proposed area plan. The scale for all plans shall be no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, and the plans shall include the following: 
(1)  The name of the proposed PDP development. 
(2)  Scale, north arrow and the date drawn. 
(3)  Proposed use and development of the planned development. 
(4)  Boundaries, dimensions and area of the planned development. 
(5)  Location of the planned development in relation to the surrounding uses, buildings and zoning. 
(6)  Location of the planned development in relation to major thoroughfares, and any roadways or drives connecting the planned development to those major thoroughfares. 
(7)  Names of adjacent subdivisions, layout of streets (with names and rights-of-way widths), connections with adjoining platted streets, location and widths and of adjoining alleys, easements and public sidewalks, and location and dimensions of all existing sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and supply facilities within 250 feet of the planned development. 
(8)  Existing conditions in the planned development area showing all easements, streets, drives or alleys, bridges, and existing structures. 
(9)  Existing topography (at least five-foot contour intervals). All topographic data shall directly relate to USGS data. 
(10)  Boundary lines of school districts, fire districts, and municipal limits must be identified on plan where applicable. 
(11)  General plan layout of the entire planned development showing proposed land uses, streets, parking areas, open space areas, sidewalks and highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction, with significant dimensions indicated where appropriate to clarify the plan. 
(12)  All planned use areas must be clearly labeled as to the proposed use and all parcels of lands to be dedicated or reserved for public use or for use in common by property owners in the planned development shall be indicated on the plan dedication or reservation. 
(13)  Proposed stages of development. 
(14)  Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the development administrator, including the location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet; location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed. 
(15)  Site plan data must be indicated on the area plan and must include the items below: 
(a)  The total gross land area of the planned development area plan in acres. 
(b)  The breakdown of total gross land area by land use type, such as townhouses, single family, retail shops, open space, church, school, etc. 
(c)  Residential data: 
(i)  The estimated total residential units. 
(ii)  The average square feet of residential land per each type of residential unit. 
(iii)  The breakdown of non-residential land by type of use. 
(iv)  The total parking by land use type and parking ratio per dwelling unit. 
(d)  Commercial and industrial data: 
(i)  The estimated total building square footage by land use type. 
(ii)  The percentage of building coverage by land use type for business and industrial uses. 
(iii)  The total parking by land use type and parking ratio per floor area. 
(16)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the development administrator to adequately illustrate the planned development. 
(d)  The area plan and final development plan required in this section shall replace (for a planned development only) any other site plan required by the city. 
(Sec. 6.3.3)  
Sec. 34-6-33. - Review of application and area plan. 
(a)  The proposed plan shall be referred to the planning commission for study, a public hearing thereon, and recommendation and report to the city council. 
(b)  The planning commission shall not act on any proposed plan before holding a public hearing thereon and, prior to holding a public hearing on any proposed plan, at least 15 days written notice thereof shall be given to all property owners within 250 feet of the boundary of the premises under consideration and at least 15 days written notice thereof shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(c)  After holding a public hearing on any proposed plan, the planning commission shall submit its report of such action to the city council for consideration and action. Said report shall include all documents comprising the proposed plan referred to the planning commission, the recommendation of the planning commission with respect to such proposed plan, and the reasons for approval or disapproval of such proposed plan. 
(d)  If no report is transmitted by the planning commission within 65 days from the date that the application is first reviewed by the planning commission at a regular meeting, the city council may take action on such proposed plan even though the planning commission has not submitted its report to the city council. If the planning commission fails to hold the public hearing required by subsection 34-6-33(b), the city council may assume that responsibility and hold such a hearing after providing the requisite notice. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the planning commission's report, the city council shall either approve the application by adopting an ordinance amending the official zoning map and authorizing the PDP development in accordance with the area plan, or deny the application. If the application is approved, the matter shall be returned to the planning commission for consideration of a final development plan. 
(f)  Minor, technical and mechanical changes to the area plan may be approved by the development administrator without review by the planning commission or the city council so long as the changes do not materially affect the PDP development as approved by the city council. Within seven days of such approval, the development administrator will advise the chairman of the planning commission of any such change. 
(Sec. 6.3.4)  
Sec. 34-6-34. - Final development plan and section plans. 
(a)  Requirements for final development plans and section plans shall be as follows: 
(1)  Final development plans must include, in addition to specific information required by the ordinance authorizing the PDP development, the following general information: 
(a)  An outboundary plat and legal description of the property. 
(b)  The location of all roadways adjacent to the property and general location, size, and pavement widths of all interior roadways. 
(c)  The general design of the PDP development including unit types (i.e., single-family detached, single-family attached, apartment), number of each unit type proposed, location of units, minimum and maximum size of single-family lots, approximate size of multiple-family structures, and location and size of common areas and recreation facilities. 
(d)  The location and size of any commercial uses, types of uses proposed, and general parking layout. 
(e)  Any floodplain boundaries. 
(f)  The density calculations. 
(g)  Concept landscape plan. 
(2)  The planning commission must determine if the final development plan complies with the conditions of the ordinance authorizing the PDP development. The planning commission's recommendation of the final development plan shall also be based upon whether the plan is consistent with good general planning practice, consistent with good site planning, can be constructed and operated in a manner that is not detrimental to the permitted uses in the district, would be visually compatible with the uses in the surrounding area, and is deemed desirable to promote the general welfare of the city. The planning commission must also consider architectural, landscape, and other relationships which may exist between the proposed PDP development and the character of the surrounding neighborhood and must prescribe or require such physical treatment or other limitations as will, in its opinion, enhance the neighborhood character. 
(3)  A section plan for each plat or phase of the area plan must be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. The section plan must contain such information as is required by the ordinance establishing the planned development, in addition to such other information required on a preliminary plat by the subdivision regulations contained in article XII. 
(4)  The planning commission shall submit its recommendation of each final development plan and section plan to the city council. If the planning commission does not approve or disapprove a final development plan or a section plan within 35 days from the date that the plan is first reviewed by the planning commission at a regular meeting, the city council may approve or disapprove such plan even though the planning commission has taken no action. 
(5)  All plans shall be retained on file by the city clerk. An approved final development plan will constitute an approved preliminary plat for purposes of the subdivision regulations in article XII. No building permits or authorization for improvement or development for any use authorized under provisions of the ordinance governing the tract shall be issued prior to approval of such plans. 
(6)  Where elements within the designated planned development boundary are necessary to the support of a given section, but not included within the section boundary, these elements shall be included on a site plan accompanying, or a part of, the section plan. 
(7)  If a final development plan includes all the information required for section plans, the section plan requirements may be waived. 
(Sec. 6.3.5)  
Sec. 34-6-35. - Site design requirements. 
(a)  All paved and landscaped areas shall, at all times, be kept in good repair and in excellent condition, in accordance with this or other ordinances. The continuous maintenance of said areas is to be the responsibility of the owners and lessees of the property. 
(b)  All landscaping plant materials shall be kept alive and in excellent condition. 
(c)  All lighting shall be served with underground cable. All parking areas and walkways shall be illuminated so as to produce a uniform illumination of two foot-candles within said areas. All exterior lighting shall be shielded and/or otherwise designed to direct light downward and within the confines of the site area so as to prevent or minimize glare or spillover to other areas. 
(d)  Access requirements. All developed parcels, except those developed for single-family, shall be provided interior drives with a minimum width of pavement of 24 feet. Driveway openings shall be limited to not more than 36 feet in width and shall be limited to one drive per 100 feet of lot width. All roads and drives shall be paved with concrete or asphaltic concrete material as specified by the development administrator. Concrete curbs shall be provided along all drives that do not abut parking spaces. All parking areas shall be edged with concrete curbs. Surface or underground storm drainage facilities shall be provided for all roads, drives, and parking areas as approved by the development administrator. All storm drainage will be directed into established surface or underground storm drainage facilities. 
(e)  Underground utilities. Telephone, electric power, cable television, and all other utilities, except surface stormwater facilities, shall be located underground. Except, however, that the following shall be excluded from this requirement: 
(1)  Poles used exclusively for street lighting. 
(2)  Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
(3)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(4)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for a period not to exceed six months which are necessary to provide utility service until the permanent service is completed. 
(5)  Poles, wires and controller cabinets necessary for the operation of traffic signals. 
(6)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(f)  Ownership and size. The site of the planned development must be under single ownership and/or unified control and be not less than five acres in size. 
(g)  Setback requirements. Building setback requirements within a planned development may deviate from the minimums required in the underlying zoning district. 
(h)  Floor area ratios. Floor area ratios shall be observed as maximum density controls for the following uses: 
Single-family attached dwellings 	0.4 
Duplexes 	0.4 
Multiple-family buildings 	0.6 
 
(Sec. 6.3.6)  
Sec. 34-6-36. - Criteria for reviewing applications. 
In considering whether or not such application for a planned development should be granted, it shall be the duty of the planning commission and the city council to give consideration to the effect of the requested use on the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of the area in the vicinity of the property in question and the residents of the city generally. In considering the planned use or uses, the planning commission and the city council should consider the following: 
(a)  The appropriateness of the proposed use or uses for the site in terms of land patterns in the entire city and the community's Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  The compatibility with surrounding uses and the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  The comparative size, floor area, mass, and general appearance of the proposed structures in relationship to adjacent structures and buildings in the surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
(d)  The amount of traffic generated by the proposed use or uses and the relationship to the amount of traffic on abutting streets and on minor streets in the surrounding neighborhood in terms of the street's capacity to absorb the additional traffic and any significant increase in hourly or daily traffic levels. 
(Sec. 6.3.7)  
Sec. 34-6-37. - Performance and maintenance guarantees. 
(a)  All public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the planned development shall be either constructed in advance of the approval of the final plan or, at the discretion of the city, escrow deposits, irrevocable letters of credit in a form approved by the city attorney, or performance bonds shall be delivered to guarantee construction of the required improvements. Any such guarantee shall be 110 percent of the estimate approved by the development administrator of the cost to construct said improvements. 
(b)  In addition to the deposit provided for in subsection 34-6-37(a), a deposit shall be made to the city in cash, irrevocable letters of credit in a form approved by the city attorney, or maintenance bonds equal to 15 percent of the estimated costs of public facility installations. This deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory performance of the facilities constructed within the planned development and shall be held by the city for a period of 18 months after acceptance of such facilities by the city. After such 18 months, the deposit shall be refunded if no defects have developed. If any defects have developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after reimbursements for amounts expended in correcting defective facilities. The deposit under this paragraph shall be made immediately upon completion and approval of the construction of said public facilities, and the performance guarantee for the public facilities shall thereupon be released. 
(Sec. 6.3.8)  
ARTICLE VII. - STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED, ACCESSORY AND CONDITIONAL USES  
DIVISION 1. - PERFORMANCE STANDARD FOR ALL USES 
 
Sec. 34-7-1. - General. 
Every use, activity, process or operation located or occurring with the city shall comply with the performance standards prescribed in this section, and no such existing use, activity, process or operation shall hereafter be altered or modified so as to conflict with, or further conflict with, these performance standards. If, as of the date of adoption of this Code, the operations of any lawful existing use violates these performance standards, such operations shall not be varied or changed in any way as to increase the degree of such violation. The operation of any existing conforming use in violation of these performance standards shall not in itself make such use subject to the nonconforming use provisions of this Code. 
(Sec. 7.1.1)  
Sec. 34-7-2. - Toxic matter. 
No use shall discharge or store beyond its lot or site boundaries any toxic matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or damage to property or business. 
(Sec. 7.1.2)  
Sec. 34-7-3. - Glare. 
Any operation producing glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the boundaries of the lot on which such building is located. 
(Sec. 7.1.3)  
Sec. 34-7-4. - Noise. 
Sound levels and impulsive type noises shall comply with St. Clair County Noise standards as established and enforced by the St. Clair County Department of Health. 
(Sec. 7.1.4)  
Sec. 34-7-5. - Smoke and hazardous material. 
(a)  The release of radioactive gases and particulate matter shall not exceed the maximum allowable concentration permitted the general population in applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations when measured at or beyond the lot lines at ground level or habitable elevation. 
(b)  No activity involving radiation hazards shall be permitted which causes exposure to persons at or beyond the lot lines in excess of the maximum allowable concentration permitted the general population in applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Sec. 7.1.5)  
Sec. 34-7-6. - Fire and explosion hazards. 
(a)  The storage or utilization of solid materials ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. 
(b)  The storage or utilization of solid materials ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The materials shall be stored or utilized within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls and handled in accordance with the standards and regulations of the fire department and the National Fire Protection Association or its successors. 
(2)  All such buildings shall be protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with the standards and regulations of the fire department and the National Fire Protection Association or its successors. 
(3)  Such materials, if stored outdoors, shall be no closer than 150 feet to the nearest lot line or in conformance with the standards and regulations of the fire department and National Fire Protection Association or its successors. 
(c)  The storage or utilization of flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be permitted in accordance with the following limitations, exclusive of storage in underground tanks, and storage of finished products in original sealed containers. 
(1)  Such materials or products shall be stored or utilized within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and handled in accordance with the standards and regulations of the fire department of the National Fire Protection Association or its successors, and, in addition, all such buildings shall be protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with the standards and regulations of the fire department and the National Fire Protection Association or its successors. 
(2)  The above ground storage of flammable liquids is prohibited, except as allowed by regulations of the fire department and the National Fire Protection Association or its successors. 
(3)  The total of all flammable liquids permitted on any tract shall not exceed 5,000 gallons unless approved by the fire department and the development administrator. 
(Sec. 7.1.6)  
Secs. 34-7-7—34-7-10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED USES 
 
Sec. 34-7-11. - Standards for mobile home parks. 
(a)  Location limitations. The installation of any new or additional mobile home within the city shall be limited to mobile home parks that have been lawfully created. 
(b)  Compliance with state and federal regulations. All mobile homes moved into the city after the effective date of this Code shall be constructed in compliance with specifications set forth by the National Fire Protection Association under the Association's Code of Specifications for Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers and all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(c)  Dangerous mobile homes prohibited. No mobile home constructed prior to June 30, 1976, nor any mobile home not constructed in compliance with the Federal "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974", nor any mobile home which is deemed by the development administrator to be a hazard to the public health or safety shall be moved into, erected or installed in the city. 
(d)  Installation criteria. 
(1)  Each mobile home space shall have a stand to provide adequate support for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home. The stand shall extend the length of the supports of the mobile home, and shall consist of either six-inch thick reinforced concrete runners or a four-inch thick reinforced concrete slab. Concrete piers may be permitted only after review and consultation of the building official. 
(2)  Each mobile home shall be anchored in a manner to meet or exceed the standards prescribed by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(3)  No mobile home shall be immobilized, but anchors capable of withstanding a vertical tension force of 4,800 pounds shall be installed at the corners of each stand or as otherwise necessary for protection against high winds. Every mobile home shall be securely tied down to such anchors. 
(4)  The minimum first floor elevation shall be at least 18 inches, but not more than 36 inches, above the crown of the nearest street or road. 
(5)  The frame, axles, wheels, crawl space storage area and utility connection of all mobile homes shall be concealed from view through the use of durable all-weather materials manufactured specifically for the purpose of covering the undercarriage area. Such skirting shall be fastened in accordance with manufacturers instructions and shall provide for adequate ventilation. 
(6)  All mobile home spaces shall abut upon an all-weather surface driveway of not less than 22 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a city street. 
(7)  Mobile homes may only be placed in designated and approved mobile home subdivisions. Mobile homes may not be placed in any zoning district other than the RMH, mobile home residential district. 
(8)  To inhibit the spread of fire, no mobile home shall be erected or placed within 20 feet of another mobile home. 
(e)  Permits and fees required. After the effective date of this Code, every mobile home park in the city shall be subject to an annual license fee of $50.00. No mobile home shall be placed within the city until a permit for such placement has been issued by the development administrator. 
(Sec. 7.2.1)  
Sec. 34-7-12. - Lessors of miniwarehouses and self-storage units. 
(a)  Lessors of miniwarehouses and self-storage units (uses within NAICS Code 53113) are allowed in the "LI", "GI" and "AP" districts based on meeting the following performance standards: 
(1)  There shall be a minimum of one parking space for each employee. 
(2)  No gasolines, flammables, explosives or other dangerous materials and no motor vehicles may be stored inside a storage building. 
(3)  Such facility may contain a surfaced lot for the outside storage of motor vehicles, trailers and watercraft as an accessory use. Motor vehicles, trailers and watercraft include boats, boat trailers, camping trailers, materials trailers and recreational vehicles, and automobiles and light trucks of less than 10,000 pounds gross weight. All such vehicles shall be registered and in operating condition, and shall be screened from the view of adjoining properties. No derelict vehicles shall be allowed. No repair, maintenance and/or upgrading of motor vehicles, trailers or watercraft shall be permitted on site. 
(4)  All storage facilities shall be separated by walls and ceilings. 
(5)  There shall be a minimum of 24 feet between buildings for purposes of ingress and egress to storage facilities. 
(6)  Each individual storage facility shall not exceed a width of 12 feet, a length of 30 feet and a height of nine feet. 
(7)  The storage facilities shall be screened from streets and surrounding residentially-zoned properties. 
(8)  Additional reasonable requirements including, but not limited to, access ways, billing locations, hours of operation, and on-site resident manager may be imposed for the protection of adjoining landowners. 
(Sec. 7.2.2)  
Secs. 34-7-13—34-7-15. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES 
 
Sec. 34-7-16. - Customary accessory uses. 
(a)  Size of accessory buildings in residential districts. In residential (R) zoning districts, accessory buildings may not exceed the size of the principal building on any lot or parcel. 
(b)  Materials for accessory buildings in residential districts. Portions of garages and similar sized accessory buildings in residential (R) zoning districts that face the street shall be constructed of building materials that are similar to or consistent with the building materials of the principal building on the lot. 
(Sec. 7.3.1)  
Sec. 34-7-17. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Applicability. In residential (R) zoning districts, home occupations shall be limited to those uses listed as permitted home occupations or which receive approval as a conditional home occupation. 
(b)  Permitted home occupations. Home occupations are permitted in any dwelling unit subject to the requirements of this section and the respective zoning district regulations. Authorized home occupations shall include the following: 
(1)  Artists and sculptors. 
(2)  Authors and composers. 
(3)  Child care for not more than three children not related to the occupant of the home. 
(4)  Data entry and similar computer work. 
(5)  Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors. 
(6)  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work, and ceramics. 
(7)  Office facility of a minister, priest or other similar person associated with a religious organization. 
(8)  Office facility of a salesman, sales representative, or manufacturers representative, provided no retail or wholesale transactions are made on the premises. 
(9)  Renting of not more than one room for rooming or boarding persons who are not transients. 
(10)  Telephone sales and similar telephone-related uses. 
(11)  Similar uses which do not involve retail or wholesale sales transactions on the premises, employment of persons other than occupants of the dwelling, any greater assembly, processing, or fabrication operations. 
(c)  Home occupation standards. Any proposed home occupation must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The home occupation shall be conducted within the dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner or in any building accessory thereto which is normally associated with a residential use. 
(2)  No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises. 
(3)  No alterations to the exterior appearance of the principal residential building or premises shall be made which changes the character thereof as a residence. 
(4)  No outside display of goods or outside storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation shall be permitted. 
(5)  No persons other than a member of the immediate household occupying such dwelling shall be employed on the premises. 
(6)  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character thereof. 
(7)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street. 
(8)  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises. 
(9)  No signs accessory to such home occupation shall be displayed. 
(10)  A home occupation shall be subject to all applicable city occupational licenses and permits. 
(Sec. 7.3.2)  
Sec. 34-7-18. - Communication antennae. 
A communication antennae, as defined in article II, may be placed on any lot or within any public or utility right-of-way in any zoning district if such antenna meets all of the following criteria: 
(a)  The antenna is a single whip antenna not exceeding six feet in height/length and not more than two inches in diameter or the antenna is in the shape of a rectangle or similar shape and not more than one cubic foot in size. 
(b)  No separate on-site support building is necessary for operation of the antenna. 
(c)  Other equipment necessary for the operation of the antenna is relatively small and can be mounted on or within a utility pole or light pole or similar structure. 
(Sec. 7.3.3)  
Secs. 34-7-19, 34-7-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES 
 
Sec. 34-7-21. - Automotive uses. 
(a)  Motor vehicle parts (used) wholesalers (uses within NAICS Code 421140) and recyclable material wholesalers (NAICS Code 421930) may be allowed as a conditional use in the "GI" district based on meeting the following performance standards: 
(1)  Shall be located on a site of at least 40,000 square feet. 
(2)  All wreckage shall be stored inside a building or within an area screened from the view of the street and surrounding properties by landscaping, fencing or a combination of materials that provides an opaque screen at least six feet in height. 
(3)  Additional criteria necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the city council. 
(Sec. 7.4.1)  
Sec. 34-7-22. - Telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Communication towers may be allowed as a conditional use in the "AG", "GC", "LI", "GI" and "AP" zoning districts based on meeting the following performance standards: 
(1)  The height of the tower shall not exceed 200 feet. 
(2)  The tower shall be set back from property lines a minimum of one foot for every foot of tower height. 
(3)  Owners and operators of every communication tower approved after the effective date of this Code may be required to provide for the collocation of other communications providers on their tower for reasonable compensation. 
(4)  Prior to approval of a communication tower by the city council, the applicant shall document their efforts to locate their antenna on an existing communication tower within the city or in close proximity to the city. Such documentation shall also indicate why collocation on any existing tower is not feasible. 
(5)  Additional reasonable requirements designed to protect the safety and general welfare of adjoining landowners and other residents of the city. 
(Sec. 7.4.2)  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 34-8-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to diminish threats to public health and safety, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or redevelopment or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth and/or changes the stormwater drainage pattern and/or stormwater flows from that which would have occurred if the land had been left in its natural state. This stormwater runoff and resulting soil erosion could result in the inundation of damageable properties, the erosion and destabilization of downstream channels, and the pollution of valuable stream and lake resources. One cause of increases in stormwater runoff quantity or rate and impairment of quality, and loss of valuable topsoil is the development or redevelopment of the land. This division is adopted to accomplish the following objectives: 
(a)  To assure that development or redevelopment does not increase drainage or flood hazards, or create unstable conditions susceptible to soil erosion. 
(b)  To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage due to increased stormwater runoff and soil erosion. 
(c)  To protect human life and health from the hazards of increased flooding and soil erosion on a watershed basis. 
(d)  To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, correction of channel erosion problems, and flood rescue and relief operations caused by stormwater runoff and soil erosion quantities from development or redevelopment. 
(e)  To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and soil, water, air, animal and plant resources. 
(f)  To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats. 
(g)  To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to manage flood and stormwater impact, improve water and groundwater quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitats, maintain quality forest resources, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, enhance community and economic development.  
Sec. 34-8-2. - Findings. 
The St. Clair Coil and Water Conservation District and the City of Mascoutah hereby find as follows: 
(a)  The soil types found in St. Clair County, Illinois are susceptible to erosion and, if left unprotected, could cause severe loss of soil with resultant damage to property, public safety, and the environment. 
(b)  The topography of St. Clair County, Illinois contains areas with steep slopes upon which, if clearing of trees and/or inappropriate construction takes place, could result in severe erosion and slope stability problems which could result in damage to property. 
(c)  Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing development for certain non-agricultural uses including but not limited to the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, the modification of stream channels and drainage ways, and the creation of recreational facilities. 
(d)  The washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof, by decreasing vision and reducing traction of road vehicles. 
(e)  Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed-out fills, and embankments. 
(f)  Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes, sinkholes, wetlands, and reservoirs. 
(g)  Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes, promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and other desirable aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove. 
(h)  Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the storage capacity of floodplains and natural depressions, resulting in increased chances of flooding at risk to public health and safety. 
(Sec. 8.1.2)  
Sec. 34-8-3. - Authority. 
This Division is enacted in accordance with the Soil and Water Conservation Districts Act as found at 70 ILCS Sec. 405/1 et seq. and specifically pursuant to the authority specified in Section 23 of that Act entitled "Adoption of land use regulations" and codified at 70 ILCS Sec. 405/23. 
(Sec. 8.1.3)  
Sec. 34-8-4. - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall commence any development or redevelopment activities without first obtaining a stormwater management and erosion control permit from the soil and water conservation district office. This division shall apply to all development and redevelopment in the incorporated portion of the city and to any subdivision within one and one-half miles of the city that is subject to subdivision plat approval by the city. 
(Sec. 8.1.4)  
Sec. 34-8-5. - Soil and water conservation district regulations adopted by reference. 
The St. Clair County Soil and Water Conservation District's Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Regulations are hereby adopted by the city as the stormwater management and erosion control regulations for the city. 
(Sec. 8.1.5)  
Secs. 34-8-6—34-8-10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 34-8-11. - Development prohibited within floodway. 
No buildings shall be constructed within the designated floodway portion of any 100-year floodplain. 
(Sec. 8.2.1)  
Sec. 34-8-12. - Development in flood fringe. 
Areas located in a 100-year floodplain and designated as part of the flood fringe may be developed provided that buildings are constructed at least one foot above the minimum flood elevation. 
(Sec. 8.2.2)  
DIVISION 3. - MINED AREAS 
 
Sec. 34-8-13. - Residential development. 
Residential developments proposed over mined areas should acquire insurance for mine subsidence. 
(Sec. 8.3.1)  
Sec. 34-8-14. - Commercial and industrial development. 
Commercial and industrial developments should avoid lands located over mined areas. Such developments shall provide information on the possibility of mine subsidence to all tenants prior to leasing space in commercial or industrial buildings. 
(Sec. 8.3.2)  
ARTICLE IX. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-9-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure that an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of off-street parking and loading spaces are provided on every site. Such off-street parking and loading facilities shall be designed as an integral part of an overall site design, shall be properly related to existing and proposed buildings and shall have appropriate landscaping. Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and monotony of large concentrations of parked cars. Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, landscaping, ease of access and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall site design. Any above ground loading facility shall be screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all uses in all zoning districts except the "DC", downtown commercial district where off-street parking facilities shall not be required. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided as required by division VI. Within this article, references to parking facilities include parking lots and parking garages. 
(Sec. 9.1)  
DIVISION 2. - INCREASED OR DECREASED PARKING DEMAND 
 
Sec. 34-9-2. - Increased parking demand. 
Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this Code is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the change or enlargement. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this Code is reconstructed or enlarged to the extent of 20 percent or more of flood area, said building or use in its entirety shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. Any change or enlargement in use of less than 20 percent of the gross floor area shall be provided with parking based on the change or enlargement. 
(Sec. 9.2.1)  
Sec. 34-9-3. - Decreased parking demand. 
When a building, structure or site undergoes a decrease in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or other unit of measurement specified hereinafter as a means for determining required off-street parking and loading facilities, or when the application of the standards herein would result in a requirement for fewer total off-street parking and/or loading spaces than are provided on the subject site, the available off-street parking and/or loading facilities may be reduced accordingly provided that existing off-street parking and loading remaining would equal or exceed the off-street parking and loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of these standards to the entire building, structure or site as modified. 
(Sec. 9.2.2)  
Sec. 34-9-4. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 34-9-5. - Prohibition of repair, service or sales use of parking facilities. 
No required off-street parking or loading facilities shall be utilized for motor vehicle repair work, service, display or sales of any kind, except as expressly permitted elsewhere in this Code. 
(Sec. 9.3.1)  
Sec. 34-9-6. - Prohibition of use of required parking as commercial or public lot. 
No area designated as a required parking area in connection with any designated building, structure, site or use shall be operated as a commercial or public parking facility providing parking spaces for the general public. 
(Sec. 9.3.2)  
Sec. 34-9-7. - Entries and exits. 
The number of entrances and exits shall be limited to one entrance and one exit or one combined entrance and exit per 300 linear feet of street frontage unless additional entrances and/or exits are deemed necessary by the planning commission. Except for single-family residential dwellings and duplexes, all parking access shall be designed to [prevent the need to back directly onto a public road or right-of-way. 
(Sec. 9.3.3)  
Sec. 34-9-8. - Location of parking or loading space. 
All required off-street parking or loading spaces shall be provided on the same parcel of land occupied by the use or building to which it is appurtenant; provided, however, that where there are, in the judgment of the planning commission, practical difficulties in satisfying the requirement for parking space and/or if the public safety or convenience would be better served by another location, the planning commission may authorize an alternative location for any portion of the required parking for a non-residential use which will adequately serve the public interest, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Required accessory off-street parking facilities may be provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use served is located and shall not exceed 20 percent of the total parking required, provided that the property occupied as parking is in the same possession, either by deed, by easement, or by long-term lease which has a term equal to or exceeding the projected life of the facility occupied by the principal use, and further provided that the owner shall be bound by covenants filed on record with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds, requiring the owner and his or her heirs and assigns, as well as subsequent owners, heirs or assigns, to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces during the existence of such principal use. 
(b)  Accessory off-street parking shall be available within a walking distance of not more than 500 feet measured from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest part of the accessory parking area. 
(c)  Such separated parking space shall be usable without causing unreasonable traffic congestion, detriment to any residential neighborhood, or hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(Sec. 9.3.4)  
Sec. 34-9-9. - Zoning and accessory parking areas. 
All accessory off-site parking facilities, whether provided in fulfillment of or in excess of the requirements of this article, and whether located on the same or on a different lot from the principal use as provided in the preceding paragraph, shall be located on non-residentially-zoned property. 
(Sec. 9.3.5)  
Sec. 34-9-10. - Joint parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided and used collectively or jointly in any zoning district in which separate off-street parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, subject to the following provisions. 
(a)  The total number of spaces so located together is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use except as provided by subsections 34-9-10(c) and (d) and subsection 34-9-33(b). 
(b)  A legally sufficient written agreement assuring the perpetual joint usage of said common parking for the combination of uses or buildings is properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the city attorney, and filed with and made part of the application for a building permit. 
(c)  Up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required for a theatre (unless the theatre's required parking spaces are based on the provisions of subsection 34-9-33(b)), or other place of evening entertainment, or for a church, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during evening hours if specifically approved by the planning commission; and provided, however, that wri6tten agreement assuring the retention for such purpose shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the city attorney, and shall be filed and made part of the application for a building permit. Such approval may, with 15 days prior written notice, be rescinded by the city council and additional parking shall be obtained by the owners in the event that the city council determines that such joint use is resulting in a public nuisance or is otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  Land uses which do not meet the criteria of subsection 34-9-10(c), above, but which can clearly demonstrate the ability to successfully provide joint parking facilities to the satisfaction of the planning commission, may be permitted to share up to 50 percent of their required parking spaces provided that written agreement assuring the retention for such purpose shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the city attorney, and shall be filed and made part of the application for a building permit. Such approval may, with 15 days prior written notice, be rescinded by the city council and additional parking shall be obtained by the owners in the event that the city council determines that such joint use is resulting in a public nuisance or is otherwise adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Sec. 9.3.6)  
Secs. 34-9-11—34-9-13. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 34-9-14. - Size of parking spaces. 
Typical parking spaces in parking lots shall be a minimum of nine feet wide by 19 feet long. Parallel parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of eight feet wide by 23 feet long. Each parking space shall provide seven feet of vertical clearance. Driver aisles providing access to parking spaces shall be 24 feet wide for two-way traffic and at least 14 feet wide for one-way traffic. 
(Sec. 9.4.1)  
Sec. 34-9-15. - Reduction in space size. 
The planning commission may approve the use of continuous concrete curbs as wheel stops and thus measure the size of parking spaces to be two feet less in length than otherwise required. In such instances the parking layout should allow for the vehicle to overhang the curb by two feet and such overhang area must be clear of all obstructions (signs, trees, etc.) and may not be regarded as required landscape area. 
(Sec. 9.4.2)  
Sec. 34-9-16. - Parking surface and drainage. 
All open off-street parking areas, except those accessory to one- or two-family dwellings, shall be improved with a compacted select rock base surfaced with an all-weather, dustless material suitably designed for the intended use to a standard approved by the city. Such material shall not include oil and chip. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided with adequate storm water drainage facilities to prevent damage or inconvenience to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys. 
(Sec. 9.4.3)  
Sec. 34-9-17. - Pavement marking. 
All parking spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines at least four inches wide and extending the length of the space or by curbs or other means to indicate individual spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall be identified through the use of light blue painted lines (See division 6). Signs or markers located on the surface within a parking facility shall be used as necessary to ensure efficient and safe traffic operation of the facility. 
(Sec. 9.4.4)  
Sec. 34-9-18. - Lighting. 
Any off-street parking or loading area used between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall contain a system of lighting to provide an adequate standard of at least one foot-candle of illumination over the area of the parking area to be used. All lighting shall be arranged to deflect, shade and focus lights away from adjacent properties and shall be designed so as not to create more than one foot-candle of illumination at any property boundary abutting a residential zoning district. Any land use which utilizes an off-street parking or loading area between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. an average of less than four days per month may be exempted from this requirement by the planning commission. 
(Sec. 9.4.5)  
Sec. 34-9-19. - Screening and landscaping. 
All parking and loading areas shall be landscaped and provide screening subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(Sec. 9.4.6)  
Sec. 34-9-20. - Maintenance. 
All signs, markers or any other methods used to indicate direction of traffic movement and location of parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible condition. Likewise any walls, landscaping including trees and shrubbery, as well as surfacing and curbing of the parking facility, shall be maintained in good condition throughout its use for parking purposes. 
(Sec. 9.4.7)  
Sec. 34-9-21. - Recreational vehicles. 
With the exception of travel trailer parks and commercial establishments engaged in the sale of recreational vehicle, recreational vehicles shall comply with the following regulations: 
(a)  Not more than one recreational vehicle shall be parking on any lot. 
(b)  No recreational vehicle shall be used as a dwelling. 
(c)  No recreational vehicle shall be used as an office or for any other commercial purposes. 
(d)  No recreational vehicle shall be parked in front of any existing residences or in the front yard or driveway on any lot in any single-family residential zoning district. Such vehicles may be parking in the side and rear yards. RV's and campers will be allowed to be parked in driveways for a maximum of 72 consecutive hours. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles are defined as RV's, campers, boats, jet skis, trailers, utility trailers, towing trailers, pull trailers, buses, shuttles, limousines, tractors, ATV's, four-wheelers, RTV's, golf carts, and other similar such vehicles. 
(f)  Recreational vehicles shall not be parking on city roads for more than 72 consecutive hours. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section can and shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-1-20. 
(Sec. 9.4.8; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1(Att.), 2-20-18; Ord. No. 18-13, § 1(Att.), 6-18-18)  
Sec. 34-9-22. - Paving of residential parking spaces. 
Off-street parking spaces for any residential use shall be paved with concrete, asphaltic concrete or brick. Any parking space constructed or designated after the effective date of this Code and the driveways between such spaces and the street right-of-way line shall be similarly paved. 
(Sec. 9.4.9; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 8-18-08)  
Secs. 34-9-23—34-9-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 
 
Sec. 34-9-31. - Rules for computing parking spaces. 
In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Floor area shall mean the gross area of the entire building of the specific use, excluding any floor or portion thereof used for parking. 
(b)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be the next greater whole number. 
(c)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall be computed separately for each use except as provided in subsections 34-9-10(c) and (d) and subsection 34-9-33(l)(2). 
(d)  All required parking shall be available at all times for the use for which the parking is required except as specifically provided by this article IX. 
(e)  In the case of bench seating, such as pews in a place of worship, 21 lineal inches of bench seating shall equate to one seat. 
(f)  For residential uses, off-street parking requirements for a single-family or each two-family unit must be met through the use of a garage and for each multi-family unit it can be met by two paved spaces. 
(g)  If a specific land use is not included in the list of uses for which parking space requirements are specifically listed, then the required parking for that use shall be determined by using the required parking for the most similar use in its North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code. 
(Sec. 9.5.1; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 8-18-08)  
Sec. 34-9-32. - General parking requirements. 
(a)  Residential uses. For single-family dwelling, duplexes, multiple-family dwellings, and mobile homes, two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
(b)  Churches, other places of worship, public buildings, auditoriums, and other places of public assembly; one parking space for each four seats. 
(c)  General offices including professional, governmental or institutional, except as specifically enumerated in this article: For buildings less than 15,000 square feet, one parking space per 250 square feet of floor area. For buildings greater than 15,000 square feet, one parking space per 300 square feet. 
(d)  Shopping centers designed for retail uses and personal service establishments shall provide five parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area unless the proposed mix of land uses in the shopping center require a higher number in which case the higher number shall be required. 
(Sec. 9.5.2)  
Sec. 34-9-33. - Parking requirements for specific uses. 
(a)  Accommodations and food service (uses within NAICS Code 72): 
(1)  Bed and breakfast inns (uses within NAICS Code 721191): Two parking spaces, plus one parking space for each room offered for overnight accommodations. 
(2)  Hotels motels and similar lodging facilities (uses within NAICS Code 72111): One and one-tenth parking spaces per rentable room, plus one parking space for each three seats in the restaurant and lounge, plus one parking space per 500 square feet of conference rooms. 
(3)  Restaurants and bars (Uses within NAICS Code 722): One parking space per 100 square feet of floor area, plus one parking space for each four seats in an outdoor seating area. 
(b)  Agriculture, forestry and fishing (uses within NAICS Code 11): One parking space per 500 square feet of floor area. 
(c)  Arts, entertainment and recreation (uses within NAICS Code 71): 
(1)  Amusement game parlors, pool halls, and other similar recreational buildings: One parking space per 200 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Bowling centers (uses within NAICS Code 71395): Five parking spaces per lane. 
(3)  Dance studios, schools and halls (including martial arts and similar schools) (uses within NAICS Code 71399): One parking spaces per 200 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  Golf courses (uses within NAICS Code 71391): Four parking spaces per hole. 
(5)  Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (uses within NAICS Code 712): One parking space per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, plus one parking space per 2,500 square feet of outdoor display area. 
(6)  Public or private commercially operated recreational complexes and associated structures: Five parking spaces per gross acre, plus one parking space per 100 square feet of floor area for associated support buildings. 
(d)  Broadcasting and telecommunications (uses within NAICS Code 513): 
(1)  Cable networks and program distribution (uses within NAICS Code 7132): One parking space for every 300 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Radio and television broadcasting (uses within NAICS Code 5131): One parking space for every 300 square feet of floor area. 
(3)  Telecommunications (uses within NAICS Code 5133): One parking space for every 400 square feet of floor area. 
(e)  Business services (Uses within NAICS Code 54): 
(1)  Legal services (uses within NAICS Code 5411): One parking space per 250 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Veterinary services (uses within NAICS Code 541940): One parking space per 250 square feet of floor area. 
(3)  All other business services: One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(f)  Construction (uses within NAICS Code 23): One parking space per 500 square feet of floor area, plus one parking space per 3,000 square feet of outdoor storage area. 
(g)  Educational services (Uses within NAICS Code 611): 
(1)  Elementary and secondary schools (uses within NAICS Code 6111): 
(a)  High schools. One parking space for every four students based on the maximum design capacity of the school, plus one parking space for every employee. 
(b)  Junior high and elementary schools. Two parking spaces per classroom. 
(2)  Colleges, universities, business schools and technical/vocational schools (uses within NAICS Codes 6112 - 6115): One parking space for every two students based on the maximum design capacity of the school, plus one parking space for every employee. 
(3)  Other educational services: One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(h)  Finance, insurance and real estate (uses within NAICS Code 52—53): 
(1)  Banks and savings and loans (uses within NAICS Codes 521—522): 
(a)  For buildings up to 5,000 square feet in size: One parking space per 165 square feet of floor area. 
(b)  For buildings greater than 5,000 square feet, but not more than 10,000 square feet in size: 30 parking spaces, plus one parking space per 200 square feet of floor area over 5,000 square feet. 
(c)  For buildings greater than 10,000 square feet in size: 50 parking spaces, plus one parking space per 250 square feet over 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  All other finance (credit agencies, securities and commodities services), insurance and real estate offices: One parking space per 250 square feet of floor area. 
(i)  Health care and social assistance (uses within NAICS Code 62): 
(1)  Child care centers (Uses within NAICS Code 6244): One and one-half parking spaces per staff person required for the licensed capacity of the facility. In addition, day care facilities shall provide safe drop-off areas near the main entrance to the facility. 
(2)  Hospitals (uses within NAICS Code 622): One and three-tenths parking spaces per patient bed. 
(3)  Medical and dental offices and out-patient care centers (uses within NAICS Code 6211—6214): 
(a)  Buildings under 10,000 square feet: One parking space per 150 square feet of floor area. 
(b)  Buildings greater than 10,000 square feet: 67 parking spaces, plus one parking space per 200 square feet of floor area over 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  Nursing and personal care facilities (uses within NAICS Code 623): One parking space per two patient beds. 
(5)  All other health services: One parking space per 250 square feet of floor area. 
(6)  All other social service uses: One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(j)  Manufacturing (uses within NAICS Codes 31—33): 
(1)  Research and development facility: One parking space per 400 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  All other manufacturing: One parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area. 
(k)  Membership organizations (uses within NAICS Codes 8132—8134, 8139): One parking space per 200 square feet of floor area. 
(l)  Motion pictures (uses within NAICS Code 5121): 
(1)  Single motion picture theatres: One parking space per three seats. 
(2)  Multi-plex motion picture theatres: One parking space per four seats. Except, however, that such theatres may have their parking modified by the provisions of subsection 34-9-10(c) or multi-plex theatres located with shopping centers containing over 25,000 square feet of floor area which provide at least six parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area or multi-plex theatres located with shopping centers over 50,000 square feet of floor area which provide at least five parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area may provide parking according to the following standards: 
Gross Retail Area 	Parking Standard 
25,000—49,999 	1 space per 5 seats 
50,000—79,999 	1 space per 6 seats 
80,000—99,999 	1 space per 7 seats 
100,000 square feet and larger 	1 space per 8 seats 
 
(3)  Video tape rental (Uses within NAICS Code 53223): One parking space per 200 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  All other motion picture uses: One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(m)  Personal services (uses within NAICS Code 812): 
(1)  Barber shops, beauty shops, nail salons and tanning salons (uses within NAICS Code 8121): Two parking spaces per barber, beautician and/or manicurist station or one parking space per 100 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Funeral homes, mortuaries and similar facilities (uses within NAICS Code 81221): One parking space per 100 square feet of floor space devoted to parlors, individual funeral service rooms and similar areas, plus one parking space for each funeral vehicle kept on the premises, plus one parking space per employee. 
(3)  Laundry, cleaning and garment services (uses within NAICS Code 8123): 
(a)  Dry cleaning pick-up establishments: One parking space per 150 square feet of floor area for the pick-up area, plus one parking space per 300 square feet of floor area for clothing storage and other areas. 
(b)  All other uses: One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  All other personal service establishments: One space per 200 square feet of floor area. 
(n)  Repair and maintenance (uses within NAICS Code 811): 
(1)  Automobile repair and services (uses within NAICS Code 8111): One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area, plus one space per service bay. 
(2)  Miscellaneous repair services (uses within NAICS Codes 8112—8114): One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(o)  Transportation and warehousing (uses within NAICS Codes 48—49): 
(1)  Transportation (uses within NAICS Codes 48, 491—492): One parking space for every 400 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Warehousing and storage businesses (uses within NAICS Code 493) shall have their parking requirements based on the following: 
Building Size 	Parking Spaces 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. 
5,000 to 15,000 sq. ft. 	1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. 
15,001 to 40,000 sq. ft. 	1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. 
Greater than 40,001 sq. ft. 	1 space per 2,500 sq. ft. 
 
or one space per employee on the largest shift, whichever is greater. 
(p)  Utility uses (uses within NAICS Code 221): One parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area. 
(q)  Wholesale and retail trade (uses within NAICS Codes 42, 44—45): 
(1)  Automotive (uses within NAICS Codes 441, 447) [not including automobile repair (uses within NAICS Code 8111)]: 
(a)  Automobile, boat or other motor vehicle dealers (uses within NAICS Codes 4411, 4412): One parking space per 250 square feet of showroom floor area, plus two parking spaces per service bay. Parking spaces typically occupied by new or used automobiles for sale shall not be counted towards the required off-street parking requirements. Such parking spaces occupied by automobiles for sale do not have to meet the minimum parking space requirements specified in this Code. 
(b)  Auto parts stores (uses within NAICS Code 4413): One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(c)  Gasoline service stations (uses within NAICS Code 447): One parking space per 200 square feet of floor area, plus three parking spaces for every service bay. 
(d)  All other automotive uses: One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Building materials and garden supplies (uses within NAICS Code 444): One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area, plus one parking space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor display area. 
(3)  Furniture and home furnishings stores (including carpeting and major appliances) (uses within NAICS Code 442): One parking space per 300 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  General retail establishments (food, health and personal care, apparel and accessories, general merchandise, and miscellaneous retail stores) (uses within NAICS Codes 445—446, 448, 451—453): Five parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
(5)  Wholesaling businesses (uses within NAICS Code 42) shall have their parking requirements based on the following: 
Building Size 	Parking Spaces 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. 
5,000 to 15,000 sq. ft. 	1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. 
15,001 to 40,000 sq. ft. 	1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. 
Greater than 40,001 sq. ft. 	1 space per 2,500 sq. ft. 
 
or one space per employee on the largest shift, whichever is greater. 
(Sec. 9.5.3)  
Secs. 34-9-34—34-9-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - HANDICAPPED PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-9-41. - General. 
All applicants should be aware of the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 including provisions of the Act which were effective as of January 26, 1992. 
(Sec. 9.6.1)  
Sec. 34-9-42. - Handicapped parking spaces. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and each space shall have access to a five-foot wide access aisle. In addition, at least one of the handicapped parking spaces must be capable of accommodating a wheelchair van which shall be provided a parking space of eight feet plus an eight-foot wide discharge area. All handicapped parking spaces shall be identified by light blue lines and a handicapped symbol painted on the pavement, and by a handicapped parking space sign for each space. 
(Sec. 9.6.2)  
Sec. 34-9-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-9-44. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the city's intent to require sufficient off-street loading areas and to ensure that such areas are located in a convenient location out of site of the general public to the extent feasible. Such off-street loading areas shall be located at the rear of building whenever practical. 
Off-street loading areas shall be provided for every use identified in section 34-9-46. Loading areas which are utilized for the location of trash collection or compaction units shall be provided for and shall be in addition to the loading space requirements provided in section 34-9-46. 
(Sec. 9.7.1)  
Sec. 34-9-45. - Dimensions of spaces. 
Loading spaces shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet width by 35 feet length with a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. In addition, some uses may be required to provide loading zones of at least 60 feet in length to accommodate large tractor-trailers. 
(Sec. 9.7.2)  
Sec. 34-9-46. - Schedule of off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Residential uses. Any building or project containing more than 50 apartment dwelling units shall provide one loading space for each 200 dwelling units or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Offices and personal or community service establishments. One loading space shall be provided for each such use, including schools, medical or dental clinics, auditoriums or clubs, or similar use, having greater than 6,000 square feet of gross floor space. 
(c)  Every building consisting of over 3,000 square feet of floor area designed or adaptable for retail, warehouse, wholesale or manufacturing use shall be provided with loading spaces and zones as follows: 
Building Size in Sq. Ft. 	No. of Spaces 	No. of Zones* 
3,000—14,999 	1 	0 
15,000—39,999 	1 	1 
40,000—100,000 	1 	2 
Each additional 100,000 	1 additional space 	1 additional zone 
 
*Retail uses existing on the effective date of this Code may be allowed to substitute one off-street loading space per required off-street loading area if they can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that off-street loading areas are not necessary for their business. 
(Sec. 9.7.3)  
ARTICLE X. - SIGN REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 04-14, § 1, adopted June 21, 2004, amended article X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article X, §§ 34-10-1—34-10-16, pertained to sign regulations. 
 
Sec. 34-10-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide reasonable regulations for the erection and display of signs. These regulations are intended to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare through a comprehensive set of reasonable standards and requirements which preserve the appearance of the city. 
These regulations are not intended to prohibit the erection or display of a sign with a religious or political message, or any sign allowed or required by state or federal law provided that any such sign conforms to the size requirements and other reasonable requirements of this article. 
(Sec. 10.1; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-2. - General provisions. 
The provisions of this Code shall apply to signs in both residential and non-residential zoning districts of the city, unless a sign is specifically exempted by section 34-10-3 of this Code. Every sign shall comply with all other applicable ordinances of the city. In case of a conflict between the provisions of this Code and other applicable provisions, the more restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Sec. 10.2; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-3. - Exempt signs. 
With the exception of section 34-10-11 concerning design, construction, maintenance, and inspection, the provisions and regulations of this Code shall not apply to the following signs: 
(a)  Governmental and official signs including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Public notices and official notices posted or authorized by government officials in the performance of their duties. 
(2)  Signs for the control or direction of traffic and other appropriate public purposes. 
(b)  "No Parking", "No Trespassing" and "No Hunting" signs that are no larger than one square foot in gross sign area and have a sign height of six feet or less. In nonresidential zones, no trespassing and no hunting signs may be increased to three square feet in size. 
(c)  Driveway signs including the following: 
(1)  Signs at driveway entrances provided that such signs do not exceed one square foot in gross sign area and have a sign height of three feet or less. 
(2)  Residential address number located on a sign not larger than one square foot in gross sign area. If such information is contained on a freestanding sign, such sign shall be limited to a height of three feet. 
(d)  Illuminated or non-illuminated bulletin board signs (as defined in section 34-2-3) erected by the city, a place of worship, or a school provided that such signs do not exceed 24 square feet in gross sign area and the sign height does not exceed eight feet. 
(e)  Residential garage, patio or estate sale signs not exceeding six square feet per sign face with not more than two sign faces which are erected not more than three days prior to such sale and removed the day following the sale. 
(f)  Incidental signs as defined in section 34-2-3. 
(Sec. 10.2.1; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-4. - Rules for measuring sign frontage. 
In determining the maximum amount of signage allowed on a non-residential premises, sign frontage shall be the primary method of measurement. Every premises has sign frontage as defined in section 34-2-2. Application of sign measurement shall be as follows: 
(a)  If premises has sign frontage on one street, the total sign frontage shall be the lineal distance along the right-of-way line of the street. 
(b)  If a premises has sign frontage on two or more streets, the total sign frontage shall be the sum of the lineal distance measured along the right-of-way line of not more than two streets provided that the two streets intersect. 
(c)  If a premises has sign frontage on the parking lot of an office building or shopping center only, the total sign frontage shall be the lineal distance of the building space that adjoins the parking lot. 
(d)  If a premises has sign frontage on one street and on the parking lot of an office building or shopping center, the total sign frontage shall be the sum of the lineal distance measured along the street right of way and the lineal distance measured along the building space that adjoins the parking lot. 
(e)  If a premises has sign frontage on two parallel or roughly parallel streets, the sign frontage shall be the lineal distance along the right-of-way of one of the streets. 
(f)  If a premises has a common property line with the right-of-way of an interstate highway such common property line shall not be considered sign frontage. 
(g)  Any building or use specifically allowed signage on more than one sign frontage shall be limited to displaying or erecting signage on only two sign frontages. The third and any subsequent frontage shall be devoid of any on-premise permanent signs except for a rear entrance sign of not more than two square feet in size. Moreover, when a sign is erected at the street intersection corner of a parcel or at the intersection of a building front, and is situated at an angle so as to be visible from both streets or both frontages, the sign shall not exceed the maximum area allowed for the longest front footage of building occupancy or street frontage. 
(Sec. 10.2.2; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-5. - Illuminated signs. 
(a)  In residentially-zoned areas, no illuminated signs shall be permitted except permanent signs for places of worship, schools, or government owned and operated buildings, and except for signs associated with a pre-existing nonconforming use. Signs associated with a pre-existing nonconforming use shall be subject to the regulations in subsection 34-10-5(b). 
(b)  Illuminated signs in all areas of the city shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded and/or directed away from the residents or occupants of surrounding properties. The intensity of such light shall not exceed one-half foot-candle at the property line of any adjoining residentially-zoned property. 
(3)  No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights, or other illuminating device of variable light intensity, brightness or color. 
(4)  Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(Sec. 10.2.3; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-6. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  Flags. Flags shall be permitted in any zoning district without a permit. Each lot or parcel of land in the city shall be limited to the display of not more than five flags. Parcels of land in excess of five acres in size, however, may display additional flags provided that there are not more than five flags displayed per five acres of land area. No flag shall exceed 64 square feet in size. Within five days prior to and three days following a national holiday such as Independence Day, Memorial Day or Veteran's Day, there shall be no limitation on the number of U.S. flags displayed on any parcel of land within the city. Flag poles may be up to 25 feet in height in residential districts except on lots of at least one acre which may have flag poles up to 35 feet in height. In other districts they shall be subject to the maximum building height limitations. 
(b)  Sign setbacks. All permanent signs shall be set back from property lines according to the regulations specified in this Code or as otherwise required by any other applicable city ordinance. Temporary signs shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of pavement of any road and shall be located outside of the right-of-way of any city, county or state road. 
(c)  Sign height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed the heights specified in this Code. If no height limit is specified in the regulations for a specific freestanding sign, such sign shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(Sec. 10.2.4; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-7. - Signs permitted in all zoning districts. 
The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts subject to all of the limitations and provisions stated in this Code: 
(a)  Residential development identification signs which are permanent signs designating a multiple-family development, subdivision or neighborhood. Such signs shall be limited to 32 square feet per sign face with a maximum of two sign faces. Each such development shall be limited to one double-faced sign or two single-faced signs per entrance. A permit is required for a residential development identification sign. In addition, directional signs internal to a development may also be approved by the development administrator or the development administrator's designee provided that such signs are not more than three square feet in size. A permit is required for such signs. 
(b)  A residential sign provided, however, that there shall be only one such sign on any lot or parcel of land. Such sign may contain a religious or political message, but may not contain a commercial message. A residential sign shall have a maximum gross sign area of six square feet per sign face and a maximum of two sign faces. No permit shall be required for such a sign provided that the sign is erected by the owner or with the owner's permission. Election signs are regulated in subsection 34-10-7(f). 
(c)  A real estate sign may advertise the property for sale, lease or rent, but is limited to six square feet per sign face and a maximum of two sign faces. Real estate signs shall be removed from the premises ten days after the premises is sold, leased or rented. No permit is required for a real estate sign. 
(d)  In addition to a real estate sign allowed in subsection 34-10-7(c), two temporary open house signs shall also be allowed. One such sign shall be allowed on site and one is allowed off-site. Open house signs shall be limited to a maximum gross sign area of six square feet per sign face and a maximum of two sign faces, shall be permitted for up to three consecutive days and shall be removed no later than one day after the open house. A minimum of four days shall transpire prior to posting any open house sign on the same lot or parcel for a second or subsequent time. No permit shall be required for such a sign. 
(e)  Institutional signs concerning institutional uses such as schools, country clubs, monasteries, convents and places of worship. Such institutions shall be allowed one permanent wall sign and one permanent freestanding sign. In addition, a place of worship having a significant accessory use or uses, such as a day care facility, may have one additional freestanding sign. No permanent sign shall contain a sign face with an area exceeding 32 square feet in size, and no freestanding sign shall have more than two sign faces. One of the permanent signs may be a bulletin board sign with changeable copy. In addition, such institutions shall be permitted one temporary sign which may be a single or double-faced sign although no single sign face shall exceed six square feet and the total gross area of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. Display of such sign shall be limited to a period of 60 days. Institutional signs in non-residential zoning districts may compute allowable signage based on the on-premise permanent sign size allowances in subsection 34-10-8(b) in lieu of the requirements specified in this paragraph. Permits are required for all signs allowed by this paragraph. 
(f)  Election signs may be erected with the property owner's permission. Such sign shall not exceed six square feet and the total gross area of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. There shall be no limit on the number of signs allowed on a given property nor shall there be any limit on the time duration of display. No permits are required for election signs. 
(g)  For subdivisions under development, a subdivision information sign, as defined in section 34-2-3, may be permitted for each entrance to the subdivision. The size of these signs shall be limited to 36 square feet each. In addition, an identification sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area may be permitted for each model home in the subdivision. Permits shall be required for subdivision identification signs and for signs for model homes. 
(h)  Special event balloons may be allowed by the development administrator or the development administrator's designee for significant events or grand openings. A permit is required for special event balloons. Such balloons shall not be allowed to exceed a height of 45 feet above ground level, shall be displayed for not more than four continuous days on any site and shall not be displayed for more than 20 days total on any site during any calendar year. 
(Sec. 10.3.1; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 10-13, § 1, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 34-10-8. - Signs permitted in non-residential zoning districts. 
(a)  Types of signs. In addition to the signs allowed by section 34-10-7, other signs are allowed in non-residential zoning districts which are necessary to identify and promote business, industry and institutions. These signs include the following: 
(1)  On-premise permanent signs including wall signs, canopy signs, window signs, projecting signs and freestanding signs. Projecting signs shall only be allowed within the DC district. 
(2)  Special purpose signs. 
(3)  Temporary signs. 
(4)  Billboards (See section 34-10-9). 
(b)  On-premise permanent signs. On-premise permanent signs include wall signs, canopy signs, window signs, projecting signs and freestanding signs. The total square footage of all on-premise permanent signs allowed on a site shall not exceed one square foot of gross sign area per linear foot of sign frontage as defined in section 34-2-3. When calculating the total square footage of on-premise permanent signs, only one sign face of a double faced sign shall be counted. Additional regulations are as follows: 
(1)  The total gross sign area of all signs located on any wall of a building (including wall signs, canopy signs and permanent window signs) shall not exceed ten percent of the area of such wall. In addition, no individual wall, canopy or window sign shall exceed 100 square feet in size. Projecting signs shall not exceed one square foot of sign area per linear foot of sign frontage. A wall sign or a projecting sign may include automated time and temperature information provided that no other part of the sign moves or appears to move. Sign permits shall be required for all wall signs, canopy signs and permanent window signs. 
(2)  Freestanding signs shall be allowed based on the amount of sign frontage. Sign permits are required for all freestanding signs. The sign frontages specified below shall be based on a single frontage. Two or more sign frontages shall not be combined to meet the minimum frontages. 
(a)  Sites with less than 100 feet of sign frontage shall not be allowed a freestanding sign. 
(b)  Sites with between 100 and 150 feet of sign frontage shall be allowed a low monument sign not exceeding eight feet in height. Such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet of gross sign area per sign face with not more than two sign faces. 
(c)  Sites with 150 feet or more of sign frontage shall be allowed one freestanding sign, not to exceed 20 feet in height, or one low monument sign allowed in paragraph (b) above. Such freestanding sign shall not exceed 64 square feet in gross sign area per sign face with not more than two sign faces. Such freestanding signs may include time and temperature information. 
(3)  The total gross sign area of all permanent window signage, striping, incidental signs and paper/temporary window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total clear glass area along the portion of the storefront on which the signs are located. Sign permits shall not be required for incidental window signs that do not exceed one square foot in gross sign area or temporary window signs that do not exceed six square feet in gross sign area. 
(c)  Off-premise permanent signage. 
(1)  Circumstances. Off premise permanent signage is allowed only under the following circumstances: 
(a)  The sign is constructed as a pole sign, monument, or free standing structure; 
(b)  The sign is a maximum of 20 square feet on each side, with a maximum of two sides; 
(c)  For square footage towards permitted sign aggregate, only one side is counted. 
(d)  Permitted sign area shall be proportionate to the size and needs of the commercial operation served by the off-site sign. Planning commission shall make the determination regarding appropriate size. 
(2)  CUP required/requirements. 
(a)  The property owner must provide written permission with termination dates linked to annual review events. 
(b)  Business owner must provide justification of need - e.g., no legitimate frontage/ exposure to traffic. 
(c)  Sign must be kept in good condition. 
(d)  Business must remain viable (a business closed for greater than 90 days shall be the basis for sign removal). 
(e)  Individually calculated removal deposit must be paid to the city. 
(f)  Annual review is required. Application for renewal, nominal fee, and reissuance for continued use. The city may require additional or modified conditions at these annual reviews. 
(d)  Special purpose signs. Signs authorized in this paragraph are not to be included in calculating the allowable gross sign area for on-premise permanent signs. Sign permits are required for all special purpose signs. 
(1)  Parking direction signs. One freestanding parking direction sign per direction, which may be internally illuminated, shall be permitted for each driveway, provided the sign does not exceed three square feet in gross sign area per face, the sign height does not exceed three feet, and no portion of the sign shall extend into the public right-of-way. If the sign is located at a private driveway, the sign may contain the address of the business or institution on the premises. 
(2)  Parking regulation signs. One non-illuminated parking regulation sign (such as "no parking", "parking reserved for" and similar signs), not exceeding five square feet in gross sign area and not exceeding ten feet in sign height, shall be permitted for each commercial or public parking lot. Parking lots with more than 20 parking spaces shall be permitted one such sign for each 20 parking spaces. In addition, a handicapped, van accessible or similar sign shall be allowed for each handicapped parking space. The size and height of such sign shall be no larger or higher than required to be in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. 
(3)  Covered walkway signs. A sign not to exceed two square feet in gross sign area, may be hung from the ceiling of a covered walkway that is attached to the front of a retail store. Such a sign shall not exceed 18 inches in drop from the bottom of the said sign to the ceiling surface of the covered walkway, nor shall the bottom of said sign be less than seven feet above the sidewalk surface it is hanging over. Only one covered walkway sign per business shall be allowed. Such a sign shall be hung perpendicular to the retail store front so as to be beneficial to pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Menu boards. Menu boards at drive-in restaurants or drive-through windows at restaurants may be allowed provided the message on such menu board is not legible off the premises. 
(e)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs allowed in non-residential zoning districts include on-site construction signs, temporary advertising signs, real estate signs, election signs, and special event signs. 
(1)  On-site construction sign. Only one such sign per entire development denoting the owner, architect, engineer, consultant, developer, lender and/or contractor, not to exceed ten feet in height from top of sign to top of grade or two feet in height from bottom of sign to top of grade, shall be permitted. Such a sign shall be erected out of the public right-of-way and shall be removed ten days after the receipt of an occupancy permit for the building or development. The size of such sign shall be based on the formula in subsection 34-10-8(d)(7). Sign permits are required for on-site construction signs. 
(2)  Temporary advertising signs. The development administrator or the development administrator's designee may issue a permit for temporary signs advertising special or promotions or grand openings. Temporary signs as authorized herein may be displayed on a premises for a period not exceeding 30 consecutive days, and a maximum of 90 days per calendar year The advertisement contained on the temporary sign shall pertain only to the business, industry, or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected. The temporary advertising sign may be a sign or banner affixed on poles, wires, ropes, or may be streamers, an "A" frame sign or a similar device. The size of such sign shall be based on the formula in subsection 34-10-8(d)(7). 
In addition, "A" frame signs on grade shall be permitted and limited to: 
(a)  Size: 30" horizontal x 42" vertical for each of the two panels. 
(b)  Location shall not hinder vehicular "lines of site" at intersections, nor unduly impair pedestrian passage. Sign must be located on premises or immediately adjacent in sidewalk area. 
(c)  Such signs may be permitted for up to one year. Annual renewal is required. 
(d)  Development administrator may refuse requests based upon congestion and other site related conditions. 
(3)  Real estate signs. In lieu of the real estate signs allowed by subsection 34-10-8(c), a real estate sign in a non-residential zoning district may exceed six square feet per sign face based on the formula in subsection 34-10-8(d)(7), provided that the sign is limited to advertising the premises on which it is located. Real estate signs shall be removed from the premises ten days after the premises is sold, leased or rented. No permit shall be required for such signs. 
(4)  Election signs. Temporary election signs in non-residential zoning districts may exceed six square feet per sign based on the formula in subsection 34-10-8(d)(7). All other requirements of subsection 34-10-7(f) apply to election signs in non-residential districts. No permit shall be required for election signs. 
(5)  Special event signs. Signs or banners promoting or announcing a special event sponsored by a governmental or non-profit agency may be approved by the development administrator or the development administrator's designee. Such signs shall not be erected more than 45 days prior to the event and shall be removed within ten days following the event. The size of such sign shall be based on the formula in subsection 34-10-8(d)(7). A permit shall be required for such signs. 
(6)  Subdivision direction signs. Subdivision direction signs, as defined in section 34-2-3, are permitted in the NC, DC, GC, LI, GI and AP districts based on the criteria in this paragraph. A permit shall be required for such signs. The size of such sign shall be based on the formula in subsection 34-10-8(d)(7). These are considered off-premise signs and only one subdivision direction sign shall be allowed per lot or parcel of land. Such signs shall be removed within ten days after the subdivision is completed. Such signs shall be permitted for one year and, at the end of that year, the permit may be renewed for six-month increments of time. 
(7)  Size limitations. All temporary signs in non-residential zoning districts shall be limited to the size limitations enumerated in this paragraph. The maximum size of temporary signs shall be based on the sign frontage of the lot or building space (if the business is located within a shopping center). In the case of corner lots, only one sign frontage shall be used in calculating the allowable size of the sign. 
Sign Frontage 	Maximum Size of Sign 
per Sign Face 
Less than 25 feet 	6 square feet 
25—50 feet 	12 square feet 
50—100 feet 	18 square feet 
101—150 feet 	24 square feet 
150—200 feet 	30 square feet 
Greater than 200 feet 	36 square feet 
 
(8)  Temporary window signs. A temporary window sign not exceeding six square feet in size may be placed in the window of a commercial establishment without a permit provided that the total square footage of all signs placed on or in the windows of the establishment do not exceed 25 percent of the total window area. No permit shall be required for such temporary window signs. 
(Sec. 10.3.2; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 10-13, § 1, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 34-10-9. - Billboards. 
(a)  Billboards limited. Billboards must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  It must be located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of Interstate Highway 64. Billboards are not permitted in any other location in the city limits. 
(2)  A billboard may only be placed on lands zoned GC, LI, GI and AP, and must be within the airport overlay zoning district. 
(3)  The billboard must comply with all provisions of paragraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section. 
(b)  Size, height and mounting of billboards. The size, height and mounting of billboards shall be regulated by the following: 
(1)  The maximum area for any one billboard shall be 200 square feet with a maximum vertical dimension of 15 feet and a maximum horizontal dimension of 20 feet, inclusive of border and trim but excluding the base or apron, supports, and other structural members. 
(2)  The maximum height of a billboard shall not exceed 35 feet above the natural grade where the sign is installed. 
(3)  No sign shall be located on the roof of a building or on a non-sign structure. 
(4)  Billboards may not be stacked such that a billboard sign face is placed immediately above or below another billboard sign face. 
(c)  Separation requirements. No billboard or any part of the billboard structure shall be erected: 
(1)  Within 50 feet of the property line of the lot on which the billboard structure is located. 
(2)  Within 200 feet of any residentially-zoned property. 
(3)  Within 50 feet of any existing building. 
(4)  Within 200 feet of any park, playground, school, library or place of worship. 
(5)  Within 50 feet of an overhead power line. 
(6)  Within 5,000 feet of another billboard. 
(d)  Permits required. A permit from the city is required to erect a billboard. 
(e)  Inspection reports. Whenever a billboard is erected or maintained within the city, the owner of such billboard shall cause an inspection of it at least every five years and a photocopy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the development administrator. 
(Sec. 10.3.3; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 5-21-07)  
Sec. 34-10-10. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are specifically prohibited in the city: 
(a)  Signs visible from a public right-of-way that imitate, blend or conflict with, or that may be confused with traffic signals and signs. Such signs shall include, but not be limited to, signs that are imitations of "stop", "go", "caution", "danger" or "warning". 
(b)  Signs that are of a size, location, movement or illumination as may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device or which might obstruct from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(c)  Signs on public land, except those erected at the direction of, or with the permission of, an appropriate public authority. 
(d)  Strips or strings of lights used to call attention to a use or occupancy by outlining property lines, roof lines, doors, windows, wall edges or other architectural features of a building site, or which are suspended from or attached to poles or similar structures. Exempted from this provision are holiday lighting displayed from November 1 through January 15. 
(e)  Moving signs, including those of which all or any part of the sign moves or appears to move. This prohibition against moving signs shall extend to devices including strings of light bulbs and rotating signs, whether part of any signs are maintained as an independent feature, but does not include an automated time and temperature sign that is limited to display of time and temperature information. 
(f)  Commercial message signs in residential zoning districts. The only exceptions are for real estate signs described in subsection 34-10-7(c), and a sign that is used in connection with a pre-existing nonconforming use as defined by this Code. A sign of that type shall be subject to subsection 34-10-5(b) so long as the nonconforming use continued. 
(g)  Snipe signs as defined in section 34-2-3, except as follows: 
(i)  Signs can advertise only garage, yard sales or auction events. 
(ii)  Signs cannot be erected more than five days before or remain standing more than two days after the advertised event. 
(iii)  Signs cannot be placed on public poles or trees. Signs must be placed on free standing stakes. 
(iv)  Responsible party must remove the sign during time specified above, or the city will remove the sign and the responsible party will be billed. 
(h)  Unkempt or unsightly signs as defined in section 34-2-3. 
(i)  Roof signs as defined in section 34-2-3. 
(j)  Any sign structure which no longer supports a sign. Exempted from this section is a sign structure which is temporarily void of a sign due to a permitted alteration or repair. A sign permit or an application for a sign permit for this alteration or repair must be on file with the city and said alteration or repair must be completed within 30 days of the issuance of the approved sign permit. 
(k)  Permanent or temporary window signs above the ceiling of the second floor including lettering painted or applied to glass. 
(l)  Portable signs as defined in section 34-2-3. 
(m)  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons, except for special event balloons. 
(n)  Signs extending over a roadway except projecting signs in the DC district. 
(o)  Signs that advertise an activity or business no longer conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. Such signs shall be removed within six months after such activity or business ceases operation. The development administrator or the development administrator's designee may grant one extension of not more than six months for this removal. 
(p)  Signs erected in a way that would impair the view of motorists at intersections or along public streets. 
(q)  Animated signs (no physical movement of the actual sign), except LED or like electronic message display boards. 
(r)  Any sign not permitted by sections 34-10-7 to 34-10-9 or exempted by section 34-10-3 is prohibited. 
(Sec. 10.4; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 7-2-07)  
Sec. 34-10-11. - Design, construction, maintenance and inspection. 
All signs shall comply with the following general requirements for design, construction, maintenance and inspection: 
(a)  Sign faces. When a sign is allowed two sign faces, the sign faces shall be parallel to one another and not more than 14 inches apart unless specifically authorized to deviate from this requirement by an applicable portion of this Code. 
(b)  Projections. No sign shall project beyond a property line or into a public right-of-way, except traffic control signs and permitted projecting signs in the DC district authorized by Unified Land Development Code. Projecting signs in the DC district shall not extend more than six feet from the wall of any building nor more than four feet into a road right-of-way. 
(c)  Compliance with Building Codes. Erection, construction, installation or placement of any sign requiring a sign permit shall comply with all applicable building codes. The development administrator or the development administrator's designee may deny approval of the erection, construction, installation or placement of any sign which does not meet all minimum standards as set forth in the building codes of the city. 
(d)  Sign permits for freestanding signs. A sign permit shall be required for all on-premise permanent freestanding signs. Any sign permit application for a freestanding sign over ten feet in height shall include sealed engineering drawings of the sign and foundation including a wind-load analysis. 
(e)  Wind loads. All signs, except those attached flat 30 pounds per square foot of sign area. 
(f)  Inspection of wall signs. All wall signs shall be inspected by the city prior to being installed on a wall to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(g)  Maintenance of signs. All signs and related structures shall be maintained in good repair, free of rust, peeling, flaking, fading, broken or cracked surfaces, and broken or missing letters. 
(h)  Unsafe signs. All signs and related structures shall be maintained in a safe, clean and attractive condition. Whenever the development administrator or the development administrator's designee determines that a sign has become structurally unsafe or endangers life or property or is not being maintained in good repair, a notice shall be sent to the owner or person in charge of the sign that the sign be made safe, repaired or removed. The owner or person in charge of the sign shall have ten days from receipt of such notice in which to comply based on the provisions in subsection 34-10-16(b). Failure to comply shall be a violation of this Code subject to section 34-10-16. 
(Sec. 10.5; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-12. - Compliance and amortization. 
Signs are required to be in compliance with this Code as follows: 
(a)  New signs. No new sign may be constructed or erected after the effective date of this Code, unless the sign conforms to all the provisions of this Code and any required sign permit has been issued by the development administrator or the development administrator's designee. Nothing in this Section shall relieve the owner or user of a nonconforming sign from the provisions of this Code regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs specified in section 34-10-11. 
(b)  Repair or replacement of damaged nonconforming signs. Any existing nonconforming sign that is destroyed, deteriorated or damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation, after the effective date of this Code, shall not be rebuilt, repaired or replaced unless in conformity with the provisions of this Code. Repair of such sign shall not affect provisions of any of the other paragraphs of this section. 
(c)  Amortization of signs erected without a permit. Any sign that was erected without a permit prior to the effective date of this Code shall be removed or brought into conformance with this Code within six months of such effective date except that signs used in connection with a pre-existing nonconforming use shall be subject to paragraph (e). 
(d)  Alterations to nonconforming signs. No existing nonconforming sign may be altered in structure or copy, relocated or replaced after the effective date of this Code. 
(e)  Amortization of nonconforming signs (within city limits). All signs within the city limits on the effective date of this Code erected with a permit and signs used in connection with a pre-existing nonconforming use shall be brought into compliance with all provisions of this Code within five years of the effective date of this Code. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any sign receiving a variance after the effective date of this Code. 
(f)  Amortization of nonconforming signs (annexed areas). All signs on property annexed into the city after the effective date of this Code shall be brought into compliance with all provisions of this Code within five years of the effective date of annexation. 
(Sec. 10.6; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-13. - Variances. 
(a)  Where there are practical difficulties of unnecessary hardship in carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this article, the planning commission may vary or modify the application of specific regulations for any permitted form of signage so that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(b)  A variance from this article may be granted for any permitted form of signage where it is found that because of the limitations on character, size, number, or dimensions of signs, or the regulations controlling the erection or installation of a sign, the applicant would be subject to practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. Unnecessary hardship is not considered the loss of possible advantage, economic loss or gain, or mere inconvenience to the applicant. 
(c)  The procedures and criteria for granting a variance from the regulations in this Code shall be as set out in section 34-11-4 except that such variance is reviewed and approved by the planning commission. 
(Sec. 10.7; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-14. - Sign permits. 
No sign permitted under sections 34-10-7 to 34-10-9 which is required to have a sign permit shall be erected, constructed, painted or placed upon any building or premises within the city until a permit therefore has been issued by the development administrator or the development administrator's designee. 
(a)  No sign permit shall be issued until after an application therefore has been filed in the office of the development administrator accompanied by duplicate scale or dimensional drawings showing the plans and specifications, dimensions, the material of which the sign is to be constructed, the details of construction thereof, including loads, stresses and anchorage, the estimated cost thereof, and in the case of freestanding signs the proposed location with reference to street lines and the walls of adjacent buildings, if any. When a proposed sign is to be attached to a building or other independent structure, the drawings shall show the position of the sign on the supporting structure, the method of attachment to such structure and the character of the structural member to which such attachment is made. In addition, each sign permit application shall be accompanied by information on the size and location of all existing signs on the site. 
(b)  All applications for permits to erect signs shall be filed by the owner or lessee of the premises, or shall be accompanied by written consent of the owner or lessee, of the property upon which such sign is to be erected. 
(c)  If the development administrator or the development administrator's designee fails to issue a permit after 90 days of the receipt of a completed application, the applicant may appeal to the planning commission for issuance of the necessary permit. 
(d)  The applicant must secure a sign permit and pay any appropriate fees associated therewith prior to erecting any sign requiring a sign permit. 
(Sec. 10.8; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-15. - Fees. 
The fee for sign permits shall be $2.00 per square foot of gross sign area except that: 
(a)  The minimum fee for any sign permit shall be $30.00; 
(b)  The fee for a double faced sign shall be based on the area of the largest sign face. 
(Sec. 10.9; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
Sec. 34-10-16. - Enforcement and sign removal. 
(a)  Inspection of signs. All signs may be inspected by the development administrator or the development administrator's designee to determine if the sign is insecure, in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe. Signs may also be inspected to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Notice to remove unsafe sign. When any sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, or if any sign exists or is installed or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Code with respect to construction or safety, the owner, person or firm maintaining such sign shall correct the deficiencies or violation or remove the sign within ten days after receiving notice from the development administrator or the development administrator's designee; provided, however, that if such sign constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the development administrator or the development administrator's designee shall order immediate correction or removal of such sign. 
(c)  Removal of nonconforming signs. Any sign which is not erected, constructed or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Code shall be removed by the owner within 15 days of notice by the city. If the owner fails to act after 15 days notice to the owner of the property such sign may be removed by the city and the cost thereof charged to the owner of, or person maintaining, such sign. 
(Sec. 10.10; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-21-04)  
ARTICLE XI. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 
 
Sec. 34-11-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to preserve and protect the character of the city by ensuring that new construction meets the design guidelines of this article. This article is intended to ensure that new construction is consistent with the architectural style, scale and mass of existing buildings in the vicinity. Moreover, new construction should be comparable in design and building materials. 
(Sec. 11.1)  
Sec. 34-11-2. - Architectural review board. 
(a)  The planning commission shall provide the architectural review functions for the city. It is intended that the review of architectural features of development proposals will be within the context of comprehensive evaluations included in: subdivisions, site plan reviews, conditional use permits (CUP), planned development procedures (PDP), and other project evaluations.  
Sec. 34-11-3. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all new construction in the O, NC, DC, GC, LI, GI and AP zoning districts, and other applications wherein major site plan review is required.  
Sec. 34-11-4. - Review of development applications. 
(A)  Submission of development applications. The standard applications required for site plan review, subdivision maps, etc., are the applications for submittal of architectural review items. Submittal requirements are referenced on the standard site plan submittal checklist, which may be amended from time to time. The submittal and review process shall be consistent with the type of process appropriate to the development. No separate forms or reviews are required.  
Sec. 34-11-5. - Appeals of architectural review board decisions. 
Any decisions regarding architectural review may be appealed to the city council for review.  
Sec. 34-11-6. - Design standards. 
Items considered for architectural review may include design elements and directives as found in the balance of this section. While adherence to the below-listed standards is mandatory, the city accepts that individual site plans may have combinations of design and materials that are acceptable while not complying with specific items in these sections. 
Additional design elements may be determined to be similar and consistent with those listed. In each case the development administrator shall consider the "unlisted" design element's compatibility in the proposed location. He also may determine the design element to be "not permitted" but suitable for conditional use consideration. 
(a)  Commercial and institutional buildings. 
(1)  Permitted building materials. Commercial and institutional buildings shall have exterior material of brick, stucco, textured masonite, stone masonry, concrete brick, permastone, or glass. Glass block may be used as an accent material. Other similar building materials may be approved by the architectural review board. 
(2)  Prohibited building materials. No new commercial or institutional building and no remodeled, enlarged or diminished commercial or institutional building shall have an exterior material of metal, smooth masonite, concrete cinder block, tilt-up concrete, vinyl or wood. 
(3)  Trim and accent materials. Trim and accent materials may include architectural metal provided that it does not exceed 15 percent of the exterior material of the building. 
(4)  Building colors. Building colors, except for trim colors, shall be subdued earth tones, white or similar suitable colors. Earth tone colors include, but are not limited to, mauve, beige, taupe brown, granite gray, gray blue, greenish blue and dark brown. Florescent colors shall not be allowed. Building colors that are neither specifically permitted nor prohibited by this paragraph may be allowed by the architectural review board if they are deemed similar to a permitted building color. The architectural review board may adopt a list of building colors that are permitted to supplement the list in this paragraph, provided that these additional colors are not specifically prohibited by this paragraph. 
(5)  Trim colors/window colors. Trim colors and the colors of window frames shall be earth tones, white or a color that clearly complements the main color of the building. Florescent colors shall be not allowed. 
(6)  Roofs. Roofs on buildings with two or more stories may be flat or pitched as approved by the architectural review board. Roofs on one-story buildings shall not be flat or nearly flat except for the center portion of the roof that is not visible from ground level. At least 60 percent of the roof area on a one-story building, when seen in plan view, must be pitched. The pitch of such roof shall have at least a four-foot rise to 12-foot horizontal run but shall not exceed a 12-foot rise to 12-foot horizontal run. All roofs shall be subject to review and approval of the architectural review board for materials, pitch and color. Colors for roof materials shall not deviate from the list of permissible building colors unless such material is a shade of dark gray or black that is not designed to call attention to the building or such material is not visible from any nearby property or roadway. 
(7)  Garages. Garages may be front, side or rear-entry although attempts shall be made to design all commercial and institutional buildings such that buildings do not have garage doors facing any street. Garages should conform architecturally to the building and its environs. 
(8)  Driveways. Driveways shall be set back at least four feet from the side lot line. Driveways and parking pads shall consist of only stabilized surfaces such as asphalt or concrete. Driveways in agricultural zoned areas in the city limits, five acres minimum, shall be allowed to use rock, gravel, or oil/chip. The parking pad however adjacent to building shall be paved with stabilized surfaces such as asphalt or concrete (minimum 20 feet in length). 
(9)  Walkways. All walkways shall consist of stone, brick or concrete. 
(10)  Sod required. No slopes shall be permitted in excess of 3:1. Except, however, that sod shall not be required for areas of the site which have a slope exceeding a 3:1 pitch prior to site development and which will remain in an undisturbed natural state. Sod shall be required on all storm water runoff areas. 
(11)  Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment on commercial and institutional buildings (such as air conditioning units) shall be completely screened from view. All buildings shall be architecturally designed so that roof-mounted equipment is hidden from all sides of the building when the building is ready for occupancy. In addition, any mechanical equipment shall be hidden so that it is not visible from the property line of the business or industrial park or subdivision in which the building is located or from any residential property. 
(12)  Front facade. The front facade of every commercial and institutional building excluding window glass shall be comprised of brick or stone masonry unless alternative material is approved by the architectural review board based on the design of the building. All buildings shall present a good, well-maintained frontage, harmonious in design to the surrounding vicinity. If architecturally acceptable, glass could be considered for part of the front facade. 
(13)  Facades of one-story buildings. All facades of one-story buildings shall consist primarily of solid materials. The combined area of windows, glass, and decorative glass block shall not exceed 30 percent of the area of any facade on a one-story building unless approved by the architectural review board. 
(b)  Industrial and major recreational buildings. 
(1)  Permitted building materials. Industrial and major recreational buildings shall have exterior material of brick, stucco, textured masonite, stone masonry, tilt-up concrete, pre-painted steel siding, concrete brick, permastone, or glass. Other metal materials may be approved by the architectural review board provided that other materials are used for part of the building. Glass block may be used as an accent material. Other similar building materials may be approved by the architectural review board. 
(2)  Prohibited building materials. No new industrial or major recreational building and no remodeled, enlarged or diminished industrial or major recreational building shall have an exterior material of smooth masonite, concrete cinder block, vinyl or wood. 
(3)  Building colors. Building colors, except for trim colors, shall be earth tones, white or similar suitable colors. Earth tone colors include, but are not limited to, beige, taupe brown, granite gray, gray blue, greenish blue and dark brown. Florescent colors shall not be allowed. Building colors that are neither specifically permitted nor prohibited by this paragraph may be allowed by the architectural review board if they are deemed similar to a permitted building color. The architectural review board may adopt a list of building colors that are permitted to supplement the list in this paragraph, provided that these additional colors are not specifically prohibited by this paragraph. 
(4)  Trim colors/window colors. Trim colors and the colors of window frames shall be earth tones, white or a color that clearly complements the main color of the building. Florescent colors shall be not allowed. 
(5)  Roofs. New roofs shall match the pitch of any existing roof. Roofs shall be subject to review and approval of the architectural review board for materials and pitch. 
(6)  Garages. Garages may be front, side or rear-entry although attempts shall be made to design all industrial and major recreational buildings such that buildings do not have garage doors facing any street. Garages should conform architecturally to the building and its environs. 
(7)  Driveways. Driveways shall be set back at least four feet from the side lot line. Driveways and parking pads shall consist of only stabilized surfaces such as asphalt or concrete. 
(8)  Sod required. No slopes shall be permitted in excess of 3:1. Except, however, that sod shall not be required for areas of the site which have a slope exceeding a 3:1 pitch prior to site development and which will remain in an undisturbed natural state. Sod shall be required on all storm water runoff areas. 
(9)  Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment on industrial and major recreational buildings (such as air conditioning units) shall be completely screened from view. All buildings shall be architecturally designed so that roof-mounted equipment is hidden from all sides of the building when the building is ready for occupancy. In addition, any mechanical equipment shall be hidden so that it is not visible from the property line of the business or industrial park or subdivision in which the building is located or from any residential property. 
(Secs. 11.6.1, 11.6.2; Ord. No. 12-110, § 1, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1(Att.), 2-20-18)  
ARTICLE XII. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS 
 
Sec. 34-12-1. - General procedure. 
(a)  Classification of subdivisions. Before any land is subdivided the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures, which include two principal steps for a minor subdivision, and two principal steps for a major subdivision. 
(1)  Minor subdivision. 
(a)  Approval by development administrator. 
(b)  Final plat. 
(2)  Major subdivision. 
(a)  Preliminary plat approval. 
(b)  Final plat. 
(b)  Subdivision process. All preliminary plats for major subdivisions shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation, then shall be reviewed by the city council. The planning commission's review shall conclude with a recommendation for approval, recommendation for approval with conditions, or recommendation for disapproval. 
(c)  Official submission dates. For the purposes of these regulations, for major subdivisions, the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent of the applicant and planning commission, shall constitute the official submission date of the plat on which the statutory period required for formal approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the preliminary or final plat shall commence to run. 
(d)  Coordination of flexible zoning application with subdivision approval. 
(1)  [Intent.] It is the intent of these regulations that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of flexible zoning applications under other provisions of this Code. The plans required for flexible zoning applications shall be submitted in a form to satisfy the requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  General requirement. Whenever the Code authorizes flexible zoning applications which permit density of buildings and structures different from those which are allowed as of right within the zoning district in which the land is situated, and the application entails the division of land into two or more lots, subdivision approval shall be required in addition to all other procedures and approvals required in this Code. Flexible zoning applications shall include, but not be limited to, all conditional uses and planned development procedures, and shall apply to all such applications, whether before the city council, board of zoning appeals, planning commission or an administrative officer. 
(3)  Procedure to be followed. 
(a)  Preliminary plat approval required. Whenever a flexible zoning application is submitted which involves a subdivision of land as set forth in subsection 34-12-1(d)(2) of these regulations, the application shall be submitted first to the official authorized to accept the application under the provisions of this Code. The application shall be made on the forms required for a plat and shall include all information required of a preliminary plat application. The development administrator shall then refer the application to the planning commission for preliminary plat approval. The planning commission shall also, when applicable under the provisions of this Code, make such reviews of use, density, and bulk standards as are required under the flexible zoning regulations. 
(b)  Referral back for zoning approval. After completing its review, the planning commission shall refer the preliminary plat with its decision of approval, conditional approval or disapproval, together with such recommendations and reviews of use, density, and bulk standards as it was required to make under the flexible zoning regulations of this Code, to the city council. Application shall then be made to the planning commission for final plat approval. No building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued for the project until the zoning application has been finally approved and the final plat is recorded with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. 
(4)  Resubdivisions of flexible zoning developments. 
(a)  A flexible zoning development or land use plan may be subdivided or resubdivided for purposes of sale or lease after the project plan has been finally approved and development completed or partially completed. 
(b)  If the subdivision or resubdivision of a flexible zoning development will create a new lot line, the applicant shall make application to the planning commission for review of the subdivision or resubdivision. The planning commission shall recommend approval of the subdivision to the city council only if an amended zoning application also is approved for the flexible development plan, by the appropriate body or official as indicated in this Code, for all provisions governing use, density, and bulk standards. 
(Sec. 12.1.1)  
Sec. 34-12-2. - Minor subdivision. 
If a preliminary plat constitute a minor subdivision, the development administrator shall review the plat, approve it, conditionally approve it or disapprove it within 30 days from the date of submission of a complete application and plat. Subsequent to an approval or conditional approval by the development administrator, the applicant may proceed directly to the filing of an application for approval of a final plat as provided in these regulations. If the preliminary plat of a minor subdivision is disapproved by the development administrator, the applicant may appeal to the city council as provided in subsection 34-12-3(e). The applicant shall have one year from the date that the preliminary plat is approved by the development administrator (or city council upon appeal) to submit a final plat, after which time a new preliminary plat must be submitted for approval. 
(Sec. 12.1.2)  
Sec. 34-12-3. - Preliminary plat (major subdivision). 
(a)  Application procedure and requirements. The applicant shall file in duplicate with the development administrator an application for approval of a preliminary plat. The application shall: 
(1)  Be made on forms available at the office of the development administrator together with a fee as established by the city council. 
(2)  Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet from the subject property, or of that directly opposite the subject property, extending 100 feet from the street frontage of opposite land, with the names of owners as shown in the assessor's files. This information may be shown on a separate current tax map reproduction from the assessor's office showing the subdivision superimposed on the tax map. 
(3)  Be accompanied by a minimum of 11 copies of the preliminary plat as described in these regulations. 
(4)  Be presented to the development administrator at least four weeks prior to a regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(b)  Preliminary plat information required. Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in Illinois at any scale necessary for clarity. The scale of a preliminary plat shall not be less than one inch equals 50 feet. Said preliminary plat, together with the supporting data, shall provide all of the following information. 
(1)  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not the owner), and registered land surveyor. 
(2)  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
(3)  Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided and all property within 100 feet of the tract to be subdivided. 
(4)  North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map. 
(5)  Dimensions of the tract, and its gross land area. 
(6)  Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two-foot contour data for land having slopes of zero to four percent; five-foot contour data for land having slopes of four to 12 percent; and ten-foot contour data for land having slopes of 12 percent or greater. 
(7)  Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas, natural drainage ways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools, etc. 
(8)  Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets and alleys. 
(9)  Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed easements. 
(10)  List of all proposed deed restrictions and covenants. 
(11)  Location and size of existing and proposed wastewater and storm sewers. 
(12)  Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and proposed utilities. 
(13)  Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or dedicated for school parks/playgrounds, common ground, and other public purposes. 
(14)  Locations, dimensions, and area of all proposed or existing lots within the subdivision. 
(15)  Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or used for green space. 
(16)  Preparation date of preliminary plat. 
(17)  Revision dates. 
(18)  Site location map. 
(c)  Preliminary plat review. After the planning commission has reviewed the preliminary plat, the report of the development administrator, any staff recommendations and testimony, and exhibits submitted at the public meeting, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat within 90 days from the official submission date. One copy of the proposed preliminary plat shall be returned to the developer with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefore accompanying the plat. If the planning commission disapproves the proposed subdivision, the applicant may execute an appeal to the city council in the manner prescribed in subsection 34-12-3(e). 
(d)  Standards for approval of preliminary plats. No preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision shall be approved by the planning commission and city council unless the applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that: 
(1)  The proposed preliminary plat meets all of the requirements of this Code, all other applicable city ordinances, and all applicable state and federal laws and statutes. 
(2)  Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality to provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed. 
(3)  Adequate provision has been made for a public sewage system. 
(4)  All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or topographical conditions presenting hazards or requiring special precautions have been identified by the subdivider and that the proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions. 
(5)  The subdivider has the financial ability to complete the proposed subdivision in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(6)  The proposed subdivision will not result in the scattered subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped parcels of land lacking infrastructure between developed parcels. 
(7)  The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the impact of the proposed subdivision on public health, safety, and welfare. 
(8)  The planning commission is authorized to disapprove the preliminary plat even through the land proposed for subdivision is zoned for the use to which the proposed subdivision will be put and the proposed use is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan if the commission makes a finding that one or more or the items enumerated in paragraphs (1) through (7) above, has not been met. 
(e)  Preliminary plat approval. Every preliminary plat must be approved by the city council prior to submittal of a final plat. Any minor subdivision preliminary plat that is denied by the development administrator or any major subdivision preliminary plat that is denied by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Within 30 days of the meeting of the city council at which the preliminary plat is first considered, the city council shall approve the preliminary plat, approve the preliminary plat with conditions, or deny the preliminary plat. If the preliminary plat is denied, the city council shall provide reasons for such denial. 
(f)  Public improvements. The applicant shall execute a subdivision improvement agreement and provide financial security for the agreement as provided in division 2 prior to final plat approval. The city council shall require the applicant to indicate on the plat all roads and public improvements to be dedicated, all water and utility improvements which shall be required to be established or extended, and any other special requirements deemed necessary by the city council in order for the subdivision plat to conform to the city's Comprehensive Plan and official map. 
(g)  Effective period of preliminary plat approval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year from the date that the preliminary plat is approved by the city council at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted a final plat for approval. If a subdivision plat is not submitted for final approval within the one-year period, the preliminary approval shall be null and void, and the applicant shall be required to submit a new preliminary plat for review subject to the then existing zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations. 
(h)  Conformance to zoning and subdivision regulations. Every preliminary plat shall conform to existing zoning regulations and subdivision regulations applicable at the time that the proposed preliminary plat is submitted for review by the planning commission unless the planning commission or city council has taken official action toward amending the applicable zoning and subdivision regulations which such amendment shall prevail. 
(Sec. 12.1.3)  
Sec. 34-12-4. - Amendments to preliminary plat. 
At any time after preliminary plat approval and before submission of a final plat, the applicant may request of the development administrator that an amendment be made in the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat. Under regulations established by the city council, the development administrator may agree to proposed amendments that are deemed to be minor. If the proposed amendment is major, the planning commission and city council shall consider the proposed major amendment in accordance with the same requirements for preliminary plat approval found in section 34-12-3. Any public meeting on a proposed major amendment shall be limited to whether the proposed major amendment should or should not be approved. The city council shall approve or disapprove any proposed major amendment and may make any modifications in the terms and conditions of preliminary plat approval reasonably related to the proposed amendment. If the applicant is unwilling to accept the proposed major amendment under the terms and conditions required by the city council, the applicant may withdraw the proposed major amendment. A major amendment shall include, but is not limited to, any amendment that results in or has the effect of decreasing open space in the subdivision by ten percent or more or increasing the number of lots in the subdivision. The city council shall render a decision on the proposed major amendment within thirty (30) days after the meeting at which the request was heard by the city council, including any adjourned session unless such issue is continued by mutual agreement of the applicant and city council. 
(Sec. 12.1.4)  
Sec. 34-12-5. - Final plat. 
(a)  Application procedure and requirements. Following the approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant, if he wishes to proceed with the subdivision, shall file with the development administrator an application for final approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall: 
(1)  Be made on forms available at the office of the development administrator, together with a fee as set by the city council. 
(2)  Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof, which derives access from an existing city, county or state road. 
(3)  Be accompanied by a minimum of 11 copies of the subdivision plat and the construction plans, as described in these regulations. 
(4)  Comply in all respects with the preliminary plat, as approved, whichever is applicable, depending upon the classification of the subdivision. 
(5)  Be presented to the development administrator at least four weeks prior to a regular meeting of the planning commission at which final plat approval will be considered. 
(6)  Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, city uses, utilities, parks and easements, in a form approved by the city attorney; and the subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal officers of dedication as follows: 
The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the city all the streets, city uses, easements, parks, and required utilities shown on the subdivision plat and construction plans in accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated ________, and recorded in the office of the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. 
By       (owner or representative)      
Date ________ 
The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to all dedicated lands and improvements in proper form for recording, together with a title policy for the city in the sum of not less than $10,000.00, which sum shall be determined by the city attorney before signing of the final plat. 
(7)  Be accompanied by the subdivision improvement agreement and financial security, if required, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney and in an amount established by the development administrator or his designee and shall include a provision that the subdivider shall comply with all other terms of the resolution of final plat approval as determined by the city council and shall include, but not be limited to, the performance of all required subdivision and off-site improvements, and that all improvements and land included in the irrevocable offer of dedication shall be dedicated to the city free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the premises. 
(8)  Be accompanied by an inspection fee in an amount to be determined on the basis of the provisions of these regulations and by written assurance from the public utility companies and improvement districts that necessary utilities will be installed. The applicant shall also pay a fee as established by the city council for each street sign shown in the construction plans, which street signs shall be installed by the city. 
(b)  Final plat information required. Every final plat shall be prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor on polyester-base film with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater than 100 feet equals one inch, provided that the resultant drawing shall not exceed 36 inches square. The final plat and supporting data shall portray/provide all of the following information: 
(1)  North arrow, graphic scale, and date. 
(2)  Name of subdivider. 
(3)  Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the tract. 
(4)  Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not more than one foot in 10,000 feet. 
(5)  Reference to recorded plats adjoining platted land by record name, plat book, and page number. 
(6)  Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the boundaries of the subdivision. 
(7)  Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way, easements, and lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles, or bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency, and central angles. 
(8)  Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street. 
(9)  Purpose of any existing or proposed easement. 
(10)  Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot areas. 
(11)  Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved. 
(12)  Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions. 
(13)  Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants in the deeds of lots and common grounds, and subject to approval by the city council and city attorney. 
(14)  Preparation date. 
(15)  Revision dates. 
(c)  Public meeting and determination. After the public meeting, the planning commission shall, within 30 days from the official submission date for the final plat, recommend approval or disapprove the subdivision application by resolution which shall set forth in detail any reasons for disapproval. One copy of the final plat shall be returned to the applicant with the date of the recommendation for approval or disapproval noted on the plat, and, if the plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval accompanying the plat. 
(d)  City council review. All final plats must be approved by the city council prior to recording. In reviewing a final plat, the city council shall consider the recommendation or disapproval by the planning commission. The city council shall review the final plat and approve or disapprove it. If the city council approves the final plat, they may attach conditions to such approval necessary to ensure compliance with all city ordinances and administrative procedures. If the city council disapproves a final plat, they shall provide written findings for such disapproval including areas where the proposed final plat does not conform to the city's Comprehensive Plan, provisions of this Code, other applicable city ordinances, or other specific written administrative rules or specifications. 
(e)  Submission and review. Subsequent to the approval of the city council, three paper copies of the construction plans, and one copy of the original subdivision plat on reproducible mylar, two copies of the subdivision plat on sepia paper and two copies of the subdivision plat on paper shall be submitted to the development administrator for final review. No final approval shall be endorsed on the plat until a review has indicated that all requirements of the resolution have been met. 
(Sec. 12.1.5)  
Sec. 34-12-6. - Vested rights and development agreements. 
(a)  Effect of approval. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any subdivision by reason of preliminary or final plat approval until the actual signing of the final plat by the mayor. 
(b)  Effect of recording. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any subdivision by virtue of the recording of a final plat. 
(c)  Applicable laws. To obtain final plat approval, the applicant shall be in compliance with all state and federal laws applicable at the time that the final plat is considered for approval by the city council. The applicant also shall be in compliance with all local laws and regulations applicable at the time that the preliminary plat was submitted to the planning commission in accordance with subsection 34-12-3(h) (or, if a minor subdivision, at the time the preliminary plat was submitted to the development administrator), except that the applicant shall comply with those local laws and regulations in effect at the time that the final plat is considered for approval by the commission if the city council makes a determination on the record that compliance with any of those local laws and regulations is reasonably necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(d)  Development agreements. The city council may, but under no circumstances is it required to, enter into a development agreement: 
(1)  General. The development agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the subdivider of the proposed subdivision and the city (the "parties") and shall contain those terms and conditions agreed to by the parties and those required by subsection 34-12-6(d). The city attorney or designee is authorized to negotiate Development Agreements on behalf of the city. 
(2)  Covenants. Any covenant by the city contained in the development agreement to refrain from rezoning or adopting any rule or regulation that would affect the proposed subdivision, shall be limited to a period of five years. The covenant shall also contain a proviso that the city may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise would constitute a breach of the covenant if it makes a determination on the record that the action is necessary to avoid a substantial risk of injury to public health, safety, and general welfare. The covenant shall contain the additional proviso that the city may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise would constitute a breach of the covenant if the action is required by federal or state law. 
(3)  Third party rights. Except as otherwise expressly provided in the development agreement, the development agreement shall create no rights enforceable by any part who/which is not a party to the development agreement. 
(4)  Limitation on liability. The development agreement shall contain a clause that any breach of the development agreement by the city shall give rise only to damages under state contract law and shall not give rise to any liability for violation of the fifty and fourteenth amendments of the U.S. Constitution or similar state constitutional provisions. 
(5)  Developer's compliance. The development agreement shall include a clause that the government's duties under the agreement are expressly conditioned upon the subdivider's compliance with each and every term, condition, provision, and covenant of the agreement, all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and its obligations under the subdivision improvements agreement. 
(6)  Adoption. The development agreement shall be adopted by the city council pursuant to applicable state and local laws and shall be recorded with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. 
(7)  Incorporation as matter of law. All clauses, covenants, and provisos required by these regulations to be included in a development agreement shall be incorporated into the development agreement as a matter of law without respect to the intent of the parties. 
(Sec. 12.1.6)  
Sec. 34-12-7. - Signing and recording of plat. 
(a)  Signing of plat. 
(1)  When a subdivision improvement agreement and financial security are required, the mayor shall endorse approval on the final plat after the agreement and financial security have been approved by the city council, and all the conditions of the resolution pertaining to the final plat have been satisfied. 
(2)  The mayor shall endorse approval on the final plat after all conditions of the resolution have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the city as shown by a certificate signed by the development administrator or his designee and city attorney stating that the necessary dedication of public lands and improvements has been accomplished. 
(b)  Recording of plat. 
(1)  The mayor will sign the reproducible mylar original of the final plat and two sepia prints of the final plat. The sepia prints will be returned to the applicant's engineer. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to file the final plat with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds within ten days of the date of signature. Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat, the city clerk shall record the agreement of dedication together with such legal documents as shall be deemed necessary to be recorded by the city attorney. 
(3)  Examples of certificates to be filed with the final plat are included at the end of this section. 
(c)  Sectionalizing major subdivision plats. Prior to granting final approval of a major subdivision plat, the city council may permit the plat to be divided into two or more sections and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plat. The city council may require that the subdivision improvement agreement and financial security be in such amount as is commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed and may defer the remaining amount of the financial security until the remaining sections of the plat are offered for filing. The developer may also file irrevocable offers to dedicate streets and public improvements in the sections offered to be filed and defer filing offers of dedication for the remaining sections until those sections, subject to any conditions imposed by the city council, shall be granted concurrently with final approval of the plat. If sectionalizing is approved, the entire approved subdivision plat including all sections shall be filed within 90 days after the date of final approval with the city clerk's office and such sections as have been authorized by the city council shall be filed with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. Such sections must contain at least ten percent of the total number of lots contained in the approved plat. The approval of all remaining sections not filed with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds shall automatically expire unless such sections have been approved for filing by the city council, all fees paid, all instruments and offers of dedication submitted and subdivision improvement agreements, financial security and performance bonds, if any, approved and actually filed with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds within three years of the date of final subdivision approval of the subdivision plat. 
(Sec. 12.1.7)  
Sec. 34-12-8. - Suspension and invalidation of final plat. 
If the city suspends final plat approval for any subdivision plat under these regulations, it shall record a document with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds declaring that final approval for the subdivision is suspended and that the further sale, lease or development of property within the subdivision is prohibited except that this prohibition shall not apply to persons or parties who have acquired property from the subdivider unless the person or party acquiring property meets the definition of "common ownership" in section 34-2-3. If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates final plat approval for any subdivision, the city shall record a document with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds declaring that the final plat for subdivision is no longer valid and that further subdivision activity is prohibited. 
As required by State law (Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 765, sections 205—230 et seq.), the following certificates shall be executed on the final plat: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
We, ___________, the Owners of   (description)   , have caused the said tract to be surveyed and subdivided/developed in the manner shown, and said subdivision/development is to be hereinafter known as _______. All rights-of-way and easements shown hereon are hereby dedicated to the use of the public forever including the release and waiver of the right of homestead under the Homestead Exemption laws of the State of Illinois. 
Dated this _____ day of ________, 20___. 
	      (Seal) 
 	 
	      (Seal) 
 	 
NOTARY PUBLIC'S CERTIFICATE 
State of Illinois 	) 	
	) 	SS 
County of St. Clair 	) 	
 
I, ___________, a Notary Public in and for the County aforesaid, do hereby certify that   (owners)   are personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and that they appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed and sealed the same as their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth, including the release of waiver of the right of homestead. 
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this ________ day of ________, 20___. 
	      Notary Public 
 	 
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
I, the undersigned Registered Illinois Land Surveyor, hereby certify that this plat is a correct representation of a survey made under my direct supervision at the request of the owners for the purpose of subdividing the tract into lots as shown. The land is within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. The land is not within one and one-half (1.5) miles of any incorporated city, town or village which has adopted a City plan and is exercising the special powers authorized by Division XII of Article XI of the Illinois Municipal Code, as not or hereafter amended, and not included in any other municipality. 
	      Registered Illinois Land Surveyor 
 	 
(Seal) 
	      Registration Number 
 	 
	      Date 
 	 
COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE 
I, ___________, County Clerk of St. Clair County, Illinois, do hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes against any of the real estate included within this plat. 
	      County Clerk 
 	 
	      Date 
 	 
CERTIFICATE OF CITY COUNCIL 
I, ___________, Mayor of the City of Mascoutah, do hereby certify that the plat shown herein was duly presented to the city council and approved at a meeting of same held on  (date)  . 
	      Mayor 
 	 
	      City Clerk 
 	 
FLOOD HAZARD CERTIFICATE 
We, the undersigned, do hereby certify that no part of this plat to be recorded, is situated within five hundred (500) feet of any surface drain or watercourse serving a tributary area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more, or, if this plat is within five hundred (500) feet of any surface drain or watercourse, we hereby certify that this plat has been reviewed by the Illinois Department of Transportation Division of Water Resources and their report is on file with the County Recorder of Deeds. 
By: _____ 
Owner(s) 
By: _____ 
Illinois Land Surveyor 
	      Registration Number 
 	 
	      Date 
 	 
(Sec. 12.1.8)  
Secs. 34-12-9, 34-12-10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-12-11. - Improvements and improvement agreement. 
(a)  Completion of improvements. Before the final plat is signed by the mayor, all applicants shall be required to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement with the city. 
(b)  Improvement agreement and guarantee. 
(1)  Agreement. The applicant shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement by which the subdivider covenants to complete all required public improvements no later than two years following the date on which the mayor signs the final plat. The applicant shall covenant to maintain each required public improvement for a period of one year following the acceptance by the city council of the dedication of that completed public improvement and also shall warrant that all required public improvements will be free from defect for a period of two years following the acceptance by the city council of the dedication of the last completed public improvement. The subdivision improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions agreed to by the applicant and the city council. 
(2)  Covenants to run. The subdivision improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the subdivider. The subdivision improvement agreement will be adopted, when necessary, by the city council, pursuant to applicable state and local laws and shall be recorded in the office of the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. 
(3)  Financial security. The applicant shall provide a letter of credit or cash escrow as financial security for the promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement. Either financial security shall be in an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements, including lot improvements. The issuer of the letter of credit or the escrow agent, as applicable, shall be acceptable to the city treasurer. 
(a)  Letter of credit. If the applicant posts a letter of credit as financial security for its promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the credit shall: 
(i)  Be irrevocable; 
(ii)  Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods in subsection 34-12-11(b)(1); and 
(iii)  Require only that the government present the credit with a sight draft and an affidavit signed by the city attorney attesting to the city's right to draw funds under the credit. 
(b)  Cash escrow. If the applicant posts a cash escrow as financial security for its promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the escrow instructions shall provide: 
(i)  That the subdivider will have no right to a return of any of the funds except as provided in subsection 34-12-12(b)(2); and 
(ii)  That the escrow agent shall have legal duty to deliver the funds to the city whenever the city attorney presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the city's right to receive funds whether or not the subdivider protests that right. 
If and when the city accepts the offer of dedication for the last completed required public improvement, the city shall execute a waiver of its right to receive all but 25 percent of the funds represented by the letter of credit or cash escrow if the subdivider is not in breach of the subdivision improvement agreement. The residual funds shall be financial security for the subdivider's covenant to maintain the required public improvements and its warranty that the improvements are free from defect. 
(c)  Temporary improvement. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the city council and shall maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the city council. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the city a separate subdivision improvement agreement and a letter of credit or cash escrow in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, which agreement and credit or escrow shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
(d)  Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the developer, at its expense, without reimbursement by the city. 
(e)  Governmental units. Governmental units to which these contract and financial security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the contract and financial security, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Failure to complete improvements. In those cases where a subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and financial security has been posted and required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the city may then: 
(1)  Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; 
(2)  Suspend final plat approval until the improvements are completed and record a document to that effect for the purpose of public notice; 
(3)  Obtain funds under the financial security and complete improvements itself or through a third party; 
(4)  Assign its right to receive funds under the financial security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete improvements in the subdivision; and 
(5)  Exercise any other rights available under the law. 
(g)  Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal officers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by ordinance of the city council. The planning commission may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
(Sec. 12.2.1)  
Sec. 34-12-12. - Inspection of improvements. 
(a)  General procedure and fees. The city shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the city an inspection fee based on the estimated cost of inspection, and where the improvements are completed prior to final plat approval, the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the mayor unless the inspection fee has been paid at the time of application. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the city and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the development administrator or his designee finds upon inspection that any one or more of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for properly completing the improvements. 
(b)  Release or reduction of financial security. 
(1)  Certificate of satisfactory completion. The city council will not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce the amount of any financial security posted by the subdivider until the development administrator or his designee has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until: 
(a)  The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the development administrator or his designee, through submission of a detailed "as-built" survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the development administrator or his designee, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvement is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision. 
(b)  A title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the city attorney indicating that the improvements have been completed, are ready for dedication to the city, and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation by the planning commission, development administrator or his designee, and city attorney, the city council shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure.  
Sec. 34-12-13. - Escrow deposits for lot improvements. 
(a)  Acceptance of escrow funds. Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any lot improvements required by the subdivision regulations cannot be performed, the development administrator may issue a certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety or general welfare upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the development administrator or his designee for the cost of the lot improvements. The subdivision improvement agreement and financial security covering the lot improvements shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  Procedures on escrow fund. All required improvements for which escrow monies have been accepted by the development administrator at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the subdivider within a period of nine months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the improvements have not been properly installed at the end of the time period, the development administrator shall give two weeks written notice to the developer requiring it to install the improvements, and if they are not then installed properly, the development administrator may request the city council to proceed to contract out the work for the installation of the necessary improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. At the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow monies are being deposited with the development administrator, the developer shall obtain and file with the development administrator prior to obtaining the certificate of occupancy a notarized statement from the purchaser or purchasers of the premises authorizing the development administrator to install the improvements at the end of the nine-month period if the improvements have not been duly installed by the subdivider. 
(Sec. 12.2.3)  
Sec. 34-12-14. - Maintenance of improvements. 
The developer shall be required to maintain all required public improvements on the individual subdivided lots, if required by the development administrator or his designee, until acceptance of the improvements by the city council. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the city, the city may on 12 hours notice plow the street or effect emergency repairs and charge those costs to the developer. Following the acceptance of the dedication of any public improvement by the city, the city may, in its sole discretion require the subdivider to maintain the improvement for a period of one year from the date of acceptance. 
(Sec. 12.2.4)  
Sec. 34-12-15. - Deferral or waiver of required improvements. 
(a)  The city council may defer or waive at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or in existence of connecting facilities. Any determination to defer or waive the provision of any public improvement must be made on the record and the reasons for deferral or waiver also shall be expressly made on the record. 
(b)  Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council to defer the construction of any improvement required under these regulations because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or nonexistent connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the city prior to signing of the final plat by the mayor, or the developer may execute a separate subdivision improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred improvements upon demand of the city. 
(Sec. 12.2.5)  
Sec. 34-12-16. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  When a subdivision improvement agreement and financial security have been required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the required public improvements and the acceptance of the dedication of those improvements by the city, as required in the city council's approval of the final plat. 
(b)  The extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant(s) and by police and fire equipment prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. The developer shall, at the time of the offer of dedication, submit monies in escrow to the city in a sum determined by the development administrator or his designee for the necessary final improvement of the street. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent of lots in a subdivision, or if ten percent be less than two, for the final two lots of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the city council for the subdivision have been fully completed and the city has accepted the developer's offer(s) to dedicate the improvements. 
(Sec. 12.2.6)  
Sec. 34-12-17. - Consumer protection legislation and conflicts of interest statutes. 
(a)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted or issued if a developer or its authorized agent has violated any federal, state or local law pertaining to: 
(1)  Consumer protection; 
(2)  Real estate land sales, promotion, or practices; or 
(3)  Any applicable conflicts-of-interest legislation with respect to the lot or parcel of land which is the subject of the permit or certificate until a court of competent jurisdiction so orders. 
(b)  With respect to any lot or parcel of land described in the immediately preceding section, if a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been granted or issued, it may be revoked by the city until a court of competent jurisdiction orders otherwise, provided that in no event shall the rights of intervening innocent third parties in possession of a certificate of occupancy be prejudiced by any such revocation. 
(c)  Any violation of a federal, state, or local consumer protection law, including, but not limited to: Postal Reorganization Act of 1970; the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1970; Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act; the Truth in Lending Act; the Uniform Commercial Credit Code; state "Blue Sky" laws; state subdivision disclosure acts; or any conflicts of interest statute, law or ordinance shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to all of the penalties and proceedings as set forth in article XIII, division 8. 
(Sec. 12.2.7)  
Secs. 34-12-18—34-12-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND DESIGN 
 
Sec. 34-12-21. - General improvements. 
(a)  Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established in these regulations, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations: 
(1)  All applicable statutory provisions. 
(2)  The city's Unified Land Development Code, Building and Housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdiction. 
(3)  The official Comprehensive Plan and official map including all streets, parks, water mains and sewer mains shown on the official map or Comprehensive Plan as adopted. 
(4)  The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the health department and/or appropriate state or substate agencies. 
(5)  The rules of the Illinois Department of Transportation if the subdivision of any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
(6)  The standards and regulations adopted by the development administrator and all boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the city. 
(7)  Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above laws, regulations, guidelines and policies as well as the purposes of these regulations established in section 34-1-1 of this Code. 
(b)  Adequate public facilities. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless the planning commission determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed subdivision. Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy will include roads and public transportation facilities, sewerage, and water service. 
(1)  [Submit information and data.] The applicant for a preliminary plat must, at the request of the planning commission, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities and services by said subdivision. 
(2)  Comprehensive Plan consistency required. Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the city's Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  Water. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
(4)  Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by city wastewater collection and treatment. 
(5)  Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The city may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. All proposed subdivision shall comply with the city's stormwater ordinance. 
(6)  Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation; shall be properly related to the Comprehensive Plan; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development and constructed in the manner prescribed by this Code. 
(7)  Utilities. All utility facilities, including gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Underground service connections to the property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. (See section 34-12-28.) 
(8)  Extension policies. All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, telecommunications and fiber optic lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. The city may require the applicant of a subdivision to extend off-site improvements to reach the subdivision or oversize required public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of plat approval. 
(9)  Easements. 
(a)  Unless utilities are to be installed in the public right-of-way, easements not less than seven and one-half feet wide shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines, and alongside side lot lines where necessary for storm and wastewater sewers; gas, water and other mains; and for underground electric power and telephone lines. Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots when necessary for the extension of main sewers or other utilities or where both water and sewer lines are located in the same easement. 
(b)  Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall be established along any natural drainage channel and in such other locations as may be necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from streets, alleys and all other portions of the subdivision. The location and minimum widths of such easements shall be approved by the development administrator or his designee. 
(c)  No person shall deny access to such easements to authorized officials upon display of proper identification. 
(d)  No person shall erect any structure or plant any tree or shrub in any easement or within ay street or alley right-of-way, except at the owner's risk with respect to all costs for demolition, removal or reconstruction thereof. 
(c)  Restrictive covenants. Restrictive covenants shall be provided for every subdivision including provisions for maintenance of common ground areas. References to those restrictions shall be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, and the restrictive covenants shall be recorded with the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds in a form to be approved by the city attorney. 
(d)  Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in another municipality, the planning commission may request assurance from the city attorney that access is legally established, and from the development administrator or his designee that access is adequately improved, or that a guarantee has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. 
(e)  Monuments. The applicant shall place stone or reinforced concrete reference monuments, set in the ground in such a manner that they will not be moved by frost, in accordance with the Plats Act, as now or hereafter amended. (Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 675, section 205/1) Such monuments shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  All lot corners shall be marked by one-half-inch iron pins not less than 24 inches long. Temporary iron fence posts shall also be placed at these locations and may not be removed until adjacent lots have been built upon. 
(2)  All monuments required by these regulations shall be set flush with the ground or so as not to protrude above the ground surface by more than one and one-half inches. 
(3)  All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered land surveyor. 
(f)  Character of the land. Land that the planning commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features that will reasonably be harmful to the health, safety, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning commission, upon recommendation of the development administrator or his designee, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses and shall not involve any danger to public health, safety, and welfare. 
(g)  Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. 
(Sec. 12.3.1)  
Sec. 34-12-22. - Lots. 
(a)  Lot arrangement. The building lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with all provisions of this Code and health regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved street or an existing access easement that was approved prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
(b)  Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of this Code. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established by this Code. 
(c)  Lot orientation. 
(1)  The lot line common to the street right-of-way shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and a similar line across the street. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear line does not abut the side line of an adjacent lot. 
(2)  Corner lots shall be configured to accommodate front yards on each street, and may need to be larger than the minimum lot size to accommodate such yards and maintain a sufficient building envelope. 
(d)  Double frontage lots and access to lots. 
(1)  Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome special disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(2)  Access from principal and minor arterials. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from a principal or minor arterial. Where driveway access from a principal or minor arterial may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street. Lots shall be designed and arranged so that driveways constructed will not require vehicles to back into traffic on arterial streets. 
(e)  Soil preservation, grading and seeding. 
(1)  Soil preservation and final grading. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final plat and the lot pre-covered with soil with an average depth of at least six inches which shall contain no particles more than two inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
(2)  Lot drainage. All lots shall have a finished grade that will allow the natural flow of surface drainage water from one lot to another without erosion or damage. Grading shall be sloped and tapered at the side and rear lot lines in such a manner as to permit proper drainage. 
(3)  Lawn-grass seed and sod. Lawn-grass seed or sod shall be required to be installed on every lot as specified in this paragraph. Sod may be used to comply with any requirement of seeding set forth herein and shall be required for portions of the lot that must be covered by grass when the slope of such area exceeds a slope ratio of 5:1. Lawn-grass seed shall be sown at not less than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area. Seed shall be sown between April 1 and October 31. The seed shall consist of a maximum of ten percent rye grass by weight and minimum of 90 percent permanent bluegrass and/or fescue grass by weight. All seed shall have been tested for germination within one year of the date of seeding, and the date of testing shall be on the label containing the seed analysis. All lots shall be seeded from the roadside edge of the unpaved right-of-way back a distance of 25 feet behind the principal structure on the lot except that existing wooded areas on any lot may be excluded from this requirement. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until re-spreading of soil and seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between November 1 and March 31, the applicant shall submit an agreement in writing signed by the developer and the property owner, with a copy to the development administrator, that re-spreading of soil and seeding of lawn will be done during the immediate following planting season as set forth in this section, and leave a cash escrow for performance in an amount determined by the development administrator. Sod may be used to comply with any requirement of seeding set forth herein. 
(f)  Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of those items and materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. No items and materials as described in the preceding sentence shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of any subdivision improvement agreement or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. 
(g)  Waterbodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots or the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body shall be placed with the homeowners so that it will not become a city responsibility. No part of the minimum area of a lot required under the provisions of this Code may be satisfied by land that is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, of design approved by the development administrator or his designee. 
(h)  Subdivision improvement agreement and financial security to include lot improvement. The applicant shall enter into a separate subdivision improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit or cash escrow to guarantee completion of all lot improvement requirements including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding, removal of debris and waste, fencing, and all other lot improvements required by the city council. Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, the city may enforce the provisions of the subdivision improvement agreement where the provisions of this section or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulations have not been met. 
(Sec. 12.3.2)  
Sec. 34-12-23. - Roads. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  [New construction.] All new streets and alleys shall be constructed solely at the expense of the subdivider/developer in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. New streets and alleys and improvements to existing streets shall be determined based on the typical roadway sections contained in the city's construction specifications. Existing streets that do not meet city standards shall be improved to meet the current street standards by one of the following methods which shall be approved by the city council: 
(a)  Existing streets to be upgraded at developer's expense; 
(b)  Existing streets will be upgraded with the cost shared between the city and the developer; or 
(c)  Off-site road impact fees shall be charged to the developer to cover the costs of the upgrading. 
(2)  Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing street on the official map unless such street is: 
(a)  An existing state, county or township highway; or 
(b)  A street shown upon a plat approved by the city council and recorded with the office of the St. Clair County Recorder of Deeds. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the highway rules, regulations, specifications or orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under these subdivision regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these subdivision regulations or the Comprehensive Plan or official map. 
Where the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing road frontage, the road shall be suitably improved as provided above. 
(3)  Grading and improvements plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the city construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the development administrator or his designee in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval. 
(4)  Classification. All roads shall be classified as principal arterials, minor arterials, collectors, subdivision feeders, local access streets or alleys as each are defined in these regulations and shown on the future Thoroughfare Plan map contained in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(5)  Topography and arrangement. 
(a)  Roads shall be related appropriately to topography. Local access roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many building sites as possible at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations. 
(b)  All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the official map and the thoroughfare plan map contained in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, commercial districts, schools, churches and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
(d)  Local access streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
(e)  The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern is not recommended for residential areas. The use of curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
(f)  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the planning commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts of land. 
(g)  In commercial and industrial developments, the streets and other access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
(6)  Blocks. 
(a)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways. 
(b)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,400 feet, nor be less than 500 feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along arterial and collector streets shall be not less than 1,000 feet in length. 
(c)  In long blocks the planning commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or pedestrian traffic. 
(d)  Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the planning commission through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. The planning commission may require screening, fencing or additional setbacks from such pedestrian ways. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the planning commission for prospective users. 
(7)  Access to principal arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed principal arterial, the planning commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
(a)  Lots shall back onto the principal arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the principal arterial; and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
(b)  A series of culs-de-sac, U-shaped streets or short loop streets entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the principal arterial. 
(c)  A marginal access or service road (separated from the principal arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access at suitable points). 
(8)  Road names. Road names shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other road names in the city so as not to cause confusion. A road which is (or is planned as) a continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name. The city clerk shall consult with the St. Clair County 911 Coordinator on proposed road names and receive his recommendation prior to approval of proposed road names by the planning commission. 
(9)  Road regulatory signs. The applicant shall deposit with the city at the time of final subdivision approval a sum in an amount adequate to cover the cost of each road sign required by the development administrator or his designee on all roads and at all road intersections. The city shall install all road signs. Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be approved by the development administrator or his designee. 
(10)  Street lights. Street lights shall be provided by the developer at each intersection of two streets (or alleys), at each cul-de-sac, at intervals of approximately 400 feet of street frontage between intersections, and between a street intersection and the terminus of a dead-end street. Additionally, in multiple-family dwelling subdivisions, lighting shall be provided by the developer within parking areas at a minimum rate of one light per 25 parking spaces or any fraction thereof. Street lights shall be installed based on the following standards: 
(a)  The design and installation of the street light system in every subdivision/development shall be reviewed by the development administrator or his designee and the appropriate electric utility company. At the subdivider's/ developer's option the appropriate electric utility may design and install the streetlight system. 
(b)  The lighting intensity of each streetlight shall be equivalent at a minimum, to a 150 watt high pressure sodium vapor luminaire lamp. Each streetlight standard (post) shall be at least 14 feet high. 
(11)  Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to the street. 
(12)  Construction of roads and dead-end roads. 
(a)  Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, for effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and where the continuation is in accordance with the thoroughfare plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a dead-end street, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T- or L-shaped turnaround shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued. The planning commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
(b)  Dead-end roads (permanent). Where a road does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the planning commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the planning commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street with a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet and a minimum pavement radius of 42 feet. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be limited in length to a maximum of 500 feet. 
(13)  Alleys and access easements. Alleys and access easements may be allowed in single-family residential districts only with planning commission approval. Alleys may be required in multiple-family districts and in commercial and industrial districts unless other adequate provisions for service access are made. When required or provided, alleys shall be at least ten feet wide, and shall be paved in accordance with specifications maintained by the development administrator or his designee. Alleys normally shall not intersect with one another nor change sharply in alignment. Adequate vehicular turnaround space shall be paved in accordance with specifications maintained by the development administrator or his designee. Alleys normally shall not intersect with one another nor change sharply in alignment. Adequate vehicular turnaround space shall be provided at the terminus of any rear-end alley. 
(14)  Access to subdivisions. It is recommended that all subdivisions be platted with a minimum of two access points to surrounding streets. Subdivisions that will have no more than 50 lots when completed, may be approved with a single entrance. Subdivisions that will have more than 50 lots but not more than 150 lots when completed shall have more than one entrance or shall have a divided entrance. Lots with more than 150 lots but not more than 300 lots shall have a minimum of two entrances. Lots with more than 300 lots when completed shall have a minimum of three entrances and shall be provided an additional entrance for each 150 lots or part thereof over 300 lots. In cases where a divided roadway is utilized, it must provide two divided lanes of traffic, each lane a minimum of 20 feet in width, from the entrance to the subdivision to the intersection of the first through or loop street. The two lanes must be divided by a median planted with grass, shrubs and appropriate trees with the median a minimum of 15 feet in width. 
Table 12-1 

Subdivision Access 
Number of Lots at Build-Out 	Minimum Number of Entrances 
50 or fewer 	1 
51—150 	2 or 1 divided entrance 
151—300 	2 
More than 300 	3 + 1 per additional 150 lots or portion thereof over 450 
 
(b)  Design standards. 
(1)  General. In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation and road-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads are hereby required. 
(2)  Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths. Every right-of-way established for subdivision purposes is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lot or parcels. All rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public by the subdivider. The minimum pavement widths shall be as noted in Table 12-2. 
(3)  Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these regulations shall be required whenever additional width is necessary, due to topography, to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three-to-one. 
(4)  Road surfacing and improvements. After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the developer shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. All surfacing shall be of a character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the development administrator or his designee. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by city council or the development administrator or his designee, and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. 
(5)  Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
(a)  In residential districts a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures on this land is prohibited." 
TABLE 12-2 
STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 
Residential Street Classification 	Max. No. of Dwelling Units/Net Acre 	Required R.O.W. (ft.) 	Min. Pavement Width (ft.) (See Note 1) 	Max. Gradient (%) 	Min. Gradient (%) (See Note 3) 
Alley 	N/A 	20 	10 	12 	1.0 
Local Access 	2.0—4.50 	50 	32 	12 	1.0 
Subdivision Feeder 	4.50/Greater 	50 	34 	10 	1.0 
Collector (See Note 2) 	Over 250 dwelling units served 	70 	36 	8 	1.0 
 
Commercial and Industrial Street Classification 	Required R.O.W. (ft.) 	Required Pavement Width (ft.) (See Note 1) 	Maximum Gradient (%) 	Minimum Gradient (%) 
Alley 	24 	16 	8 	1.0 
Local 	50 	28 	8 	1.0 
50 	34 			
Collector 
(See Note 3) 	60 	36 	8 	1.0 
 
Other Street Classification Arterials 	Required R.O.W. (ft.) 	Required Pavement Width (ft.) (See Note 1) 	Maximum Gradient (%) 	Minimum Gradient (%) 
Minor Arterial (See Note 3) 	70 	36 	8 	1.0 
Principal 
Arterial 
(See Note 3) 	80 	42 	8 	1.0 
 
  
Notes: 
1. Minimum pavement width is measured from back-to-back of curb. 
2. Minimum pavement width may increase as needed for left-turn lanes, to be determined by city council. 
3. Minimum gradient may be reduced to 0.5 percent where determined necessary by the development administrator. 
(b) In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad right-of-way shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance from the railroad right-of-way to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
(c) When streets parallel to the railroad right-of-way intersect a street which crosses the railroad right-of-way at grade, they shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(6)  Intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. No more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. 
(b)  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
(c)  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be at least 20 feet and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(d)  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a three percent rate at a distance of 50 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
(e)  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance. 
(f)  The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be three percent or less. 
(7)  Pavement structure. All streets and alleys shall be paved across the entire surface width. All streets and alleys shall be paved as indicated below, with the city council or the development administrator or his designee reserving the right to select the most appropriate option; likewise, equivalents to the minimum street construction standards found in Table 12-3 may be approved by the development administrator or his designee depending on engineering and traffic volume considerations. 
(a)  Bituminous and/or Portland cement concrete designs based on Illinois Department of Transportation pavement designs is acceptable. 
(b)  Earth subgrade. 
(i)  Compacted earth per Illinois Department of Transportation standards of 95 percent modified proctor. 
(ii)  Compaction test required prior to placing any paving material. The number of tests will be left to the discretion of the development administrator or his designee. 
(c)  Portland cement concrete pavement joints shall be sawed longitudinally in center and every 15 feet transversely. 
(d)  Materials and construction techniques shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the latest edition of the Standards and Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition, as published by the Illinois Department of Transportation. 
(e)  In the event of dispute, Illinois Department of Transportation standards and specifications shall prevail. 
(f)  An Illinois registered professional engineer shall be required to certify any pavement design reports, compaction reports, etc., that are required. 
(8)  Curb and gutter. All streets, except alleys, private drives, access easements, and commercial or industrial streets, shall be constructed with Portland cement concrete vertical curb and gutter and/or V-type gutter in accordance with the dimensions and specifications shown, therefore, in the city's construction specifications, unless otherwise approved by city council. Only vertical curb and gutter shall be constructed in commercial or industrial streets. 
Curb and/or gutter may be constructed either integrally or separately in conjunction with Portland cement pavement. If constructed separately, the gutter flag shall be "tied" to Portland cement concrete pavement with 30-inch long #4 reinforcing bars spaced at 30-inch centers. 
(9)  [Structures.] Once a street right-of-way is dedicated to the city, no person may place or install any structure over or into the curb and gutter portion of any city maintained street right-of-way without written permission from the development administrator or his designee. 
(c)  Road dedications and reservations. 
(1)  New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The planning commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within its own subdivision boundaries. 
(2)  Widening and realignment of existing roads. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Comprehensive Plan or official map indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to dedicate those areas for widening or realignment of those roads. The costs of improving the realignment or widening of the road may be shared between the city and the developer upon determination by the city council that the cost of the realignment or widening exceed the cost of providing necessary access to the subdivision. Frontage roads shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at its own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of this Code whether the land is to be dedicated to the city in fee simple or an easement is granted to the city. 
Table 12-3 Minimum Street Construction Standards 
Street Classifications 	Flexible Pavements 	Ridge Pavements 
	Alternate #1 	Alternate #2 	Alternate #1 	Alternate #2 
Alley/Access Easement 	1½" I-11 Surface 	1½" I-11 Surface 	6" P.C.C. 	N/A 
Marginal Access 	2½" I-11 Binder 	2½" I-11 Binder 	w/ 15' Plain Joints 	
	4" B.A.M. Base 	8" Crushed Stone 		
Residential 	1½" I-11 Surface 	2" I-11 Surface 	6" P.C.C. 	N/A 
Local Access 	2½" I-11 Binder 	2½" I-11 Binder 	w/ 15' Plain Joints 	
	5" B.A.M. Base 	8" Crushed Stone 	4" Crushed Stone 	
				
Residential 	1½" I-11 Surface 	2" I-11 Surface 	7" P.C.C. 	N/A 
Subdivision Feeder 	2½" I-11 Binder 	5" B.A.M. Base 	w/ 15' Plain Joints 	
Collector 	6" B.A.M. Base 	8" Crushed Stone 	4" Crushed Stone 	
				
Commercial 	1½" I-11 Surface 	1½" I-11 Surface 	7" S.R.P.C.C. 	7" P.C.C. with Fiber 
Local Access 	2" I-11 Binder 	1½" I-11 Binder 	w/ 40' Dowel Joints 	Reinforcement and 
	8" B.A.M. Base 	5" B.A.M. Base 	4" Crushed Stone 	20' Dowel Joints 
		8" Crushed Stone 		4" Crushed Stone on U.L. 
				
Commercial 	1½" I-11 Surface 	1½" I-11 Surface 	8" S.R.P.C.C. 	8" P.C.C. with Fiber 
Collector 	2" I-11 Binder 	2" I-11 Binder 	w/ 40' Dowel Joints 	Reinforcement and 
	10" B.A.M. Base 	6" B.A.M. Base 	4" Crushed Stone 	20' Dowel Joints 
		8" Crushed Stone 		" Crushed Stone on U.L. 
Arterial or 	1½" I-11 Surface 	2" I-11 Surface 	9" S.R.P.C.C. 	N/A 
Industrial Street 	1½" I-11 Binder 	2½" I-11 Binder 	w/ 40' Dowel Joints 	
	12" B.A.M. Base 	6" B.A.M. Base 	4" Crushed Stone 	
		8" Crushed Stone 		
 
NOTES: 
(1)  Equivalent pavements, in addition to those shown in Table 5-B, shall be submitted to the development director for approval. 
(2)  If total pavement thickness exceed eight inches, the granular aggregate base/subbase shall extend under the curb and gutter. 
(3)  All pavement types shall be constructed on subgrade compacted to 95 percent maximum density per AASHTO T-99 (Standard Proctor) 
ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS: 
1.  B.A.M. Bituminous Aggregate Mixture. 
2.  P.C.C. Portland Cement Concrete. 
3.  S.R.P.C.C. Standard Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete. 
4.  U.L. Synthetic Underlayment. 
5.  Plain Joints Keyed or sawcut joints with joint surface sealant. 
6.  Dowel Joints Sawcut or formed joints with cast-in-place dowels centered in joint and joint surface sealant. 
7.  Fiber Reinforcement Polypropylene reinforcing fibers. Fiberglass fibers are not allowed due to reactivity with cement paste. 
MAXIMUM LIFT THICKNESS: 
Crushed Stone = 8", B.A.M. = 6", I-11 Binder = 2 ½", Surface = 2" 
(Sec. 12.3.3; Ord. No. 06-05, § 1, 5-1-06; Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 8-18-08)  
Sec. 34-12-24. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
(a)  General requirements. The planning commission shall not recommend approval of any plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and flood water runoff channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any wastewater sewer system. 
(b)  Nature of storm water facilities. 
(1)  Location. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may require the applicant to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring, surface water or stormwater runoff that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications. 
(2)  Accessibility to public storm sewers. Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to the specifications of the development administrator or his designee. However, in subdivisions containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in commercial and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems may be required to be constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved out-fall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the development administrator or his designee. 
(3)  Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The subdivider's engineer shall calculate the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Comprehensive Plan or other provisions of this Code. Such calculations shall be reviewed, verified, and approved by the development administrator or his designee. 
(4)  Effect on downstream drainage areas. The subdivider's engineer shall also study the effect of the subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. City drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the city council may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the expansion of the existing downstream drainage facility. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 
(5)  Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is subject to flooding, the city council may approve such subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of the subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of 12 inches above the elevation of the 100-year floodplain, as determined by the development administrator or his designee. The plat of the subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width that shall be sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or placed in the overflow zone. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the development administrator or his designee. 
(6)  Floodplain areas. The city council may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and wastewater facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property that lies within the 100-year floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps, except at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  Dedication of drainage easements. 
(1)  General requirements. When a subdivision is traversed at or below grade by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, whether natural or man-made, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(2)  Drainage easements. 
(a)  Perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
(b)  When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
(c)  Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be utilized for average density procedures nor for computing the area requirement of any lot. 
(d)  Design criteria. A storm water management plan shall be required for any new residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or utility subdivision having a gross aggregate area of one acre or more. The following rules shall govern the design of improvements with respect to managing storm water runoff. 
(1)  Drainage and storage facilities shall be designed using the modified rational method or soil conservation service (SCS) method of calculating runoff discharge rate and total volume. 
(2)  Storage volume. The volume of storage potential provided in detention facilities shall be sufficient to control the excess storm water runoff, as determined to be the difference between the storm water quantity from the site in its developed state for a 50-year, 24-hour frequency rainfall (6.2 inches) as published by the Illinois State Water Survey and the U.S. Department of Agricultural rainfall for this region, less the allowable release rate as set forth in paragraph (d)(3). A higher frequency storm may be justified by the city depending upon the particular development conditions. 
(3)  The controlled release rate of storm water runoff from all developments shall be limited to that which existed prior to development for the design year used. 
(4)  Street, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to minimize the velocity of overland flow and allow maximum opportunity for infiltration of storm water into the ground, and to preserve and utilize existing and planned streams, channels, and detention basins. 
(5)  The increase storm water runoff resulting from the proposed development shall be accommodated by the provision of appropriate detention facilities including wet or dry bottom reservoirs, flat roofs, or parking lots. 
(6)  All culverts shall extend for the length of the property served and shall not terminate in the middle of a lot. 
(7)  Storm sewer materials and construction shall conform to the applicable sections of the Illinois Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition, and shall be either reinforced concrete pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO M170, or corrugated metal pipe. The minimum diameter for across road culverts shall be 15 inches. The minimum diameter for storm sewers shall be 12 inches. The minimum gradient shall be 0.3 percent. 
(8)  Inlets shall be placed at locations required to handle the run-off within certain design controls and wherever necessary so that surface water is not carried across any street or intersection. The maximum permissible encroachment of water on the pavement shall be ten feet. 
(e)  Dams and impoundment structures. Dams and berms for water impoundments, pools, ponds, reservoirs and small lakes shall be planned, designed and constructed under the supervision of a registered professional engineer and shall meet the approval of the Division of Water Resources, Illinois Department of Natural Resources. An engineering report shall be submitted to the development administrator on all existing dams within a proposed subdivision. Any dam found to be structurally unsafe shall be reconstructed or reinforced in accordance with the division of water resources standards. 
(Sec. 12.3.4; Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 9-20-10)  
Sec. 34-12-25. - Water facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  An adequate supply of potable water shall be provided to every platted lot in accordance with Illinois Environmental Protection Agency regulations. If a public water main is not accessible, the developer shall take necessary action to extend water mains for the purpose of providing a water supply system capable of providing for domestic water use and fire protection. 
(2)  When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the development administrator or his designee. All water mains shall be at least eight inches in diameter. In certain instances, the development administrator or his designee may require water mains to exceed eight inches in diameter. In these cases, the difference in material costs between an eight-inch main and the size required by the development administrator or his designee will be paid for by the city. 
(3)  Water main extensions shall be approved by the development administrator or his designee. 
(4)  The location of all fire hydrants and all fire hydrants and all water supply improvements shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be borne by the developer and included in the subdivision improvement agreement and financial security to be furnished by the developer. 
(b)  Design standards. 
(1)  Water plans. All water plans must be in conformance with Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois (latest edition) (referenced as standard specifications, hereafter). If there is a conflict between the specifications and these regulations, the more stringent provision shall apply. 
(2)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with Section 45 of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, latest edition. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart, within 400 feet of every lot, and shall be approved by the development administrator or his designee and fire chief in accordance with the State of Illinois Fire Marshal's standards. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. 
(3)  Water main pipe. Water main pipe shall be SDR21PVC or class 250 ductile iron bell and spigot joints conforming to ASTM D3139 except at hydrants and fittings. 
(4)  Tapping sleeves. Tapping sleeves shall be one of the following: Mueller type H-615 for cast iron pipe or ductile iron pipe; Mueller style H-612, ROMAC style SST or Ford style FAST for PVC Pipe. All tapping sleeves shall include either a ductile iron or stainless steel retaining flange. 
(5)  Tapping valves. Tapping valves shall be flanged by mechanical joint outlets with resilient seat wedge shut off design. The retainer gland on the mechanical joint outlet shall be a megalug series 2000PV. 
(6)  Granular base required. Select granular back (CA-6) crushed stone shall be installed for the full depth over all water mains that cross area to be paved. 
(7)  Crossing of water mains. Crossings of water mains shall be constructed in accordance with Section 41-2.01 of the standard specifications. 
(8)  Thrust blocking. Thrust blocking shall be constructed in accordance with Section 41-2.09 of the standard specifications. 
(9)  Disinfection. Chlorine shall be used for disinfection in accordance with Section 41-2.14 of the standard specifications. 
(10)  Hydrostatic air testing. Hydrostatic air testing of all new water mains shall be performed in accordance with Section 41-2.13 of the standard specifications. The contractor is required to provide all materials and manpower necessary for testing. The contractor shall notify the public works department when the testing takes place so that a city representative can be present. 
(11)  Bacteriological water sampling. Bacteriological water sampling of all new water mains shall be performed by a representative of the public works department prior to acceptance of the water lines by the city. 
(12)  Turning on water mains. The public works department shall be responsible for turning on the new water main extension. 
(13)  Water connections. Water connections between buildings and the city's water meter shall be Type K rolled copper tubing. 
(14)  Additional requirements. The subdivider shall comply with all additional standard city requirements for the installation of water mains. 
(Sec. 12.3.5)  
Sec. 34-12-26. - Wastewater facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. The applicant shall install wastewater sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the city's construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed and approved in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the development administrator or his designee. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend wastewater sewers for the purpose of providing sewer facilities to the subdivision. 
(b)  Design criteria for wastewater sewers. 
(1)  General guidelines. These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances when considered justified by the development administrator or his designee. 
(2)  Sewer plans. All wastewater sewer plans must be in conformance with Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois (latest edition) (referenced as standard specifications, hereafter) and the Illinois Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, Part 370, latest edition. If there is a conflict between the specifications and these regulations, the more stringent provision shall apply. 
(3)  Sewer pipe. Wastewater sewer pipe shall be SDR35 PVC conforming to ASTM D3034, with joints conforming to ASTM 3212. Service sewers and risers shall be SDR35 PVC conforming to ASTM D3034, with joints conforming to ASTM 3212. 
(4)  Backfill. Selected granular backfill case III shall be type (CA-6) and shall be used at all locations where sewer mains and services are installed for the full depth under areas to be paved and shall extend three feet beyond all paved surfaces. 
(5)  Embedment. Pipe embedment class III shall be used for all wastewater sewer mains and installed in accordance with ASTM D2321. 
(6)  Air and deflection testing. Air and deflection testing of all new wastewater sewer mains shall be performed in accordance with Section 31.1.11 of the standard specifications. The contractor is required to provide all materials and manpower necessary for testing. The contractor shall notify the public works department when the testing takes place so that a city representative can be present. 
(7)  Manholes. All manholes shall be type "A" in design and four feet in diameter, equipped with a-lock rubber gaskets. Risers and slabs shall be in accordance with ASTM C 478. Lifting holes shall be provided in the bases and risers. Lifting hooks shall be provided in flat slabs. Manhole steps shall be constructed of copolymer polypropylene plastic. 
(8)  Manhole frames and lids. All manhole frames and lids shall be either Neenah type R-1916D, Deeter type 1270 series or East Jordan type 1058ZPT. The manhole lid shall have cast in the center the work "wastewater". Mastic sealant shall be applied between the concrete and flange of the frame before the lid bolts are tightened. 
(9)  Minimum slope for wastewater service laterals/risers. Minimum slope for all wastewater service laterals shall be one-eighth inch per foot. Sewers installed greater than ten feet deep shall have a section of sewer service lateral and a plug installed from a T location to an elevation not less than eight feet below the finish grade. 
(10)  Staking of service laterals. The end of each service lateral shall be marked with a treated two-inch by four-inch stake left at least three feet above the finished grade. 
(11)  Switching flow. The contractor shall obtain approval from the city public works department before switching flow from the new sewer to the existing system. 
(12)  Minimum diameter. All wastewater sewer mains shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter. In certain instances, the development administrator or his designee may require wastewater mains to exceed eight inches in diameter. In these cases, the difference in material costs between an eight-inch main and the size required by the development administrator or his designee will be paid for by the city. 
(13)  Building connections. All wastewater sewer connections to buildings shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter. 
(14)  Additional standards. The subdivider shall comply with all additional standard city requirements for the installation of wastewater sewer mains. 
(15)  Lift stations and force mains. If the design and construction of a sewer lift station and force pipe main are required, general specifications to construct such facilities must be obtained from the development administrator or his designee. 
(Sec. 12.3.6)  
Sec. 34-12-27. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Required improvements. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement right-of-way of roads when the planning commission or city council deem that sidewalks are necessary to ensure public safety. Sidewalks will be required on both sides of all public streets, near schools, in developments where the density exceeds four dwelling units per acre, and in shopping areas and similar public places. Owner(s) shall complete all new sidewalks in a development within two years of the city's acceptance of public improvements. City manager has the ability to modify the time frame of sidewalk completion with the execution of a developer agreement or a specific escrow account. 
(2)  Construction standards. 
(a)  Relationship to curb. The street-side edge of every sidewalk shall be located at least four feet from the curb to allow sufficient space for tree planting. Tree wells shall be provided. 
(b)  Width. Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide. Nonresidential sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide. 
(c)  Thickness of concrete. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four inches thick, except that across driveways the thickness shall be increased to six inches and/or number six reinforcing mesh shall be used. 
(d)  Grade. No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than ten percent. Cross slopes shall not exceed two percent and driveway grades shall be adjusted to maintain a maximum cross slope of two percent through the "sidewalk zone". 
(e)  Ramps at intersections. When sidewalks are required curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be ramped at all intersections so as to enhance the mobility of handicapped individuals conforming to IDOT Highway Standard 4-24-001 curb ramps for sidewalks. 
(b)  Pedestrian access. The city council may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Sec. 12.3.7; Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 8-18-08)  
Sec. 34-12-28. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  Gas, electric power, telephone, cable television and other utilities, except surface stormwater facilities, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Except, however, that the following shall be excluded from this requirement: 
(1)  Poles used exclusively for street lighting. 
(2)  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used for furnishing communication services. 
(3)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(4)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for a period not to exceed six months which are necessary to provide utility service until the permanent service is completed. 
(5)  Poles, wires and controller cabinets necessary for the operation of traffic signals. 
(6)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(7)  Other utility facilities which may be exempted by the city council based on a recommendation from the development administrator. 
(b)  All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. 
(Sec. 12.3.8)  
Sec. 34-12-29. - Public uses. 
(a)  Parks. 
(1)  Parks. The planning commission shall require that land be reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes in locations designated by the Comprehensive Plan or official map. The area shall be shown and marked on the plat, "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes". 
(2)  Park sites. The planning commission shall refer any subdivision proposed to contain a dedicated park to the city council for a recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to the city for park purposes shall have prior approval of the city council and shall be shown marked on the plat, "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes". 
(3)  Greenspace requirements for multi-family projects. Multi-family projects shall provide greenspace in an amount determined according to the schedule provided in section 34-12-29(b)(3), with the provision that "number of lots" shall be replaced by "number of units" for the purposes of calculating the minimum greenspace requirement. The requirements for meaningful and accessible layout of greenspace shall also apply to multi-family projects. 
(b)  Green space. 
(1)  General green space requirements. In every proposed residential subdivision where the gross land area before subdivision exceeds six acres or the proposed subdivision contains 20 or more lots, the developer shall: 
(i)  Dedicate or set aside green space for the use of residents in the subdivision. Such green space shall be owned, supervised and managed by the subdivision homeowners' association. All green space areas shall be included on the respective subdivision plats and appropriately integrated into the restrictive covenants for the subdivision. 
(ii)  In lieu of green space provided within the subdivision, the applicant may provide a parks in-lieu development fee. This fee shall be paid to the city and be used by the city for the expansion and/ or improvement of existing or future city parks. The in-lieu fee shall be established within the Unified Fee Ordinance and specified in the fee resolutions. This fee may be updated as determined appropriate by the city council. 
(2)  Specific requirements for green space within development. The green space shall consist of park, recreation or other green space, whether developed for recreational uses or not, but shall not include nor credit water retention, water detention or other storm water management areas. Every green space area shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet in size and shall be configured to provide adequate space for meaningful passive or active recreation areas and not be merely remnants of land area not adequate for inclusion in a lot. The active recreational areas required to meet this provision shall not be less than 50 percent of the total area. Active space is defined as playground equipment, picnic tables and facilities, appropriately sized pavilions or other shelters. Passive improvements can include walkways, bikeways, exercise trail, and usable open spaces typical of recreational uses. Not more than 20 percent of the green space may be covered by impervious surfaces including, but not limited to, parking lots, tennis courts, buildings and other structures. Green space must be accessible to all lots via rights-of-way or easements to preclude having to cross private land. 
(3)  Minimum green space requirements. The amount of green space provided by a subdivision shall be based on the following schedule: 
Number of Lots 	Required Green Space 
Less than 20 (gross land area over 6 acres) 	10,000 square feet 
20 to 50 lots 	500 square feet per lot 
51 to 100 lots 	25,000 square feet, plus 500 square feet for each lot over 50 
101 to 200 lots 	47,500 square feet, plus 500 square feet for each lot over 100 
More than 200 lots 	87,500 square feet, plus 500 square feet for each lot over 200 
 
(4)  Cumulative impact of adjacent subdivisions. Developers shall not avoid the green space requirements of this section by configuring proposed subdivisions into smaller parcels or attempting phased developments to avoid setting aside green space. When any parcel over six acres in size is proposed for subdivision into 19 or fewer lots, the gross land area of the proposed lots is less than six acres, and the remaining land is capable of division into two or more lots, the sub-divider shall provide green space in accordance with this section. 
(5)  Other green space. The provisions of this section are minimum standards. None of the paragraphs above shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from providing other land for green space purposes in addition to the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Other public uses. 
(1)  Plat to provide for public uses. Except when an applicant utilizes planned development procedures in which land is set aside by the developer as required by the provisions of this Code, whenever a tract to be subdivided includes recreation uses, or other public use as indicated in any portion of the Comprehensive Plan or official map, the space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into its preliminary plat. After proper determination of its necessity by the city council and the appropriate city official of other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such site and a determination has been made to acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into the preliminary and final plats. 
(2)  Referral to city council. The planning commission shall refer the preliminary plat to the city council for its consideration and report. The city council may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency 30 days for reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition. 
(3)  Notice to property owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report, the city council shall notify the property owner and shall designate on the preliminary and final plats that area proposed to be acquired by the public body. 
(4)  Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within 12 months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a preliminary plat of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed 12 months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation form the property involved and the freeing of the property for development in accordance with these regulations. 
(Sec. 12.3.9; Ord. No. 05-22, § 1, 10-3-05; Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 34-12-30. - Preservation of natural features and amenities. 
(a)  General. Existing features that would add value to residential development or to the city as a whole, such as trees, as herein defined, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land affected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. Any lot that retains trees should preserve trees of eight-inch caliper or more. When because of setbacks or other lot factors, the footprint of the house requires destruction of more than 25 percent of such trees, a new tree of at least two and one-half-inch caliper size should be planted for each lost tree. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of grade. The preliminary plat shall show the number and location of existing trees as required by these regulations and shall further indicate all those marked for retention and the location of all proposed street trees required along the street side of each lot as required by these regulations. 
(b)  Street trees planted by developer. 
(1)  As a requirement of subdivision approval the applicant shall plant street trees on the property of the subdivision. Such trees are to be planted within five feet of the right-of-way of the road or roads within and abutting the subdivision, or, at the discretion of the city council, within the right-of-way of such roads. One tree shall be planted for every 40 lineal feet of frontage along each road unless the city council shall grant a waiver. The waiver shall be granted only if there are trees growing along the right-of-way or on the abutting property which, in the opinion of the city council, comply with these regulations. 
(2)  New trees to be provided pursuant to these regulations shall have a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches. Such trees shall be selected from among the species in the definition of approved street tree contained in section 34-2-3. 
(c)  Shade tree easement and dedication. The preliminary plat and final plat shall reserve an easement authorizing the city to plant street trees within five feet of the required road right-of-way. No street shall be accepted for dedication until the development administrator or his designee shall inform the planning commission and city council that compliances, where necessary, has been made with these regulations. 
(Section 12.3.10)  
Sec. 34-12-31. - Preservation of residential subdivision common grounds and green space areas. 
Unless the city council determines that exigent circumstances justify otherwise, every existing or future residential subdivision common ground or green space area shall continue to exist on a perpetual basis. This is to ensure the preservation of present and future subdivision common grounds in green space or land devoted to subdivision recreational activities, park-like areas, buffers or other open space in the respective subdivisions. 
(a)  Existing and future subdivision common grounds and green space areas shall not be allowed to be split, subdivided or replatted. No subdivision common ground, or any portion thereof, shall be allowed to be combined with or transferred into any other tract of land, platted area or lot. Each subdivision common ground and green space area will continue to exist, on an ongoing basis, as a separate legal entity as it was originally platted in the establishment of the subdivision. 
(b)  No residential structures or commercial buildings shall be permitted to be constructed on any subdivision common ground or green space area. Applicable subdivision restrictive covenants for the common grounds and green space areas will apply and govern the ongoing management and maintenance of the subdivision common grounds and green space areas. 
(c)  It is envisioned that normally the subdivision common grounds will be established and maintained under the ongoing ownership of an entity of the respective subdivisions. If however, the ownership of a subdivision common ground area is transferred to another third party through a forced sale such as, delinquent taxes or other court ordered action, or any other type of land transfer, the restrictions of this section along with other applicable sections of this Code will continue to apply. 
(Sec. 12.3.11)  
Sec. 34-12-32. - Non-residential subdivisions. 
(a)  General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to the land shall make provision as the city council may require. A non-residential subdivision shall also be subject to all other requirements of this Code relative to site design and architectural review. A non-residential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the city council, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the Comprehensive Plan, official map and all provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
(3)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water drainage. 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
(6)  Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
(Sec. 12.3.12)  
ARTICLE XIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 34-13-1. - Scope of provisions. 
This article contains the regulations pertaining to administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code, issuance of permits and certifications, inspection of property, issuance of stop work and stop use orders, and enforcement of violations of the provisions of this Code. 
(Sec. 13.1)  
Sec. 34-13-2. - Development administrator responsibilities. 
This Code shall be administered and enforced by the development administrator, who shall have the following duties with respect to this Code: 
(a)  Shall enforce the provisions of this Code. In addition, the development administrator shall enforce all regulations and conditions governing development of any and all projects as permitted by this Code, following approval by the planning commission, city council, or board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  May determine the actual location of a boundary line between zoning districts, where such line does not coincide with a property line or district boundary line. Such determination shall be subject to appeal before the board of zoning appeals. 
(c)  Shall approve appropriate permits. 
(d)  Shall examine premises for which permits have been issued. The development administrator shall also investigate matters referred to in this Code and render written or oral reports. 
(e)  May cause the cessation of any erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use in violation of this Code by issuing a stop work or stop use order. 
(f)  May refer any violation of this Code to the city attorney for prosecution or other appropriate action when deemed necessary. 
(g)  May adopt such administrative policies, in cooperation with the city council, deemed necessary to the execution of his enforcement responsibilities. 
(h)  The development administrator shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. All papers in connection with building work shall be retained on file so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. Such records shall be open to public inspection at reasonable hours, but shall not be removed from a permanent place designated by the development administrator. 
(i)  Shall perform such other related duties as the city council may from time to time prescribe. 
(Sec. 13.2)  
Sec. 34-13-3. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, adopted February 4, 2008, amended division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 34-13-4—34-13-10, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Sec. 13.3—13.3.5. 
 
Sec. 34-13-4. - Council grants conditional use permits. 
The city council by conditional use permit after public hearing by the planning commission, and subject to such protective restrictions as it deems necessary, may authorize the location, extension, or structural alteration of any one of the buildings or uses listed in each district as a conditional use. Conditional use permits shall be issued to tenants and operators. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-13-5. - Application for conditional use permit. 
A written application shall be filed with the development administrator to obtain a conditional use permit for the uses hereinafter set forth in this section or for uses previously issued a conditional use permit where alteration or an extension is requested. Upon receipt of an application, together with a site plan and necessary descriptive material of the entire parcel including all permitted and conditional uses, the development administrator shall submit the application to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-13-6. - Review by planning commission. 
The planning commission shall review the application, hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section, approve or disapprove the application, and submit a report of its recommendations to the city council within 45 days. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-13-7. - Public hearing. 
Notice shall be given of the time and place of the hearing, not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-13-8. - Notice to owners. 
In addition, the city clerk shall mail notice of the proposed conditional use permit to all owners of property which are located within 250 feet of any part of the property being considered for a conditional use permit at least 15 days prior to the time the planning commission holds a public hearing on the request. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-13-9. - City council action. 
No action shall be taken upon any applications for a proposed building or use referred to above until and unless the report of the planning commission has been filed; provided, however, that if no report is received from the planning commission within 45 days, the city council may proceed with its action upon the application. The city council shall vote on the conditional use permit following the public hearing. If the action by council is similar to the recommendation of the planning commission, the council vote may be a simple majority of those present. If the action by council is contrary to the recommendation of the planning commission, the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the city council shall be required to authorize and approve the issuance of any conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-13-10. - Criteria for reviewing applications. 
In considering whether or not such application for a conditional use permit should be granted, it shall be the duty of the planning commission and the city council to give consideration to the effect of the requested use on the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of the area in the vicinity of the property in question and the residents of the city generally. In considering the conditional use, the planning commission and the city council should consider the following: 
(a)  Whether the proposed conditional use is consistent with the city's Comprehensive Plan, and will not impede normal, orderly development of the neighborhood. 
(b)  The compatibility with surrounding uses and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, including any substantial impact on property values. 
(c)  The comparative size, floor area, mass, and general appearance of the proposed structure in relationship to adjacent structures and buildings in the surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
(d)  The amount of traffic movements generated by the proposed use and the relationship to the amount of traffic on abutting streets and on minor streets in the surrounding neighborhood in terms of the street's capacity to absorb the additional traffic and any significant increase in hourly or daily traffic levels. 
(e)  The added noise level created by activities associated with the proposed use and the impact of the ambient noise level of the surrounding area and neighborhood. 
(f)  The impact of night lighting in terms of intensity, duration, and frequency of use as it impacts adjacent properties and in terms of presence in the neighborhood. 
(g)  The impact of the landscaping of the proposed use in terms of landscaped areas, buffers, and screens. 
(h)  The potential for the proposed use to remain in existence for a reasonable period of time and not become vacant or unused. Consideration should also be given to unusual single purpose structures or components of a more temporary nature. 
(i)  Whether there are any facilities near the proposed use (such as schools or hospitals) that require special protection. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-13-10.1. - Revocation of conditional use permit. 
(a)  The city council may institute a rezoning or an extension (all or any part) of a conditional use permit if any approved conditional use permit granted by the city council is not exercised and put into use within 12 months of the date of approval. 
(b)  Upon failure of compliance with the regulations and restrictions of this Code or the requirements of the conditional use permit, the city manager will provide 30 days written notice of possible revocation. 
(c)  If no remedy is received, then the city council, after a public hearing, may revoke a conditional use permit for failure of compliance with the regulations and restrictions of this Code or the requirements of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, adopted February 4, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as § 34-13-11. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 34-13-10.1.  
Sec. 34-13-10.2. - Lapse. 
A conditional use permit shall lapse and become void unless the applicant begins operation of the conditional use permit within one year of the date of the approval by the city council. Upon the written request of the property owner and for good cause shown, the city council may grant one extension of not more than one year. An application for extension will be considered only if it is submitted, in writing, prior to the expiration of the initial period. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, adopted February 4, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as § 34-13-12. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 34-13-10.2.  
DIVISION 3. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 34-13-11. - Applicability. 
(a)  Applicable zoning districts. An approved site plan is required in all districts for the development or redevelopment of any parcel of land proposed for any land use. The purpose of the site plan review procedure is to enable the city to consider potential impacts upon the area in the vicinity of the property, consistency with good planning practice, and to ensure high standards of site and building design for the general welfare of the city and its residents. 
(1)  Exceptions. 
(a)  Certain limited legal accessory uses. 
(b)  Improvements made in emergency events. 
(c)  Public utilities or improvements. 
(d)  Schools: City receives improvement plans from the school district for review and input. Re: street access, utility connection, general site compatibility (bulk, setbacks, etc.). 
(e)  Agriculture uses which do not involve additional impervious surfaces. 
(b)  Types of site plans. Site plans shall be divided between major and minor site plans. 
(c)  Relationship to other ordinance requirements. The requirements, procedures and standards contained in this division III are in addition to the requirements, procedures and standards contained in other sections of this Code which shall remain applicable to the parcel for which the application is filed. In case of conflict between the general provisions and district regulations of the Unified Land Development Code with provisions of this division, the more restrictive requirement shall control. 
(Sec. 13.4.1; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 34-13-12. - Application, review and approval of a site plan. 
(a)  Minor site plan procedure. The procedure for obtaining approval of a minor site plan includes: 
(1)  The filing of an application with the site plan. This application shall include all items "checked" for submittal on the "Site Plan Submittal Checklist". This list shall be prepared on a case-by-case basis by the development administrator to reflect the individual application needs for adequate review. 
(2)  Review and comments by city departments. The development administrator may solicit input and impose requirements as requested from city departments. 
(3)  Minor site plan approval. The development administrator may approve a minor site plan if the site plan complies with all requirements of the city's Unified Land Development Code. If the development administrator denies approval of a minor site plan including the provision of written comments as to the reason for such denial, the denial may be appealed by the applicant to the planning commission for review. The planning commission shall then approve the minor site plan, approve the minor site plan with conditions, or deny the site plan. 
Minor site plan exceptions: The development administrator may waive the requirement that a minor site plan be submitted when the applicant demonstrates to the development administrator one of the following: 
• That the proposed development, issuance of a certificate of occupancy or change in the principal use of the property will have no detrimental impact on adjoining property and would otherwise clearly comply with all regulations of the city without review of the plan, thereby eliminating the necessity for the establishment of or revision to a minor site plan; or 
• That the proposed development will conform in every material respect to a site plan previously approved for the same property; or 
• That valid and complete subdivision improvement plans already have been approved by the city for the development as proposed. 
(b)  Major site plan procedure. The procedure for obtaining approval of a major site plan includes: 
(1)  Procedure summary. 
(a)  Filing an application with the site plan; 
(b)  Review and comments by city departments; 
(c)  Review of the staff report/site plan and approval by the planning commission; and 
(d)  Approval of the site plan by the city council. 
(2)  Procedure detail. 
(a)  Application. 
(i)  An applicant shall confer with the development administrator, or the Administrator's designee, to become familiar with the city's regulations and requirements affecting the district in which the parcel in question lies and shall obtain copies of various city ordinances pertaining to procedures and requirements for site plan approval. 
(ii)  An application may be made by the owner or by any person with a contractual interest in the property. Written consent of the owner shall be required if the applicant is not the owner. All owners must join if multiple owners exist within the project site. The written application for review and approval of the site plan shall be filed on a form supplied by the development administrator and shall be accompanied by a site plan as described in section 34-13-13. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state the name and address of the applicant and of the owner. If the applicant is not the owner, the application shall identify the applicant's specific contractual interest in the property. 
(iii)  A fee for reviewing the site plan shall be paid to the city at the time of filing the application. Fees may include provisions for payments related to direct expenses incurred by the city for engineering and legal services. 
(iv)  Additional studies may be required for project related impacts—Traffic, storm drainage, utilities, etc. 
(v)  Architectural drawings including elevations, landscape elements, and other key design features. 
(b)  Review of application. Upon receipt of an application completed in satisfactory form, the development administrator may deliver a copy of the application and accompanying papers including the site plan to the appropriate city departments for their review and comments on the impact of the proposed development on health, safety, traffic, public services or facilities and other relevant consideration, in both the area of the project, and other areas of the city which may be affected. Such comments shall be sent to the development administrator and forwarded to the applicant within 21 days of the receipt of the completed application. 
Within 21 days from the forwarding of comments to the applicant, the applicant shall advise the development administrator of the applicant's desire to supplement and/or revise the application and site plan based on the city's comments; or proceed to a review by the planning commission. If the applicant opts to proceed to a review of the unrevised site plan by the planning commission, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next available meeting of the commission. If the applicant opts to revise the site plan, the previously outlined review periods will be repeated. 
(c)  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review the site plan at a public meeting and recommend approval, disapproval, or approval with conditions. Wherever possible, concurrent review of the site plan and architectural review shall take place. In determining whether to recommend approval, disapproval, or approval with conditions, the planning commission shall consider: 
(i)  All relevant information, including: 
* The site plan's consistency with good planning practices, 
* Its compatibility with adjacent developments and uses, 
* Its effect on the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
(ii)  Likely effects of the site plan on vehicular or pedestrian traffic, fire hazards, fire, police and utility services, municipal expenditures, surface water drainage facilities and environmental aspects. 
(d)  Approval by city council. After considering the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall approve the site plan, disapprove the site plan or approve the site plan with conditions. 
(c)  Validity of a site plan. Approval of a site plan shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of approval by the city. If no building permit is obtained during that period, the approval shall terminate. The city council may grant extensions of time not to exceed 12 months each, upon written request of the applicant provided that the request is filed prior to the expiration date. The city council may attach new conditions when an extension is granted. The same procedure shall be followed by the development administrator for minor site plans. 
Modified extension requested. The applicant may request modifications as a part of an approval extension. For a substantially similar major site plan, the council may grant an extension with modifications approved (new conditions may be required). If, in the opinion of the city council, the application contains substantial changes to the originally approved plan, a new major site plan review process may be required including the payment of a new application fee. 
(Sec. 13.4.2; Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 34-13-13. - Submittal requirements. 
(a)  Content of site plan. Generally, applications shall include a site plan incorporating all information found in the "Site Plan Submittal Checklist", which is available and maintained in the development administrator's office. As stated above, minor site plan submittal checklists are tailored on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  Site plan drawings. Generally, the scale for all drawings shall be no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, and the drawings shall contain the project name, street names, a scale, north arrow, and the date drawn. In certain circumstances, plans shall also be provided in reduced (8½" x 11") format. 
(c)  Number of copies of plans. The applicant will be required to submit a specified number of plans at certain points during the review process, responding to the distribution to departments and commission/council reviewers. 
(Sec. 13.4.3)  
Sec. 34-13-14. - Maintenance of constructed improvements. 
Buildings, structures, landscaping and other improvements shall be constructed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the site plan as approved by the city. It shall be the duty of the owner of the property to maintain such improvements. 
(Sec. 13.4.4)  
Secs. 34-13-15—34-13-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OCCUPANCY PERMITS AND CHANGE OF USE 
 
Sec. 34-13-21. - Applicability of section. 
Every dwelling, every dwelling unit and every nonresidential building within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to the requirements of this section, irrespective of the zoning classification of such building and irrespective of when such building may have been constructed, altered or repaired, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Sec. 13.5.1)  
Sec. 34-13-22. - Transfer of ownership/occupancy. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit or any nonresidential building to sell, lease, rent, or otherwise transfer possession thereof to another until he has first secured an occupancy permit, authorizing such occupancy by the buyer, lessee, renter, or transferee, as the case may be, and has delivered the said permit to such purchaser, transferee or lessee. 
(b)  If there are violations of this chapter which must be abated before an occupancy permit is issued, it shall be the responsibility of the owner, seller, lessor or transferor to abate such violations; provided however, that if the owner, seller, lessor or transferor first provides a true and correct copy of all such violation notices to the purchaser, transferee or lessee and thereafter obtains the purchaser's, transferee's or lessee's written undertaking to abate such violations, upon filing a copy of the said written undertaking, signed by the part to be so bound, with the development administrator, the obligation to abate such violations shall then be the responsibility of the said purchaser, transferee or lessee, who shall be bound thereby without further notice. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to transfers of real estate wherein the transferee notifies the development administrator, in writing, of his/her intent to demolish any buildings located thereon within 90 days of the transfer of such real estate and does so demolish the buildings within the said period of time. The development administrator may, for good cause shown, extend the said period of time for one additional period of 90 days. 
(Sec. 13.5.2)  
Sec. 34-13-23. - Occupancy permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hereinafter occupy, or for any owner or agent thereof to permit the occupancy of any dwelling, dwelling unit, nonresidential building or addition thereto, or part thereof, except an owner-occupied dwelling or dwelling unit, for any purpose until an occupancy permit has been issued by the development administrator. The occupancy permit shall be issued when the occupancy complies with all the provisions of this section. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any occupancy in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter, nor shall a family be considered in violation of this section by reason of births or deaths within a family or by reason of the return of a family member. 
(c)  The occupancy permit must be applied and paid for by the owner, lessor, or seller; said occupancy permit will not be issued until such time as there is an actual change of occupancy, but occupant must furnish such additional information as is required by the issuing authority. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in his application for an occupancy permit including the names, ages, relationships, or number of occupants who will occupy the premises. 
(e)  In the event a person desires to continue to receive a utility service, such as water, electricity, etc., to a dwelling or a dwelling unit during a period of time that the dwelling or dwelling unit actually has no occupants, then upon application and without fee, the development administrator may issue a retention of utility services permit. A retention of utility services permit shall be valid only so long as the dwelling or dwelling unit has no occupants. 
(f)  In the event a property owner desires to restore a utility service, such as water, electricity, etc., to a dwelling or a dwelling unit where no utilities are currently being provided, then upon application and without fee, the development administrator may issue a restoration of utility services permit. Said permit shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed 60 days. If upon the conclusion of the 60 days the property owner has not obtained the necessary permits leading to the legal occupancy of said dwelling or dwelling unit, or the property owner is using said dwelling or dwelling unit contrary to the provisions of City Code, the city shall have the right to order the person(s) providing utility service(s) to discontinue utilities to the dwelling or dwelling unit in question. 
(g)  No occupancy permit shall be issued by the development administrator until such time as all sewer service fines, fees or levies issued against the property in question are paid in full. The development administrator shall be responsible for checking with all appropriate departments to determine if such sewer service fees, fines or levies have been paid. 
(Sec. 13.5.3)  
Sec. 34-13-24. - Utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person that provides a utility service, such as water, electricity, etc., to provide its service to any building, or addition thereto, or part thereof, that is to be used as a dwelling or dwelling unit until an occupancy permit or retention of utility services permit has been issued by the development administrator concerning the dwelling or dwelling unit to be served by said utility and until said occupancy permit or retention of utility services permit is presented to said utility service. The owner of a dwelling can, however, contact the appropriate electric company to have the utilities changed over to his or her name in the event that the tenants move out without sufficient notice. In the event that the utilities are placed back in the owner's name, the owner has seven days to obtain a retention of services permit from the office of the development administrator. 
(b)  If no attempt has been made by the property owner to get a retention of services permit at the end of the seven consecutive days, then the utility company shall discontinue their services. This section shall not apply to any occupancy in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
(Sec. 13.5.4)  
Sec. 34-13-25. - Change of use. 
Any change in use of any building or premises shall be approved by the development administrator prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. The purpose of this approval is to ensure that adequate parking is provided on site, that the new use is permitted in the zoning district, and that there are no violations of this Code. 
(Sec. 13.5.5)  
Secs. 34-13-26—34-13-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 34-13-31. - Temporary outdoor displays. 
The development administrator may permit the temporary outdoor display of merchandise based on the following criteria: 
(a)  The merchandise shall not be located in a right-of-way or on any other public property. 
(b)  The area dedicated to the temporary display of merchandise shall not occupy more than five parking spaces or ten percent of the parking spaces available on the site, whichever figure is lower. 
(c)  Merchandise may be displayed on a sidewalk which is not located within a public right-of-way provided that the area of the sidewalk available for pedestrian circulation shall not be reduced to less than five feet in width. This width shall be measured on a line perpendicular to the edge of the curb. 
(d)  The merchandise must be arranged such that vehicular and pedestrian circulation is not impeded and the merchandise is physically separated from circulation aisles by temporary barriers. 
(e)  The merchandise shall not be displayed on site for a period exceeding 15 days. 
(f)  The area covered by the merchandise shall not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the principal building on the site. 
(Sec. 13.6.1)  
Sec. 34-13-32. - Temporary seasonal displays. 
The temporary display of seasonal, grand opening or special promotional merchandise may be approved by the development administrator subsequent to the submittal and approval of an application for such display. Such temporary display may include, but is not limited to, Christmas trees, pumpkins and displays of other similar merchandise. Such merchandise may be displayed in the open or under a temporary tent, awning or similar device. The permit approval will be conditioned on a demonstration by the applicant that such temporary seasonal display can satisfactorily conform to the following criteria: 
(a)  The merchandise shall not be located in a right-of-way or on any other public property. 
(b)  The area dedicated to the temporary display of merchandise shall not occupy more than five parking spaces or ten percent of the parking spaces available on the site, whichever figure is lower. 
(c)  Merchandise may be displayed on a sidewalk which is not located within a public right-of-way provided that the area of the sidewalk available for pedestrian circulation shall not be reduced to less than five feet in width. This width shall be measured on a line perpendicular to the edge of the curb. 
(d)  The merchandise must be arranged such that vehicular and pedestrian circulation is not impeded and the merchandise is physically separated from circulation aisles by temporary barriers. 
(e)  The merchandise shall not be displayed on site for a period exceeding 35 days. 
(Sec. 13.6.2)  
Sec. 34-13-33. - Festivals. 
Festivals, circuses, street carnivals, sidewalk sales on sidewalks within a public right-of-way and similar events may be approved by the development administrator subsequent to the submittal and approval of an application for a festival permit. Such festival shall be of limited duration and the public health, safety and general welfare shall be maintained throughout the course of the event. The permit approval will be conditioned on a demonstration by the applicant that such festival can satisfactorily conform to the following criteria: 
(a)  Special considerations shall be required for any activity occurring in a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Arrangements for adequate parking shall be made such that major disruptions do not occur for more than one business day. 
(c)  The festival shall not exceed a period of ten days. 
(Sec. 13.6.3)  
Sec. 34-13-34. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENTRY AND INSPECTION OF LAND AND BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 34-13-35. - Authorized representatives. 
Members of the planning commission, members of the board of zoning appeals, the development administrator, or other authorized personnel of the city are hereby empowered in the performance of their functions, to enter upon any land in the city for the purpose of making inspection, examinations and surveys, or to place and maintain thereon monuments, markers, notices, signs or placards effecting the provisions of this Code. The above authorized persons shall present proper identification upon demand when entering upon any land or structure for the purpose of this Code. 
(Sec. 13.7.1)  
Sec. 34-13-36. - Development administrator. 
The development administrator is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected any building or other structure or any land on which work is in progress. 
(Sec. 13.7.2)  
DIVISION 7. - FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES 
 
Sec. 34-13-37. - Fees, charges and expenses. 
The city council may establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, including publication fees, and a collection procedure for all permits, applications, certificates, appeals and other matters pertaining to this Code. The schedule of fees shall be on file with the city clerk, and may be modified or amended as necessary. No permit, certificate, conditional use, rezoning, approval or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses listed in this Code have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the planning commission, board of zoning appeals or city council unless or until fees have been paid in full. 
(Sec. 13.8)  
Secs. 34-13-38—34-13-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 34-13-41. - Violation of Unified Land Development Code. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this Code or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the proper local authorities of the municipality (including city council, planning commission, board of zoning appeals, city attorney, development administrator, or any other officer appointed by the city council), in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. Such regulations shall be enforced by the development administrator, who is empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision of the regulations made under authority of this Code. 
(Sec. 13.9.1)  
Sec. 34-13-42. - Penalty. 
The owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of a building or premises or part of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of said regulations has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes parts or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than $500.00. Each week the violation remains uncorrected shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Sec. 13.9.2)  
Sec. 34-13-43. - Other remedies. 
In addition to the penalties hereinabove authorized and established, the city attorney shall take such other actions at law or in equity as may be required to halt, terminate, remove, or otherwise eliminate any violations of this Code. 
(Sec. 13.9.3)  
ARTICLE XIV. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS  
DIVISION 1. - ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 34-14-1. - Establishment. 
A board of zoning appeals is hereby established in accordance with Chapter 65, Section 5/11-13-3 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(Sec. 14.1)  
Sec. 34-14-2. - Composition; membership. 
The board of zoning appeals shall consist of seven regular members and may include one alternate member, all of whom shall be residents of the city appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(Sec. 14.2.1)  
Sec. 34-14-3. - Length of term. 
The term of office of the members of the board of zoning appeals shall be for five years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall be removed for cause by the mayor and the city council upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(Sec. 14.2.2)  
Sec. 34-14-4. - Officers. 
The board of zoning appeals shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman who shall serve for one year. 
(Sec. 14.2.3)  
Sec. 34-14-5. - Rules. 
The board of zoning appeals shall adopt from time to time such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Code. 
(Sec. 14.2.4)  
Sec. 34-14-6. - Meetings. 
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board of zoning appeals may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be open to the public. The board of zoning appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board of zoning appeals and shall be a public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a reporter utilized by the board of zoning appeals for that purpose. 
(Sec. 14.2.5)  
Sec. 34-14-7. - Quorum. 
Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(Sec. 14.2.6)  
Secs. 34-14-8, 34-14-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 34-14-10. - Applicability. 
Appeals to the board of zoning appeals on any matter over which the board is herein specifically granted jurisdiction may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department or board, other than the board of zoning appeals, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the development administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, by filing with the development administrator and with the board of zoning appeals of notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The development administrator shall immediately transmit to the board of zoning appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. 
(Sec. 14.3.1)  
Sec. 34-14-11. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the development administrator certifies to the board of zoning appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of zoning appeals or by a court of record on application or notice to the development administrator on good cause shown. 
(Sec. 14.3.2)  
Sec. 34-14-12. - Time of hearing. 
The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give not less than 15 days notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation, as well as due notice to the parties in interest (owners or agents of property abutting or fronting upon the property involved in the appeal), and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or be represented by an agent or by attorney. 
(Sec. 14.3.3)  
Sec. 34-14-13. - Fees. 
A fee shall be paid to the development administrator at the time the notice of appeal is filed, which the development administrator shall submit to the city treasurer. 
(Sec. 14.3.4)  
Sec. 34-14-14. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - POWERS OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
 
Sec. 34-14-15. - Powers relating to appeals of administrative decisions. 
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Code. 
(Sec. 14.4.1)  
Sec. 34-14-16. - Powers relating to variances. 
Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the adoption of this Code, or by reasons of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property which conditions are not generally prevalent in the neighborhood and not created by the owner, the strict application of the area regulations of this Code would result in peculiar and exceptional difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the owner of such property, the board of zoning appeals is hereby empowered to authorize upon an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships, provided such relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good. 
(Sec. 14.4.2)  
Sec. 34-14-17. - Findings. 
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this Code, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as sought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals to this Code, the board of zoning appeals shall, before making any finding in a specific case, first determine that the proposed change will not constitute a change in the district map and will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or materially diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare of the city. every change granted or denied by the board of zoning appeals shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based on sworn testimony and evidence specifying the reason for granting or denying the variance. 
(Sec. 14.4.3)  
Sec. 34-14-18. - Vote required. 
The concurring vote of four members of the board of zoning appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of the development administrator, or to decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Code, or to grant any variance to this Code. 
(Sec. 14.4.4)  
Sec. 34-14-19. - Petition of persons aggrieved by decision of board of zoning appeals. 
Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals may present to the circuit court a petition duly verified, specifying the grounds of illegality and asking for relief therefrom. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of zoning appeals. 
(Sec. 14.5)  
ARTICLE XV. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-15-1. - City council action. 
The city council may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal by ordinance the boundaries of districts or regulations, or restrictions herein established.  
Sec. 34-15-2. - Change by petition. 
Applications for amendment, supplement, or modification change of the official zoning, including petitions for annexation, map may be made by any owner or his attorney-in-fact who wants their land to be rezoned/annexed. If such application is made by the owner's attorney, he shall enter upon the application the name and current mailing address of the owner. Satisfactory evidence of ownership shall be provided at the time of application. Such application shall be made upon forms prescribed by the planning commission and duly filed with the commission. The application shall include: 
(a)  A legal description of the property to be rezoned or annexed. 
(b)  A parcel map obtained from the St. Clair County Supervisor of Assessments Office outlining the property to be rezoned or annexed. 
(c)  Proof of ownership of the property. 
(d)  A list containing the names and addresses of all owners of property located within 250 feet of the property to be rezoned/annexed. 
(e)  A fee as required by the city. 
(Sec. 15.1; Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 9-20-10)  
Sec. 34-15-3. - Change by city council or planning commission. 
Recommendations for revision, or amendment of this Code, including the official zoning map, may also be made by the planning commission upon its own motion, for final determination by the city council. Likewise, the city council may revise, modify, or amend this Code, including the official zoning map, upon its own motion. 
(Sec. 15.2)  
Sec. 34-15-4. - Planning commission review. 
Any proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall be first submitted to the planning commission. The commission shall review the application, hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section, approve or deny the application, and submit a report of its recommendations to the city council within 45 days. All proposals are subject to review by other boards and commissions of the city as appropriate. 
(Sec. 15.3; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 9-20-10)  
Sec. 34-15-5. - Public hearing. 
Notice shall be given of the time and place of the hearing, not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the city. If any amendment, change or modification recommends a change in the district boundaries by rezoning of certain property, then such notice shall, in addition to the legal description of the property, contain a commonly recognized designation or address. 
(Sec. 15.4; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-15-6. - Notice to owners. 
In addition, where the proposed amendment recommends a change in the district boundaries by rezoning of property, the city clerk shall mail notice of the proposed rezoning to all owners of property which are located within 250 feet of any part of the property being considered for rezoning action at least 15 days prior to the time the planning commission holds a public hearing on the rezoning. 
(Sec. 15.5; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08)  
Sec. 34-15-7. - City council action. 
An affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the city council shall be required to approve any rezoning request or to adopt any amendment to this Code. 
(Sec. 15.6; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 2-4-08) 
SUMMARY OF BULK REGULATIONS 
Zoning District 	Minimum 
Maximum Lot Size 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Building 
AG, Agricultural 	5 acres 	25 feet 	10 feet 	25 feet 	20% 
RS-10, Single-Family Residential 	10,000 sq. ft. 	25 feet 	10 feet (25 feet combined) 	25 feet 	20% 
RS-8, Single-Family Residential 	8,000 sq. ft. 	25 feet 	10 feet (25 feet combined) 	25 feet 	20% 
RS-5, Single-Family Residential 	5,000 sq. ft. 	20 feet 	5 feet (15 feet combined) 	20 feet 	25% 
RT, Two-Family Residential 	6,000 sq. ft. 	20 feet 	5 feet (15 feet combined 	25 feet 	30% 
RM, Multiple-Family Residential 	5,000 sq. ft. (sf) 
6,000 sq. ft. (duplex) 
10,000 sq. ft. (mf and nonresidential uses) 	25 feet 	5 feet (sf) 
6 feet (duplex) 
6 inches/ft. of bldg. Height (mf and nonresidential uses) 	25 feet 	30% 
RMH, Mobile Home Residential 	4,000 sq. ft. 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	40% 
O, Office 	5,000 sq. ft. 	15 feet 	0/10 feet 1 	10 feet 	30% 
NC, Neighborhood Commercial 	10,000 sq. ft. 	25 feet 	0/10 feet 1 	10 feet 	30% 
DC, Downtown Commercial 	5,000 sq. ft. 	0 	0/10 feet 1 	10 feet 	80% 
GC, General Commercial 	10,000 sq. ft. 	25 feet 	0/10 feet 1 	20 feet 	40% 
LI, Light Industrial 	20,000 sq. ft. 	30 feet 	5/25 feet 2 	10/25 feet 3 	40% 
GI, General Commercial 	20,000 sq. ft. 	30 feet 	5/25 feet 2 	10/25 feet 3 	40% 
AP, Airport 	20,000 sq. ft. 	30 feet 	5/25 feet 2 	10/25 feet 3 	40% 

1. No side yard is required unless abutting residential in which case a ten-foot side yard is required. 
2. A five-foot side yard is required unless abutting residential in which case a 25-foot side yard is required. 
3. A ten-foot rear yard is required unless abutting residential in which case a 25-foot rear yard is required. 
  
Chapter 36 - TAXATION  
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-1-1. - Corporate rate. 
The maximum rate for general corporate purposes of the city be and the same is hereby established at a rate of .25 percent. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/8-3-1.  
Sec. 36-1-2. - Police tax. 
The maximum rate for police protection purposes of the city be and the same is hereby established at a rate of .075 percent. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-1-3.  
Sec. 36-1-3. - Audit tax. 
The city council may levy a "Municipal Auditing Tax" upon all taxable property in the city which will produce an amount which will equal the cost of all auditing for the city. 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/8-8-8.  
Sec. 36-1-4. - F.I.C.A. tax. 
The city council may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the city at whatever rate is necessary to participate in the Federal Social Security System. 
State Law reference— See 40 ILCS Sec. 5/21-101 et seq.  
Sec. 36-1-5. - Tort liability. 
The city council may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the city at whatever rate is necessary to purchase general liability insurance for the city.  
Sec. 36-1-6. - Park tax. 
The tax rate for the parks and recreation fund shall be .20 percent of the equalized or assessed value of all taxable property within the city for recreational purposes to include the maintenance and operation of the municipal swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 745, 2-7-83)  
ARTICLE II. - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX 
 
Sec. 36-2-1. - Tax established. 
All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of the State which are engaged, within the limits of the city, in writing fire insurance, shall pay annually to the treasurer of the city, for the use and support of the fire department of the city, the sum of two percent of the gross receipts of their agencies in the city. All such corporations, companies and associations shall pay at the rate of two percent upon the gross amount of premiums, which shall have been received for any insurance effected or agreed to be effected, within the limits of the city during each year ending July 1st by each association or company, respectively.  
Sec. 36-2-2. - Persons acting as agent, etc., to report premiums. 
Every person who shall act, within the city, as agent or otherwise for or in behalf of any corporation, company or association as referred to in section 36-1-3 of this Code shall, on or before the 15th day of July of each year, render to the city clerk, a full, true, and just account, verified by affidavit, of all the premiums which shall have been reviewed by such agent for fire insurance during the year ending July 1st, preceding such report, in behalf of such corporation, company or association.  
Sec. 36-2-3. - Person acting as agent to make payment of two percent of gross receipts; companies in default not to transact business. 
Every person who shall act within the city as agent or otherwise for or in behalf of any corporation, company or association as referred to in section 36-1-2 of this article, shall, on behalf of the corporation, company or association represented, pay annually to the city treasurer, at the time of making the report referred to in section 36-1-2 two percent of the gross receipts or premiums of his agency, for which the corporation, company or association represented by the person making such report is chargeable by virtue of this article. If such account be not rendered on or before the day designated in this article, or if the rate above fixed shall remain unpaid after that date, it shall be unlawful for such corporation, company or association, so in default, to transact any business within the limits of the city until the above requirements have been fully met; but this provision shall not relieve any such corporation, company or association from the payment of any risk taken in violation hereof.  
Sec. 36-2-4. - Effect of failure of person acting as agent, etc., to make report of premiums or to pay sums due; effecting contracts of fire insurance for non-complying companies, etc. 
Any person acting as agent or otherwise for, or in behalf of any fire insurance company, corporation or association, as referred to in this section, in effecting fire insurance within the limits of the city, who shall fail to make the report required in this article, or fail to pay over the amount due from any such corporation, company or association at the time designated for that purpose, or who shall effect or attempt to effect any contract of fire insurance in behalf of any such corporation, company or association, which has not complied with the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that any prosecution brought by the city to enforce the penalty for the violation of this article shall not interfere with the rights of the city to recover, by appropriate action, the sum due the city, at the rate fixed in this article, from any such corporation, company or association, its agents or representatives.  
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX 
 
Sec. 36-3-1. - Tax imposed. 
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: 
(a)  Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity, at the rate of three percent of the gross receipts from such business originating within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah. 
(b)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah, and not for resale, at the rate of three percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(c)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling water for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of Mascoutah, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent of the gross receipts therefrom.  
Sec. 36-3-2. - Exceptions. 
None of the taxes authorized by this article may be imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof, or shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, water, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or furnishing sewer services be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, nor shall any tax authorized by this section be imposed upon any person engaged in the business unless such tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or operated. Any account(s) of the City of Mascoutah shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by section 36-3-1(b) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 1-19-16)  
Sec. 36-3-3. - Additional funds. 
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money or value, of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers' business.  
Sec. 36-3-4. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Gross receipts means the consideration received for the transmission of messages, the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, electricity or water services for the use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction on account of the cost of service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. 
Transmitting messages, in addition to the usual and popular meaning of person to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to other persons for the transmission of messages. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court.  
Sec. 36-3-5. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the 1st day of December, 1994.  
Sec. 36-3-6. - Returns. 
On or before the last day of January, 1995, each taxpayer shall make a return to the city treasurer for the month of December, 1994, stating: 
(a)  His name. 
(b)  His principal place of business. 
(c)  His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed. 
(d)  Amount of tax. 
(e)  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the city treasurer for the preceding month. 
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the city treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.  
Sec. 36-3-7. - Credit for over-payment. 
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.  
Sec. 36-3-8. - Deposit of funds. 
The tax imposed under this article shall, when collected, be paid into the general corporate fund of the city, or any other fund so designated from time to time by the city.  
Sec. 36-3-9. - Recovery of overpayments. 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount.  
Sec. 36-3-10. - Failure to file return. 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willingly violates any other provisions of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $150.00 nor more than $750.00, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of the tax due. 
(Ord. No. 923, 10-17-94)  
ARTICLE IV. - MOTEL TAX 
 
Sec. 36-4-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
Hotel room or motel room means a room within a structure offered for rental on a daily basis and containing facilities for sleeping. One room offered for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered as a single hotel or motel room. The number of hotel or motel rooms within a suite shall be computed on the basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping. 
Owner means any person having an ownership interest in, conducting the operation of a hotel or motel room, or receiving the consideration for the rental of such hotel or motel room. 
Person means any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstance.  
Sec. 36-4-2. - Tax imposed. 
There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of five percent of the rent charged for the privilege and use of renting a hotel or motel room within the City of Mascoutah, Illinois for each 24-hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room charge is made; provided, however, that the tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any person who rents a hotel or motel room for more than 30 consecutive days or to a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 12-1-08; Ord. No. 11-15, § 1, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 36-4-3. - Exclusion. 
(a)  The ultimate incidence of, and liability for payment of said tax is to be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel room, said person hereinafter referred to as "renter". 
(b)  The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner of every hotel or motel to secure said tax from the renter of the motel or hotel room, and to pay over to the city clerk or any authorized representative of the city said tax under procedures prescribed by the city clerk, or as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Every person required to collect the tax levied by this chapter shall secure said tax from the renter at the time he collects the rental payment for the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this chapter shall be stated separately on said document.  
Sec. 36-4-4. - Books and records. 
The city manager or authorized representative may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this chapter, and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the city manager or authorized representative in the discharge of their duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the city manager or authorized representative shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing: 
(a)  The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the 24-hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel rooms where such shall occur. 
(b)  The actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in question.  
Sec. 36-4-5. - Transmittal of tax revenue. 
(a)  Commencing on May 1, 1996, the owner or owners of each hotel or motel within the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel and motel room during each month commencing on May 1, 1996. The return shall be due on or before the last day of each succeeding calendar month, and the return shall indicate for what period the return is to be filed; i.e., return for January tax receipts is due on or before the last day of February. 
(b)  Commencing on May 1, 1996, the tax return and payment for such period shall be due on or before June 30, 1996. Thereafter reporting periods and taxes shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. At the time of filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the city clerk all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies. 
(c)  If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one and one-half percent per 30-day period, or portion thereof, from the date of delinquency shall be added and collected.  
Sec. 36-4-6. - Collection. 
Whenever any person shall file to pay any tax as herein provided, the corporation counsel shall, upon the request of the city council bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
Sec. 36-4-7. - Proceeds of tax and fines. 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter, including penalties, shall be deposited in the general fund account. 
(Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 36-4-8. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation found willfully guilty of failing to pay, collect, report and transmit said hotel or motel tax to the city clerk in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-115, 3-18-96)  
ARTICLE V. - SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX RATE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 04-16, §§ 1—2, adopted August 2, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as repealing Art. V, §§ 36-5-1—36-5-11 and adding a new Art. V to read as herein set out. Formerly, such article pertained to telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee and derived from Ord. No. 97-118, 10-20-97. 
 
Sec. 36-5-1. - Imposed. 
The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the provisions of Sections 5-25 and 5-30 of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, P.A. 92-0526 is hereby changed to six percent. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 36-5-2. - Effective. 
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law, provided, however, that section 36-5-1 of this article shall take effect for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after the first day of July, 2006. The municipal clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this Ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before March 20, 2006. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 2, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 06-02, § 2, 3-6-06)  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX 
 
Sec. 36-6-1. - Tax imposed. 
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: 
(a)  The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
(1) 	First 2,000 KWH 	.462 cents per KWH 
(2) 	Next 48,000 KWH 	.303 cents per KWH 
(3) 	Next 50,000 KWH 	.273 cents per KWH 
(4) 	Next 400,000 KWH 	.265 cents per KWH 
(5) 	Next 500,000 KWH 	.258 cents per KWH 
(6) 	Next 2,000,000 KWH 	.243 cents per KWH 
(7) 	Next 2,000,000 KWH 	.239 cents per KWH 
(8) 	Next 5,000,000 KWH 	.235 cents per KWH 
(9) 	Next 10,000,000 KWH 	.231 cents per KWH 
(10) 	Over 20,000,000 KWH 	.227 cents per KWH 
  
Sec. 36-6-2. - Type of customer—Rate effective. 
Pursuant to 65 ILCS Sec. 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in section 36-6-1 above shall be effective: 
(a)  On August 1, 1999 for residential customers; and 
(b)  On the earlier of: 
(1)  The last bill issued prior to December 31, 2000; or 
(2)  The date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 ILCS Sec. 5/16-104, for non-residential customers.  
Sec. 36-6-3. - Effective date for article. 
The provisions of section 36-6-1 shall not be effective until August 1, 1999.  
Sec. 36-6-4. - Exceptions. 
None of the taxes authorized by this article may be imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business or privileges may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by section 8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized by this article be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in business of the same class in the city, whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the city.  
Sec. 36-6-5. - Additional taxes. 
Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its business.  
Sec. 36-6-6. - Collection. 
The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the city by such person delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the city upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the city in the manner prescribed by the city. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the city the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this article.  
Sec. 36-6-7. - Reports to city. 
On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a return to the city for the preceding month stating: 
(a)  His name. 
(b)  His principal place of business. 
(c)  His gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed. 
(d)  Amount of tax. 
(e)  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the city, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.  
Sec. 36-6-8. - Credit for over-payment. 
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount.  
Sec. 36-6-9. - Penalty. 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(Ord. No. 99-113, 5-17-99; Ord. No. 99-117, 6-21-99) 
State Law reference— See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/8-11-2  
ARTICLE VII. - TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS CODE 
 
Sec. 36-7-1. - Title. 
This article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Code".  
Sec. 36-7-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code shall apply to the city's procedures in connection with all of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes.  
Sec. 36-7-3. - Definitions. 
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
Act. "Act" means the "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act". 
Corporate authorities. "Corporate authorities" means the city's mayor and city council. 
Locally imposed and administered tax or tax. "Locally imposed and administered tax" or "tax" means each tax imposed by the city that is collected or administered by the city, not an agency or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure maintenance fees. 
Local tax administrator. "Local tax administrator", the city manager, is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this Code to give full effect to this Code. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this Code and the Act. 
City. "City" means the City of Mascoutah, Illinois. 
Notice. "Notice" means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
Tax ordinance. "Tax ordinance" means each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax. 
Taxpayer. "Taxpayer" means any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the city.  
Sec. 36-7-4. - Notices. 
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator, as follows: 
(a)  First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or 
(b)  Personal service or delivery.  
Sec. 36-7-5. - Late payment. 
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: 
(a)  Physically received by the city on or before the due date; or 
(b)  Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage prepaid.  
Sec. 36-7-6. - Payment. 
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: 
(a)  First to the tax due for the applicable period. 
(b)  Second to the interest due for the applicable period. 
(c)  Third to the penalty for the applicable period.  
Sec. 36-7-7. - Certain credits and refunds. 
(a)  The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress. 
(b)  The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the city. 
(c)  The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows: 
(1)  The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying: 
(a)  The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim. 
(b)  The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim. 
(c)  The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment. 
(d)  The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim. 
(e)  A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city. 
(2)  Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either: 
(a)  Grant the claim; or 
(b)  Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial. 
(3)  In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of four percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.  
Sec. 36-7-8. - Audit procedure. 
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this Code. 
(a)  Each notice of audit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The tax. 
(2)  The time period of the audit. 
(3)  A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor. 
(b)  Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours. 
(c)  The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. 
(d)  Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English Language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city. 
(e)  It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability. 
(f)  If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the city's determination of the amount of overpayment. 
(g)  In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax.  
Sec. 36-7-9. - Appeal. 
(a)  The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The reason for the assessment. 
(2)  The amount of the tax liability proposed. 
(3)  The procedure for appealing the assessment. 
(4)  The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. 
(b)  A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment. 
(c)  If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties. 
(d)  If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice. 
(e)  Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.  
Sec. 36-7-10. - Hearing. 
(a)  Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 36-7-9, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. 
(b)  No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed 14 days. 
(c)  At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.  
Sec. 36-7-11. - Interest and penalties. 
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated. 
(a)  Interest. The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be ten percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed. 
(b)  Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of five percent of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25 percent of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.  
Sec. 36-7-12. - Abatement. 
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing.  
Sec. 36-7-13. - Installment contracts. 
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.  
Sec. 36-7-14. - Statute of limitations. 
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing. 
(a)  No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. 
(b)  If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the city, the tax paid was less than 75 percent of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six years after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed. 
(c)  No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer.  
Sec. 36-7-15. - Voluntary disclosure. 
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment form the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.  
Sec. 36-7-16. - Publication of tax ordinances. 
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 36-7-17. - Internal review procedure. 
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall: 
(a)  Timely remove the lien at the city's expense. 
(b)  Correct the taxpayer's credit record. 
(c)  Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.  
Sec. 36-7-18. - Application. 
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the city's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 00-122, 12-18-00)  
ARTICLE VIII. - BUSINESS DISTRICT RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND BUSINESS DISTRICT SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 12-04, §§ 1—4, adopted March 5, 2012, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as repealing Art. VIII, §§ 36-8-1—36-8-7 and enacting a new Art. VIII as set out herein. Such article pertained to home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax, home rule municipal service occupation tax. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 36-8-1. - Imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail within the boundaries of the Mascoutah Business District at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged within the boundaries of the business district in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one percent of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. This "business district retailers' occupation tax" and this "business district service occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances modifications to a motor vehicle for the purpose of rendering it usable by a disabled person, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. 
The imposition of these business district taxes is in accordance with the provision of subsections (b) and (c) respectively, of Section 11-74.3-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (65 ILCS 5/11-74.3-6). 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 3-5-12)  
Sec. 36-8-2. - Enforcement. 
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 3-5-12)  
Sec. 36-8-3. - Certified copy. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before the first day of April 2012. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 3, 3-5-12)  
Sec. 36-8-4. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect on the first day of July next following the adoption and filing of this ordinance with the department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 04-08, § 4, 4-19-04)  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Article IX has been deleted at the direction of the city. The former Art. IX, §§ 36-9-1—36-9-12, pertained to tax increment allocation redevelopment act—interested parties registry registration rules and derived from Ord. No. 14-13, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 3, 2014. 
 
Secs. 36-9-1—36-9-12. - Reserved.  
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES  
ARTICLE I. - DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED 
 
Sec. 38-1-1. - Department established. 
There shall be an executive department of the city known as the waterworks and sewage department. It shall include the city manager, public works director and employees of the department. The designated office shall be the City Hall.  
Sec. 38-1-2. - Water and sewer committee. 
The city manager shall exercise a general supervision over the affairs of the department. He shall ascertain the condition and needs thereof; and shall, from time to time, report the same to the mayor and city council so that a full understanding thereof shall be had; and generally, shall do all acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the departments.  
Sec. 38-1-3. - Public works director. 
The public works director shall be subject to the supervision of the city manager and shall be hereinafter be referred to as the "director". He shall be appointed by the city manager, by and with the advice of the city council and shall hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified. He shall receive such salary as may be provided by the annual budget of the city council at the time of his appointment.  
Sec. 38-1-4. - Duties of the public works director. 
The director shall exercise general management and control over his respective department; and 
(a)  Shall supervise over and be responsible for the conduct and performance of all employees of the department as a department head in accordance with the Personnel Code; 
(b)  Shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the city's water system and sewerage system as provided in this Code; 
(c)  Shall be the custodian of all vehicles, equipment, structures, and property provided by the city for the use of his department; 
(d)  Shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and make such inspections, measurements, and tests as necessary for that purpose; and 
(e)  Shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the provisions of this code or by the city council.  
Sec. 38-1-5. - Regulating wages for workers in public works. 
To the extent and as required by "An Act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by the State, County, City or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for public works," approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing wage of rates in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the City of Mascoutah, is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in St. Clair County area as determined by the Department of Labor and the State of Illinois for the current year, a copy of that determination being attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. As required by said Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois shall supersede the Department's previous determination and apply to any and all public works construction undertaken by the City of Mascoutah. The definition of any terms appearing in this Ordinance which are also used in aforesaid Act shall be that same as in said Act. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public works construction of the City of Mascoutah to the extent required by the aforesaid Act. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, §§ 1, 2, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 06-09, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 07-10, §§ 1, 2, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 08-10, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-08; Ord. No. 10-09, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 11-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 12-12, §§ 1, 2, 6-18-12; Ord. No. 13-09, §§ 1, 2, 6-17-13; Ord. No. 14-08, §§ 1, 2, 6-16-14; Ord. No. 15-13, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-15; Ord. No. 16-13, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-16) 
Editor's note— The prevailing wages are not set out herein but are avilable for inspection in the main office of the city.  
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 38-2-1. - Contract for utility services. 
(a)  Customer accepts service. The rates, rules and regulations contained in this chapter shall constitute and be considered a part of the contract with every person, company or corporation who is supplied with utility services from the waterworks and sewerage system and every person, company or corporation, hereinafter called a "customer" who accepts and uses city utility services shall be held to have consented to be bound thereby. 
(b)  Not liable for interrupted service. The department shall endeavor at all times to provide a regular and uninterrupted supply of service, however, in case the supply of service shall be interrupted or irregular or defective or fail from causes beyond its control or through ordinary negligence of employees, servants or agents, the departments shall not be liable therefor. 
(c)  Using services without paying. Any person using utility services from the city without paying therefor, or who shall be found guilty of breaking the seal of any meter or appurtenances, or bypassing any meter, shall be guilty of violating this Code, and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum as provided in section 1-1-20 of the City Code. 
(d)  Destroying property. Any person found guilty of defacing, tampering, injuring or destroying, or in any manner, limiting the use or availability of any meter or any property of the utility systems, or erecting signs on the property of the department without permission shall, upon conviction of such act, be fined as provided in section 1-1-20 of this Code. 
(e)  Service obtained by fraud. All contracts for utility services shall be made in the name of the head of the household, firm or corporation using the established spelling of that person's or firm's name. Attempts to obtain service by the use of other names, different spellings or by substituting other persons or firms shall be considered a subterfuge and service shall be denied. If service has been discontinued because of nonpayment of bills, or any unpaid obligation and service has again been obtained through subterfuge, misrepresentation or fraud, that service shall be promptly disconnected and the whole or such part of the advanced payment as may be necessary to satisfy the unpaid obligation shall be retained by the city and credited to the appropriate account. 
(f)  Failure to receive bill. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse a customer from his obligation to pay within the time specified. Should the department be unable to bill a customer for services used during any month, the following billing shall include the charges for services used during the unbilled month. 
(g)  Request to discontinue service. Services shall have been deemed to have been supplied to any property connected to the utility systems during a month unless the customer notifies the city prior to the first day of the new billing month in which the services are to be discontinued. 
(h)  Billing; utility shut-off; hearing. 
(1)  This penalty shall be in addition to the charges heretofore established for the utility services. If the charges for such services are not paid within 15 days after the rendition of the bill for such services, a penalty of five percent shall be added to all bills not paid by the due date. 
(2)  Any customer who fails to pay the utility bills within 15 days of presentation shall have the utility services disconnected after a written notice by the city clerk has been mailed by first-class mail to the customer, affording the customer an opportunity for a hearing. The aforesaid notice shall be mailed to the customer 16 days after billing, specifically advising the customer of the following: 
(a)  Name and address of the customer and amount of the bill. 
(b)  The date, time, and location of the hearing to be held. 
(c)  That the customer has a right to be heard and to present evidence in his behalf if he does not agree with the bill. 
(d)  That if the customer fails to appear at the hearing, the consumer's utility service shall be terminated without further proceedings. 
(e)  The date of termination. 
(3)  The time, date and location of the hearing shall be determined by the city manager, mayor, or the clerk. One of these officials shall preside over the hearing and shall make a final determination as to the rights of the consumer and the city based on the information received at the hearing. 
(4)  The customer shall be notified within two working days of the decision rendered by the hearing officer. If the service is to be discontinued, a date and time will be set out in the notice to terminate the service or services of the customer. Notice of the hearing officer's decision shall be made by first-class mail. 
(5)  If the hearing officer decides in favor of the city, the city shall have the right to discontinue the customer's utility services. Should the customer fail to appear at the hearing, or should the notice be returned non-accepted, then the city shall also have the right to terminate the customer's utility services without further proceedings. 
(6)  If the customer who has been notified for nonpayment of utility bills is not the owner of record, then the city shall notify the owner of the property by first-class mail. 
(7)  Once utility services have been disconnected the same shall not be again connected or used until all delinquent accounts and bills of service are paid in full, including a fee of $25.00 for each connection of such utility services, plus expenses incurred in the reconnecting of the utility services. 
(i)  Lien Notice. Whenever a bill for utility services remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the city clerk shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
If the user of utility services whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Treasurer has notice of this, then notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known to the city clerk whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after it has been rendered. 
The failure of the city clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid utility bills as mentioned herein. 
(j)  Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid utility charges may be sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the city. 
The city attorney is hereby authorized to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill for utility services has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-2-2. - Consumer lists. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to prepare or cause to be prepared a complete and accurate list of all premises and properties receiving utility services, showing the name and address of the occupant and the owner of the same. The list shall be kept up-to-date, and shall be corrected from time to time to allow changes in the occupancy or ownership of any such property or premises. It shall be presented at the regular monthly meeting if requested.  
Sec. 38-2-3. - Responsibility for charges. 
The owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises receiving any of the services of the utility systems of the city, the occupant of such premises and the user of the services shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of service to such lot, parcel of land or premises, and all services are rendered to the premises by the city only on the condition that such owner, occupant and user shall be jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-2-4. - Failure of water meter. 
Whenever, for any cause, a water meter fails to operate, a reasonable estimate shall be made by the utility department and approved by the city manager of the amount of water supplied during the period such meter fails to operate and the user shall pay a rate based in whole or in part on the estimated amount of water supplied.  
Sec. 38-2-5. - Accuracy. 
The quantity of water recorded by the meter shall be accepted as correct by both the customer and the city, except when the meter has been found to be registering inaccurately or has been ceased to register. In either case, the meter will be promptly repaired by the city and the quantity of water used will be determined by the registration of the meter during a similar previously metered period of time. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-2-6. - No free utility service. 
No free utility service shall be furnished to any person, public or private, and all rates and charges shall be non-discriminatory, provided that the mayor and city council reserve the right to impose special rates and charges in cases where particular circumstances render the regular rates inadequate or unjust.  
Sec. 38-2-7. - Water service billing deposits. 
Prior to occupying a residence, business or industry any applicant, who is not the owner of record shall pay to the city clerk a water deposit of $20.00 and a sewer deposit of $25.00. The deposits shall be held by the city until the customers vacate the premises for which the deposits are paid. The deposits shall not be returned to a vacating customer until all water and sewer service charges, including penalties, are paid in full. 
(a)  Property owner. A utility deposit of $45.00 shall be paid to the clerk by any applicant who is not the record owner of the property, before any water will be turned on to any premises. The deposit shall be retained by the city until the user discontinues water use from the city at which time the deposit will be returned to the user, provided however, that said user shall have a good payment record, making all monthly payments timely. 
(b)  Security for payment—No interest. The deposits made under the provisions of this section shall be held by the city as security for the payment of water services used by the applicant upon the premises to which his application pertains, and may be so applied when any default is made in the payment in the utilities bill in accordance with this chapter. The depositor shall earn no interest on the deposit. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-2-8. - Special provisions. 
(a)  Duplex or apartments. Where utility service is supplied to a duplex or apartment building, where there is only one meter for the entire premises, the service charge shall be calculated as if the total amount of water metered has been supplied through separate meters for each side of the duplex and for each apartment building. This method shall also be utilized where one meter services more than one business establishment. 
(b)  Mobile home courts. Where utility service is supplied to premises used as a mobile home park, where there is only one meter for the entire premises, the service charge shall be calculated as if the total amount of water metered has been supplied through separate meters equal in number to the number of mobile home spaces occupied at the time of each reading of the meter. The minimum service charge shall apply for each living unit served if less than the minimum amount of water per unit was used.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 38-3-1. - Application for taps and service connections to the waterworks system. 
An applicant desiring a water tap or service connection with the city shall file a written application at the City Hall, signed by the owner of the property for which the tap or service connection is desired, or by the duly authorized agent of such owner. The application shall be accompanied by payment of the fee hereinafter prescribed to cover the cost of such service connection. In the event the application is made by an agent for the owner, then the application shall also be accompanied by the written authority of the owner to the agent for the making of the application. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-2. - All service to be by meter. 
All water service, whether for domestic, commercial or industrial use shall be metered. All meters shall be so placed and installed as to render the same accessible at all times for the purpose of reading or repairing and so as to be free from danger of freezing. Meters outside of a building shall be set in a suitable meter box approved by the public works director. Water shall not be turned on for new connections until the meter has been installed and all other requirements of this chapter on the part of the property owner have been fully complied with. Multi unit residential, commercial or industrial buildings shall have a separate meter installed per unit. All new mobile home park developments shall be required to have a separate meter installed per mobile home unit a single or shared meter shall no longer be permitted. 
(a)  Inside meters. The city shall no longer permit the installation of meters inside homes, businesses, industries, etc. Furthermore, whenever an existing inside meter is found to be defective and in need of replacement, a new meter and appurtenance shall be installed by the city outside of a home, business, industry, etc. in accordance with this section. Fifty percent of the city's cost to relocate a meter to the outside shall be paid by the customers. 
(b)  Meters to be open to inspection. All water meters and water fixtures, connections and appurtenances on private property connected with the waterworks system shall be open to the inspection of the proper officers and employees of the city at all reasonable hours. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-3. - Inspection: Access to premises. 
The city shall have access to all portions of the premises of the consumer at any reasonable time for inspection of the use of water and the consumer's pipe, fixtures, plumbing, and any other apparatus in any manner connected to the waterworks system. The city shall have the right and option to demand change or stopping of use or to require any repair, change, removal or improvement of any pipe, fixture, plumbing or other apparatus that would in any manner affect the water supply or system of the city or the supply or fixtures of other customers. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-4. - Meter damaged. 
Whenever a meter is found to have been damaged by hot water being forced back into it from the consumer's hot water or heating apparatus or for any other cause within control of the consumer, the consumer shall pay the city for the actual cost of the removal, repair, and replacement of the damaged meter and all previous water bills shall be corrected on an estimated basis to cover such period as it appears that the meter was out of order for such damage. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-5. - Damage due to interruption of service; liability. 
All connections for the water services applied for hereunder and all connections now attached to the present waterworks system and all use or service of the system shall be upon the express condition that the city will not be liable for nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, service, pipe, apparatus or appurtenance connected with the waterworks system or for any interruption of the supply of water by reason of the breaking of machinery or by reason of stoppages, alterations or renewals.  
Sec. 38-3-6. - Resale. 
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient or consumer thereof from the city supply to any premises other than that for which application has been made and the meter installed.  
Sec. 38-3-7. - Discontinuing service—Dangerous usage. 
The city shall have the right to refuse water service or to discontinue water service, without notice, at any time to any consumer if the city finds any apparatus or appliances, the operation of which will be detrimental to the water system of the city or to any or all of its consumers. Standpipes, hydrants, gate valves and any other apparatus that cause water hammer or any danger to the water system or other customer's plumbing shall be immediately repaired or removed upon notice from the city or, at its option, the city may immediately discontinue service without notice and without any liability for direct or resulting damages therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-8. - Electric ground wires. 
All persons are strictly forbidden to attach any electric ground wire to any plumbing or water piping which is or may be connected to any water service pipe, water meter, or water main belonging to the city. 
The city shall hold the owner of the premises responsible and liable for any damage to the property or injury to the employees of the city caused by such ground wire. Any and all owners and consumers shall remove any existing ground wires immediately upon written notice from the city. If not so disconnected five days after notice, the city, through its officials, may enter the property and remove such ground wires and the consumer shall pay all costs. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-9. - Water for building or construction purposes. 
Applicants desiring to use water from the waterworks system for building or construction purposes shall make application therefor to the public works director on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
Upon a permit being granted, the service pipe shall be carried at the expense of the applicant to the inside of the curb line where a service cock and meter shall be placed with pipe leading to the surface and a faucet placed at the end thereof above the surface. When the building or construction is completed, the faucet and meter shall be removed and the water shut off unless permanent connection is made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Charge for the use and connection of the meter shall be prescribed by the city manager.  
Sec. 38-3-10. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  All public fire hydrants shall be owned, maintained and used only by the city. Use of water from fire hydrants by contractors and others shall be only upon permission by the city and after approved application to the city. 
(b)  The city shall not be held liable and will not assume any responsibility for the condition of any fire hydrant inside or outside of the city limits or the pressure or amount of water obtainable therefrom or any damage either direct or resultant because of the condition, pressure or amount of water available at any fire hydrant. 
(c)  All public fire hydrants located outside the city limits owned by the city shall be maintained in as good order as reasonably possible, but the city will not undertake or assume any responsibility or liability for their condition or use or abuse. Such public fire hydrants shall be used only for the purpose of extinguishing fires except when the city may issue a special permit for their use to contractors who shall then be responsible for the hydrants and the use of water from them.  
Sec. 38-3-11. - Limited water usage in emergencies. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized to proclaim the existence of an emergency whenever it appears that the city water supply is inadequate for all general uses and purposes, which proclamation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the community and the Mayor is further authorized to declare in similar manner the end of an emergency period. 
(b)  From and after the publication of a proclamation as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the following uses of water shall be prohibited: 
(1)  The washing of cars and other vehicles. 
(2)  The sprinkling of lawns and shrubbery. 
(3)  The watering of gardens. 
(4)  Other nonessential uses. 
and it shall be unlawful for any person to so use water from the city supply during such an emergency.  
Sec. 38-3-12. - Shortage and purity of supply. 
The city shall not be held responsible for or in any manner liable to any person, company, consumer or public body for any claim or damage, either direct or resultant because of any shortage of water supply, any shutoff of water for any reason, any bursting or leakage of either the consumer's or city's mains, pipes and fixtures, any pollution or impurity in water supply or any fire or water damage. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-13. - Non-compliance with rules and regulations. 
If any consumer fails to comply with any of the rules and regulations in force, the city shall notify the consumer of such failure. If the consumer does not remedy the same as the rules provide and within a reasonable time, the city shall have the right to discontinue service. Except in case of non-payment, emergency, necessity, or as otherwise provided, the city will not discontinue service for violation of any rule until five days after notice has been given and the violation has not been remedied. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-3-14. - Easements. 
The consumer shall give such easements and rights-of-way as necessary to the city and allow access for the purpose of construction, repair, maintenance, meter reading, relocation or expansion of the water system. The necessity shall be determined by the city council.  
Sec. 38-3-15. - Use of water on consumer's premises. 
The city shall reserve the right to use the water from the consumer's facilities at any time deemed necessary. No charge shall be made by the consumer for the use of the facilities and no charge shall be made by the city for the water used by the city.  
Sec. 38-3-16. - Removal of meters. 
All meters shall remain the property of the department and may be removed from the customer's premises at any time without notice for the purpose of testing and repairing the same or upon discontinuance of service. Upon discovery of any unlawful act by any customer, his agent, or employee or upon failure to comply with any other rules and regulations of the department, such service shall be disconnected.  
Sec. 38-3-17. - Rules to become part of contract. 
All of the rules and regulations concerning the use of the facilities of the water system and the consumption of water shall be adopted and the same shall become part of the contract with every water consumer and every water consumer shall be considered to take water from the city, subject thereto and bound thereby.  
Sec. 38-3-18. - Installing and maintaining service lines. 
The user shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of service lines between the meter and the residence or business. Such service lines must be at least three-fourths inch in diameter, and shall be installed at a minimum depth of three feet. Service lines must have a minimum working pressure rating of 160 psi at 73.4 degrees F and shall be constructed of one of the following types of materials: Copper, (Type K), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyethylene or polybutylene. Service lines shall not be covered until they are inspected and approved by the director. 
The user shall not connect any service line or any plumbing connected with the service line to any other water source. The service line shall meet all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency's rules and regulations, the Illinois Plumbing Code, and the regulations in this chapter. (See division II, cross-connections.)  
Sec. 38-3-19. - Allocation of maintenance costs between user and city. 
The city shall maintain and repair all water service pipes between the water mains and the curb lines. Any repairs to service lines or taps between the water mains and the sidewalk or property line shall be the city's expense. Any repairs or renewals of water service pipes between the property line or curb line and extending to the owner's premises shall be made at the sole expense of the consumer or owner of the premises.  
Sec. 38-3-20. - City not liable for interruption of supply. 
The city shall have the right to shut off the supply of water whenever it is necessary to make repairs, improvements, and/or enforce rules. Notice as circumstances allow, will be given to consumers, however, in emergencies the water may be shut off without notice. All hot water faucets shall be left open during any shut-off to prevent damage to plumbing. Such necessary work will be done as rapidly as may be practical and whenever feasible at such times as will cause the least inconvenience. The city shall not be held responsible for or liable because of any shut-off of supply for any direct or resultant damages to any person, company or consumer or to any pipe, fixtures, or plumbing. 
Water for steam boilers, gas engines, ice plants, or other industrial use, shall not be furnished by direct pressure from the mains, but only to tanks holding ample reserve supply. Should any equipment be supplied direct from mains, then in case of any shutoff of water, the city will not be held responsible or liable for any direct or resulting damage because of interrupted supply, insufficient pressure, or otherwise. 
Whenever water mains, pipes and service connections are taken up, shut-off or interfered with by reason of any city street improvements, the city will endeavor to maintain service so far as reasonably possible, but will not be directly or indirectly liable for any interruption, poor pressure, or damage of any kind either to consumers, adjacent or to other consumers affected thereby. 
The city expressly stipulates with all its consumers and other persons that it will not insure or be responsible or liable in any manner for any losses, or damages, direct or resultant by reason of any fire, and all water service furnished shall always be conditional upon acts of God, inevitable accidents, fire, strikes, riots, war, or any other cause not within the reasonable control of the city.  
Sec. 38-3-21. - Protection of waterworks and damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the waterworks. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charges of disorderly conduct.  
Sec. 38-3-22. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  While performing the necessary work on private properties duly authorized employees of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury to or death of the inspectors and they shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demand for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in section 38-3-21. 
(b)  The city and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portions of the waterworks lying within said easements. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.  
Sec. 38-3-23. - Penalties. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time state in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke any permit for water service as a result of any violation of any provision of this article. 
Any person who shall continue any violation shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount of not less than $75.00 per day nor more than $750.00 per day. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reasons of such violation.  
Sec. 38-3-24. - Private fire connections. 
All private fire connection mains, pipes, fire hydrants, standpipes, automatic sprinklers and any and all other privately owned fire extinguishing apparatus connected, shall be installed, maintained and used only by the owner or consumer. No connection shall be made to any private fire main pipe or apparatus from which water may be taken for any other purpose than actual fire use. A sufficient number of gate valves shall be placed in the main fire line in order that at the time of fire, portions of such line may be cut off if broken. All fire mains, the construction and kind of hydrants and apparatus shall be subject to the approval of the city. The owner shall furnish the city a complete map showing kind, size and location of all private mains, gates, hydrants and apparatus. No extensions, connections, or additions shall be made for any purpose without the consent and approval of the city. 
The city shall have the right to make a small meter by-pass test and inspections of private main and apparatus at any time and in case any leakage is found, the owner or consumer shall immediately repair or replace any defective pipe or apparatus. In case any pipe or apparatus is found in dangerous condition, the city may, at its option, immediately shut off such private fire main connection and not turn it on until satisfactorily repaired or replaced. The city, at its option, in case of defective pipe or apparatus, or in case the city has any reason to believe that water is being taken for any other purpose than extinguishing fire, may install after five days' notice, a fire main meter at the sole cost and expense of the owner or consumer, and charge thereafter for all water used or wasted at meter rates in addition to the regular fire main connection rate. The city may place seals on private hydrants and other outlets, and in case the same are found broken, may install meter as provided above unless the city has been notified in advance of any test to be made by the consumer. 
The city shall not be held responsible or liable for any direct or resultant damages due to the condition, pressure, amount of water available, or leakage of any private fire mains, hydrants or other apparatus, or because of any shut-offs for non-payment, to make tests or to enforce rules, or because of any fire loss, or damage of any nature.  
Secs. 38-3-25—38-3-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CROSS-CONNECTION ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 38-3-30. - Approved backflow device. 
All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Inspector, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Inspector shall give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations.  
Sec. 38-3-31. - Cross-connection prohibited; exception. 
No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply enters the supply or distribution system of the city, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the city manager and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.  
Sec. 38-3-32. - Investigations by city manager. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause surveys and investigations to be made of commercial industrial and other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the inspector shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years.  
Sec. 38-3-33. - Right to enter premises. 
The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections and that the inspector or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Inspector any information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information when demanded shall, within the discretion of the inspector, be evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this chapter.  
Sec. 38-3-34. - Notice to customer; reconnect fee. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this chapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and until a reconnection fee of $100.00 is paid to the city clerk. 
(b)  Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the Inspector is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the inspector or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. 
(c)  The public water supply, the inspector or the agents or assigns shall not be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of the customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without notice.  
Sec. 38-3-35. - Contaminations cost and the consumer. 
The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.  
Sec. 38-3-36. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL CODE 
 
Sec. 38-3-37. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is: 
(a)  To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply system. 
(b)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety. 
(c)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water systems.  
Sec. 38-3-38. - Application. 
These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the city.  
Sec. 38-3-39. - Responsibility of owner. 
The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customers water service connection. If, in the judgment of the city manager or his authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the city manager shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in section 38-4-43(d) below for a period of at least five years. The city manager may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report to the city to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross-connection control device inspector certified by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.  
Sec. 38-3-40. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations: 
Agency means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Approved means backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation. 
Auxiliary water system means any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
Backflow means the backflow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply. 
Backflow prevention device means any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Consumer or customer means the owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
Consumer's water system means any water system located on the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard. 
Cross-connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other. 
Direct cross-connection means a cross-connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance. 
Indirect cross-connection means a cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve. 
Fixed proper air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life. 
Inspection means a plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admn. Code 890. 
Non-potable water means water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604. 
Plumbing means the actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls. 
Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Potable water means water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes. 
Potential cross-connection means a fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point. 
Process fluid(s) means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, or biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not limited to: 
(a)  Polluted or contaminated waters. 
(b)  Process waters. 
(c)  Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality. 
(d)  Cooling waters. 
(e)  Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems. 
(f)  Chemicals in solution or suspension. 
(g)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes. 
Public water supply means all mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a "non-community water supply". 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closed shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
Service connection means the opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user. 
Survey means the collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection. 
System hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system. 
Used water means any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian. 
Water purveyor means the owner or official custodian of a public water system.  
Sec. 38-3-41. - Water system. 
(a)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: The public water supply system and the consumer's water system. 
(b)  The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the city manager up to the point where the consumer's water system begins. 
(c)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply distribution system. 
(d)  The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system. 
(e)  The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points of use.  
Sec. 38-3-42. - Cross-connection prohibited. 
(a)  Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis. 
(b)  No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency. 
(c)  There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a supply.  
Sec. 38-3-43. - Survey and investigations. 
(a)  The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the consumer's premises. 
(b)  On request of the city manager, or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the city manager for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with Ill. Comp. Stat., Ch. 225, Sec. 320/3. 
(d)  It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that: 
(1)  All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage. 
(2)  Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(3)  Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  Testing and records. 
(a)  Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. 
(b)  Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with Ill. Comp. Stat., Ch. 415, Sec. 5/4(e). 
(c)  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs. 
(d)  A maintenance log shall be maintained and include: 
1.  Date of each test. 
2.  Name and approval number of person performing the test. 
3.  Test results. 
4.  Repairs or servicing required. 
5.  Repairs and date completed. 
6.  Serving performed and date completed.  
Sec. 38-3-44. - Where protection is required. 
(a)  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the city manager, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist. 
(b)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the city manager and the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(2)  Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include premises having sources or system containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the city manager. 
(3)  Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the city manager, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements it make which impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist. 
(4)  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey. 
(5)  Premises having a repeated history or cross-connections being established or reestablished. 
(c)  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the city manager determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists: 
(1)  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes. 
(2)  Laboratories. 
(3)  Piers, docks, waterfront facilities. 
(4)  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water pumping stations. 
(5)  Food or beverages processing plants. 
(6)  Chemical plants. 
(7)  Metal plating industries. 
(8)  Petroleum processing or storage plants. 
(9)  Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors. 
(10)  Car washes. 
(11)  Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks. 
(12)  Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.  
Sec. 38-3-45. - Type of protection required. 
(a)  The type of protection required under section 38-3-44 of these regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard. 
(2)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard. 
(3)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. 
(b)  The type of protection required under section 38-3-44 of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention connected to the public water supply when: 
(c)  Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when: 
(1)  The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals; 
(2)  Water is pumped into the system from another source; or 
(3)  Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; 
(4)  There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the fire safety system. 
(d)  All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.  
Sec. 38-3-46. - Backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specification. 
(b)  Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802, and only as specified by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site.  
Sec. 38-3-47. - Inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer's instructions. 
(1)  Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or by passed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours. 
(2)  Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed within 15 days. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five days. 
(b)  Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing. 
(c)  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs. 
(d)  A maintenance log shall be maintained and include: 
(1)  Date of each test or visual inspection. 
(2)  Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection. 
(3)  Test results. 
(4)  Repairs or servicing required. 
(5)  Repairs and date completed. 
(6)  Servicing performed and date completed. 
(e)  Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay as required by section 38-3-47(a). 
(f)  Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the city manager.  
Sec. 38-3-48. - Booster pumps. 
(a)  Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the city manager, at least once a year, that the device is operable.  
Sec. 38-3-49. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The city manager shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the city manager, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order. 
(b)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the city manager, and the required reconnection fee is paid. 
(c)  Neither the city, the public works director, or its agents or assigns, shall be liable to any customers of the city for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this article, whether or not said termination of the water supply was with or without notice. 
(d)  The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system. 
(e)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this Code shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice.  
Secs. 38-3-50—38-3-52. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EXTENSION OF MAINS 
 
Sec. 38-3-53. - Application. 
Any person, firm or corporation having an interest in real estate within the service areas of the Mascoutah water distribution system and desiring the extension of water mains to their premises shall make application therefore to the city manager and shall include plat showing the area to be served by the water main extension.  
Sec. 38-3-54. - Design of proposed extension. 
Detailed construction plans of proposed water main extension accompanied by completed IPEA Permit Applications shall be submitted by developers of real estate to the city manager. The size and length of watermains, plan and profile, location of fire hydrants, water service valves and other appurtenances shall be included on these plans. Furthermore, the following general requirements shall apply: 
(a)  All mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter but sized so that fire protection service may be rendered to all lots on premises to be served by the main and any possible extension thereof. 
(b)  All plastic water mains shall be manufactured in compliance with AWWA C-900, DR-18 pipe with cast iron pipe equivalent outside diameters and all fittings shall be ductile iron mechanical joint and cement mortar lined unless otherwise approved by the city manager. 
(c)  Fire hydrants shall be so located that no premises will be more than 400 feet from a fire hydrant. 
(d)  No "dead end" watermain extension shall be permitted unless, as determined by the city manager, the construction of a "looped" or interconnected extension is not feasible. 
(e)  The city may require a proposed extension to be connected to the distribution system at a point judged by the city to be adequate in capacity to serve the applicants property. The city shall not be required to allow the connection of a proposed extension to the closest point of existing service if such service is determined to be inadequate for a proposed extension. 
(f)  The city reserves the right to charge a developer that portion of the construction costs for water mains which the city has installed directly fronting his property or lot being developed. 
(g)  The city reserves the right to further extend or to allow service connections to water mains constructed under this article. 
(h)  Extension made under this article shall be and shall remain the property of the city. 
(i)  All developers shall present construction plans to the city manager. The city shall charge the applicant proposing a water main extension a fee for the city engineer's review of the proposed construction plans. This fee shall not exceed one percent of the construction cost. 
(j)  Obtaining all IPEA permits and approvals for the construction and operation of a proposed water main extension is the responsibility of the applicant.  
Secs. 38-3-55, 38-3-56. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FIRE MAINS 
 
Sec. 38-3-57. - Permit. 
Upon proper application and inspection, the city manager shall issue a special permit for the connection and extension of a fire main into the applicant's property. All fire connections shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter and shall not be used for private purposes other than fire protection. 
(a)  Expense of the fire mains. The expense of installing fire mains shall be borne by the applicant. Furthermore, maintenance of all fire service mains shall be at the expense of the applicant. Furthermore, all maintenance performed on fire service mains located on public property shall be done by, and under the direction of the city at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  Fire connection fees. Annual fee connection service fees shall be charged as follows: 
	Item 	Annual Fee 
(1) 	Fire hydrants 	$150.00/each 
(2) 	Automatic sprinkler connection 	$150.00/each 
(3) 	Automatic sprinkler heads 	$0.15/each 
(4) 	Hose connection greater than 2½ inch in diameter, other than fire hydrants openings 	$75.00/each 
(5) 	Hose connection, 2½ inch in diameter, other than fire hydrant openings 	$40.00/each 
(6) 	Hose connection, 2 inch in diameter or less, other than fire hydrant openings 	$15.00/each 
 
(Ord. No. 99-102, 1-19-99)  
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY RATES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-4-1. - Building unit defined. 
All persons or families residing in a building under one roof, be it an apartment or homes converted into more than one dwelling place, each family or individual resident residing therein shall be deemed an individual customer or such homes or apartments or dwellings shall be billed for at least one minimum water and/or sewer account according to the number of families or individual residents residing therein.  
Sec. 38-4-2. - Revenues. 
All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water and sewer systems shall be deposited in the water and sewage funds. All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be directed by the city manager. 
The treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water and sewer systems and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such systems as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the funds designated as the "water fund and sewage fund of the city". The treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 65. 
Cross reference— City officials, § 1-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 38-4-3. - Accounts. 
The treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water and sewer systems and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the water and sewer systems. 
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do, in fact, meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: 
(a)  Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year. 
(b)  Billing data to show total number of gallons billed. 
(c)  Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year. 
(d)  Number of users connected to the system. 
(e)  Number of non-metered users. 
(f)  A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of waste discharged. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-4-4. - Access to records. 
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, United States Environmental Protection Agency, or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city's system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state grant. 
(Ord. No. 846, 3-21-94)  
Sec. 38-4-5. - Appeals. 
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user charges in article IV shall be made available to a user within 15 days of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used, or in the computation thereof, shall be remedied by a third party selected by both parties within 90 days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.  
Secs. 38-4-6—38-4-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER RATES 
 
Sec. 38-4-10. - Water connection. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public water main or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  Tap fees—Three-fourths inch by five-eighths inch meter, box and lid. A permit and inspection fee (tap fee) in the amount indicated in the consolidated fees list shall be paid to the city at the time an application is filed for potable water service. The city, upon receipt of these tap fees shall install (or allow to be installed) a three-fourths inch by five-eighths inch meter, box and lid. 
For larger service pipe or extraordinary work, the city shall charge time and materials used plus 15 percent to be paid by the applicant for water service. However, all applicants shall pay a minimum of $550.00 per service connection installed plus the cost of any and all appurtenances provided by the city if the service connection is installed by those other than the city. 
(c)  Service connections installed by private contractor or individuals shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. 
(d)  A potable water service permit shall only be issued and a service connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the distribution system has adequate capacity to service the owner's anticipated potable water demand. 
(e)  All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the water service connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation of the water service connection. 
(f)  A separate and independent potable water service connection shall be installed per building unless otherwise approved by the city manager. 
(g)  Old service connections may be used for new buildings only when they are found on examination and tested by the city to meet all requirements of this Code. 
(h)  Illinois Plumbing Code. All water tap and service connections made to the mains of the Waterworks System shall conform to the regulations of this Code and of the Illinois Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-120, 12-15-03)  
Sec. 38-4-11. - Maintenance of water lines. 
The city shall replace all water mains when it has been deemed necessary to do so in order to maintain service in the city. The city shall limit its responsibility to maintaining water lines to the water mains and to the service lines up to the meter. The property owner shall be responsible for the service line from the meter into the premises served.  
Sec. 38-4-12. - Water rates. 
There shall be established the following rates and charges for the use of the water system of the city, based upon the amount of water consumed as follows: 
(a)  Water rates inside city. 
i.  FY 18-19: 
$8.08 per month facilities charge (base charge). 
$5.75 per 1,000 gallons per month usage fee. 
(b)  Water rates outside city. (Calculated as twice the in-town rate). 
i.  FY 18-19: 
$16.15 per month facilities charge (base charge). 
$11.50 per 1,000 gallons per month usage fee. 
(Ord. No. 03-120, 12-15-03; Ord. No. 06-07, § 1, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 5-16-11, eff. 5-1-11; Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 4-16-12, eff. 5-1-12; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 5-6-13, eff. 5-1-13; Ord. No. 14-04, § 1, 4-7-14; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 16-08, § 1, 4-18-16; Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 4-3-17; Ord. No. 18-03, § 1(Att.), 3-19-18)  
Sec. 38-4-13. - Requested shut-off. 
If user requests water to be shut off, there will be a $25.00 fee to have the water turned on again.  
Secs. 38-4-14—38-4-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SEWER RATES 
 
Sec. 38-4-31. - User charge system. 
Every person whose premises are served by the authority will be charged for the sewer services provided through a facility charge and service charges. 
Facility charges are directed at wastewater plant and collection facility hardware. Service charges are directed at a basic charge based on the water meter readings, or if available, a discharge metering device approved by the authority, and said basic charges shall be as follows and are levied to defray the cost of operation and maintenance and replacement of the treatment works: 
Sewer Rates inside City 
(a)  Facility charge. 
i.  FY 18-19. The total facility charge rate shall be $16.56 per month. 
(b)  Service charge. 
i.  FY 18-19. The service charge shall be $6.00 per 1,000 gallons metered. 
ii.  Service charges shall be for operation, maintenance, replacement costs, and may be used for debt service recovery. 
(c)  Sewer service outside the city. All charges for use of sewer connections where water is supplied thereto by the authority subject to the special provisions herein shall be as follows: 
a.  A facility charge for users outside of the city shall be: 
i.  $33.11 per month in FY 18-19. 
ii.  This rate shall apply as a facility charge so long as the sewer connection is in service and regardless [of] whether or not water is used during said period, and which facility charge shall entitle the user to continue use. 
b.  Service charges shall be at the rate of: 
i.  $ 11.99 in FY 18-19 plus a surcharge of the same amount per 1,000 gallons of water metered. 
c.  The rate in subsection (b) above shall apply to the amount of water passing through the water meter except when an approved discharge metering system is utilized. In this case the rate shall apply to that water discharged to the system. 
d.  When the user (outside the city) does not receive water provided by the city, provisions for accurate sewer metering will be required. 
(Ord. No. 03-119, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 06-07, § 1, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 5-16-11, eff. 5-1-11; Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 4-16-12, eff. 5-1-12; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 5-6-13, eff. 5-1-13; Ord. No. 14-04, § 1, 4-7-14; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 16-08, § 1, 4-18-16; Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 4-3-17; Ord. No. 18-03, § 1(Att.), 3-19-18)  
Sec. 38-4-32. - Basis for wastewater service charges. 
The wastewater service charge for the use of, and for service supplied by the Wastewater Facilities of the City of Mascoutah, shall for operation and maintenance, replacement, applicable surcharges, and a debt service. 
The service charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal domestic concentrations: 
(a)  A five-day, 20° C biochemical oxygen demand BOD of 204 mg/1. 
(b)  A suspended solids (SS) content of 260 mg/l. 
It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated. 
(2)  Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year, for all work categories. 
(3)  Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement (OM&R) costs to each user class by volume, BOD, and SS. 
(4)  Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement (OM&R) costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids and BOD. 
(Ord. No. 03-119, 11-3-03)  
Sec. 38-4-33. - Computation of service charge. 
The wastewater service charge shall be computed as follows: 
CW = CM + CDM + (Vu-X)CU + (Vu-X)CUD + CS 
Where: 
CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period. 
CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement. 
CDM = Minimum charge for debt service. 
Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period. 
X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge. 
CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement. 
CUD = Basic user rate for debt service. 
CS = Amount of surcharge.  
Sec. 38-4-34. - Notification. 
The users of the wastewater treatment service will be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributed to the wastewater treatment operation, maintenance and replacement.  
Sec. 38-4-35. - Annual review. 
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually, by the city manager. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs including replacement costs.  
Sec. 38-4-36. - Special provisions. 
The following special provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Facility charges: Duplex or apartments. Where water is supplied to a duplex or apartment building, where there is only one meter for the entire premises, the minimum facility charge shall be calculated as if the total amount of water metered has been supplied through separate meters for each unit of the duplex and for each apartment in the building. This method shall also be utilized where one meter services a residence plus a business establishment. In this manner each household or business will equally share the minimum facility cost of the system. 
(b)  Facility charges: Mobile home courts. Where water is supplied to premises used as a mobile home court, where there is only one meter for the entire premises, the minimum facility charge shall be calculated as if the total amount of water metered has been supplied through separate meters equal in number to the number of mobile home spaces occupied at the time of each reading of the meter. The facility charge shall apply for each living unit served. In this manner each mobile home will equally share the facility charge cost of the system. 
(Ord. No. 03-119, 11-3-03) 
Cross reference— Special provisions, § 38-2-8.  
Sec. 38-4-37. - Additional assessments. 
In addition to the above charges, for normal domestic sewage, the following assessments shall be made: 
(a)  A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed normal domestic concentrations of BOD (185 mg/l) and SS (219 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 185 mg/l and 219 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Said surcharge shall be determined as follows: 
The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges. 
Upon determining the concentration of wastes, a surcharge equal to the minimum charge referred to in section 38-4-31(a) shall be assessed for each 260 p.p.m. BOD or SS in excess of the normal domestic concentration. The assessment cost shall be $0.14/lb and $0.12/lb of BOD and suspended solids respectively. BOD or suspended solids whichever is determined to be in highest concentration shall be the parameter to be utilized in determining the surcharge.  
Sec. 38-4-38. - Measurement of flow. 
The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 100 gallons. 
(a)  If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. 
(b)  Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. 
(c)  Metering devices for determining the volume of wastewater shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the owner. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled, without the consent of the city.  
Sec. 38-4-39. - Sewer charge adjustment. 
The city manager shall have authority to allow deductions on sewer bills for water which is used but does not enter the sanitary sewer system. In every case, a request for deduction shall be made by written application on forms provided by the City of Mascoutah, and shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  No deductions shall be granted for users of the sewer system who do not have a metered water supply. 
(b)  No deductions shall be granted for users of the sewer system who are delinquent in their payment to the city for such service. 
(c)  One hundred percent of any used water for which a deduction is requested, must have been prevented from entering the sanitary sewer system. 
(d)  The city manager, shall determine which used waters are eligible for discharge to some point other than the sanitary sewer system, and shall have the authority to prohibit discharges which he determines to be potentially harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare; provided, however, that no used water which contains suspended matter in any form (organic or inorganic), or which contains any dissolved substances, shall be eligible for discharge to any point other than the sanitary sewer system, including storm sewers or any other watercourse, without approval of the state sanitary water board. 
(e)  Metered deductions. Customers may purchase and install a "deduct meter" at a designated outside water outlet on their property. The meter will measure water not entering the sanitary sewer system, and shall be eligible for deduction of that used water annually. 
(1)  Any such meter shall be of an approved design purchased from the city at cost, shall be registered with the city utility clerk of the City of Mascoutah prior to use, and shall be used only by the user to whom it is registered and at the service location to which it is assigned. 
(2)  Customers are responsible for correctly installing their meters at the designated service locations each year. No sewer credit will be issued for meters installed incorrectly. 
(3)  Customers are responsible for removing their meters at an appropriate time in the Autumn season to prevent freezing and damage. 
(4)  All deduct meters shall be read in October. Customers will have three options for the deduct meter to be read. 
(i)  Bring the meter to City Hall to be read by the utility office no later than October 15 th each year. 
(ii)  Email a picture of the transponder number and the reading on the meter to utility office (info@mascoutah.com) no later than October 15 th each year. 
(iii)  Sign up with the utility office to have the city read the meter at the service location no later than October 15 th each year. 
(5)  The utility clerk shall then credit the user's sewer account by subtracting the previous reading from the current reading, as taken from the meter, multiplying the difference by the current basic user charge, and then deducting 100 percent of that product from the next month's billings. 
(6)  The city shall be authorized to inspect meters for accuracy at any time meter readings are suspect and not considered representative of usage. 
(7)  The user will be charged an annual service fee of $5.00 to be billed at time of sewer credit. 
(8)  City is not liable for damage to meters caused by freezing or other means. Customer will be responsible for all costs associated with repair or cost for new meter. 
(f)  Special occurrence deduction. Users may apply for a special occurrence deduction in the event that a leak in water service lines allows metered water to discharge on their property to some point other than the sanitary sewer system. 
(1)  Following submission of an application for special occurrence deduction, the city manager shall verify the presence of a leak, that said leak was repaired, and that the leak did not enter the sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  A special occurrence deduction shall be calculated by determining the user's average monthly consumption during the 12 months immediately preceding the billing month during which the leak occurred, and then subtracting that average, from the consumption for said month. The city manager shall then credit the user's sewer account by multiplying that difference by the current basic user charge, and deducting 90 percent of that product from the next monthly billing. 
(g)  Metering of in-ground irrigation systems. Users who at their own expense, obtains their own meter installed at a separate water tap in accordance with chapter 38, article III of this Code for in-ground irrigation systems shall be eligible for deduction off their sewer charge for that water used as follows: 
(1)  Any such meter shall be of an approved design, shall be registered with the city utility clerk prior to use, and shall be used only by the registered user and only for in-ground irrigation systems at the location which it is assigned. 
(2)  The city will read said meters monthly. 
(3)  The customer will be billed in accordance with chapter 38, article IV of this Code. 
(4)  The city shall be authorized to inspect meters for accuracy at any time meter readings are suspect and not considered representative of usage. 
(Ord. No. 96-117, 4-1-96; Ord. No. 03-119, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 3-16-09; Ord. No. 18-09, § 1(Att.), 6-4-18)  
DIVISION 4. - WATER AND SEWER RATES INCREASES BEYOND FY 07-08 
 
Sec. 38-4-40. - Consumer price index (CPI). 
Effective for customer bills rendered after April 30, 2008, each year, at the beginning of the city's fiscal year, the unit charges for all water and sewer rates will be adjusted to reflect no more than the percentage increase of change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W): Midwest Urban Region, All Items Index, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor, on the first published date after the beginning of the most recent calendar year, to the average comparable index for the previous year (12 months). 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 4-16-12, eff. 5-1-12; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 5-6-13, eff. 5-1-13) 
Note— This index can be found at www.bls.gov/cpi/ .  
ARTICLE V. - SEWER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 38-5-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
Government, federal. 
(a)  Administrator means the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  Federal act means the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 466 et seq.) as amended, (Pub. L. 95-217). 
(c)  Federal grant shall mean the U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II—Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations. 
Government, local. 
(a)  Approving authority shall mean the city manager or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
(b)  NPDES permit means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act. 
(c)  Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private cooperation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity. 
(d)  Inspector shall mean the director or other person or persons duly authorized by the city to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their connection to the sanitary sewer system. 
Government, state. 
(a)  Director means the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  State Act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970. 
(c)  State grant shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of State of Illinois. 
Clarification of word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible. 
Sewer types and appurtenances. 
(a)  Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
(b)  Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
(c)  Combined sewer shall mean a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
(d)  Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by other. 
(e)  Public sewer shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary sewer or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city funds. 
(f)  Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
(g)  Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storms, surface and groundwater drainage. 
(h)  Sewerage shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage. 
(i)  Storm sewer shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
(j)  Stormwater runoff shall mean that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers. 
Treatment: 
(a)  Pretreatment shall mean the treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works. 
(b)  Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant". 
Types of charges: 
(a)  Basic user charge shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system. 
(b)  Capital improvement charge shall mean the charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct the sewage treatment works. 
(c)  Debt service charge shall be the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding. 
(d)  Local capital cost charge shall mean charges for costs other than the operation, maintenance and replacements costs, i.e. debt service and capital improvement costs. 
(e)  Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
(f)  Sewerage fund is the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system. 
(g)  Surcharge shall mean the assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than average concentration values as established by code. 
(h)  Useful life shall mean the estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will be operated. 
(i)  User charge shall mean a charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost operation, maintenance and replacement. 
(j)  Wastewater service charge shall be the charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in aticle IV of this Code and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable. 
(k)  Reserve fund charge" shall mean a revolving fund for expansion and construction of the sewer system. 
User types: 
(a)  Control manhole shall mean a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the city representative to sample and/or measure discharges. 
(b)  Industrial user shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into products. 
(c)  Residential user shall mean all dwelling units such as houses, buildings, mobile homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings. 
(d)  User class shall mean the type of user either "residential or commercial" (non-industrial) or "industrial" as defined herein. 
(e)  Commercial user shall include transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services. 
(f)  Institutional/governmental user shall include schools, churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, state and local governments. 
Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse. 
Watercourse and connections: 
(a)  Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(b)  Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Wastewater and its characteristics: 
(a)  BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade (20(C), expressed in milligrams per liter. 
(b)  Effluent criteria are defined in any applicable "NPDES permit". 
(c)  Floatable oil" is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
(d)  Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
(e)  Industrial waste" shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
(f)  Major contributing industry shall mean an industrial user the publicly owned treatment works that: 
(1)  Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than ten percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; 
(3)  Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or 
(4)  Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works. 
(g)  Milligrams per liter (mg/1) shall mean a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliter of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. 
(h)  pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
(i)  Population equivalent is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids. 
(j)  ppm shall mean parts per million by weight. 
(k)  Properly shredded garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
(l)  Sewage is used interchangeably with "wastewater". 
(m)  Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
(n)  Suspended solids (SS) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the I.E.P.A. Division of Laboratories Methods. 
(o)  Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
(p)  Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
(q)  Water quality standards are defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois.  
Secs. 38-5-2, 38-5-3. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 38-5-4. - Deposit of wastes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.  
Sec. 38-5-5. - Sewage in natural outlet. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 38-5-6. - Private system, unlawful. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.  
Sec. 38-5-7. - Connection to system required. 
The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the city is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Code, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 350 feet of the nearest property line and adequate to handle the additional connection, where determined to be required. Pumping facilities may be necessary to be provided by the owner.  
Secs. 38-5-8, 38-5-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 38-5-10. - Private sewage system. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 38-5-7, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division.  
Sec. 38-5-11. - Health department approval. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the appropriate health department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city (reference Appendix #2) which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the director. A permit and inspection fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.  
Sec. 38-5-12. - Permit approval. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within hours of the receipt of written notice by the director.  
Sec. 38-5-13. - Compliance with state requirements. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted.  
Sec. 38-5-14. - Availability of public sewer. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 38-5-7, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Code, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.  
Sec. 38-5-15. - Operation of private system. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the city.  
Sec. 38-5-16. - Additional restrictions. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city.  
Sec. 38-5-17. - Time constraints for public sewer. 
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.  
Secs. 38-5-18—38-5-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 38-5-21. - Disturbing system unlawful. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.  
Sec. 38-5-22. - Compliance with regulating authorities. 
All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.  
Sec. 38-5-23. - Connection and permit fees. 
Any property owner who has not paid a permit or connection fee as of the effective date of this Code, shall pay a connection and permit fee as follows: 
Residential connections 	$400.00 per unit 
Apartments and hotels (motels) 	$400.00 per unit 
Mobile homes 	$400.00 per unit 
Commercial connection 	$800.00 per acre or fraction thereof and $400.00 for each commercial or residential unit 
Schools, hospitals, public buildings 	$800.00 each 
Churches 	$800.00 each 
 
The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city, (reference Appendix #2). The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. A permit, connection and inspection fee as set forth above shall be paid to the city at the time that the application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. 
(Ord. No. 96-136; 09-16-96)  
Sec. 38-5-24. - Cost borne by owner. 
All costs and expenses including labor and material incidental to the installation, connection and maintenance of a lateral sewer line shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation, connection and maintenance of the lateral sewer lines. This section shall apply even where the lateral sewer line runs under a public street, public right-of-way, or public easement.  
Sec. 38-5-25. - Separate sewer: Exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building.  
Sec. 38-5-26. - Old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this Code.  
Sec. 38-5-27. - Plumbing Code requirements. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply.  
Sec. 38-5-28. - Elevation. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in accordance with section 38-5-22 and discharged to the building sewer.  
Sec. 38-5-29. - Prohibited connections. 
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to public sanitary sewer.  
Sec. 38-5-30. - Capacity of sewer. 
A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.  
Sec. 38-5-31. - Tap-in supervision and testing. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or its representative. 
At any time after the installation of the building sewer, the city may test the building sewer for violation of this ordinance.  
Sec. 38-5-32. - Inspection. 
After the building sewer has been constructed in the trench but before the sewer is backfilled, the applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director that the building sewer is ready for inspection. If the sewer has been constructed properly, permission will be given to backfill the trench. If the sewer construction is found to be unsuitable, the permit applicant will correct the installation to meet city's requirements.  
Sec. 38-5-33. - Public sewer connection. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation.  
Sec. 38-5-34. - Protection of property. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.  
Sec. 38-5-35. - Unlawful discharges. 
All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those ordinances in compliance with Federal Standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.  
Secs. 38-5-36—38-5-38. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 38-5-39. - Discharge of storm water. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.  
Sec. 38-5-40. - Storm water. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the city, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.  
Sec. 38-5-41. - Regulations of wastes. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(a)  Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solids, or gas. 
(b)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(c)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(d)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.  
Sec. 38-5-42. - Harmful effects of certain materials. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are: 
(a)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit 65 degrees Celsius. 
(b)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150° F 0 and 65° C. 
(c)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. 
(d)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not. 
(e)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials. 
(f)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other waste odor-producing substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(g)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(h)  Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hq at any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(i)  Materials which exert or cause: 
(1)  Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
(2)  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
(3)  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; 
(4)  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(j)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(k)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(l)  Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.  
Sec. 38-5-43. - Harmful wastes; approval. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 38-5-42 of this division, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978 and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates for discharge; and/or; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of section 38-5-42. 
(b)  If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, articles, and laws. 
(c)  The owner of the pretreatment or equalization facilities shall obtain construction and operating permits from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency prior to the issuance of final approval by the director. 
(d)  Where multiple process or discharges are present or contemplated at an industry, the city shall have the authority to require the owner or person to furnish and install more than one control manhole with appurtenances and/or require that all wastewater be discharged through a single control manhole or structure with appurtenances described herein.  
Sec. 38-5-44. - Grease and oil interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.  
Sec. 38-5-45. - Flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.  
Sec. 38-5-46. - Industrial wastes control manhole. 
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safety located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.  
Sec. 38-5-47. - Industrial waste testing. 
(a)  The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Code and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. 
(b)  The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.  
Sec. 38-5-48. - Measurements and tests. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Code shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.)  
Sec. 38-5-49. - Special arrangements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, in accordance with the chapter, hereof, by the industrial concern provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system and industrial cost recovery system. 
Cross reference— Sewer rates, § 38-4-31 et seq.  
Secs. 38-5-50—38-5-54. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - SEWER MAIN EXTENSION 
 
Sec. 38-5-55. - Application. 
Any person, firm or corporation having an interest in real estate within the service areas of the Mascoutah Sanitary Sewer Collection System and desiring the extension of sewer mains to their premises shall make application therefore to the city manager and shall include plat showing the areas to be served by the sewer main extension.  
Sec. 38-5-56. - Design of proposed extension. 
Detailed construction plans of proposed sewer main extensions accompanied by completed IEPA Permit Applications shall be submitted by developers of real estate to the city manager. The size and length of sewer mains, plan and profile, location of manholes, service connections, lift stations, and other appurtenances shall be included on these plans. Furthermore, the following general requirements shall apply: 
(a)  All mains shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter but sized so adequate service may be rendered to all lots on premises to be served by the main and any possible extensions thereof. 
(b)  All plastic sewer mains shall be manufactured in compliance with ASTM D3-34 DR-35 pipe. Pre-cast concrete manholes shall conform to ASTM C478. 
(c)  Manholes shall be so located that no more than 400 feet exists between them. 
(d)  All lift stations shall include submersible pumps mounted on guide rails for easy installation and removal. Wet well/dry wall type construction shall not be approved. Furthermore, all alarm circuitry must be compatible with the city's lift station alarm system. 
(e)  The city may require a proposed extension to be connected to the collection system at a point judged by the city to be adequate in capacity to serve the applicants property. The city shall not be required to allow the connection of a proposed extension to the closest point of existing service if such service is determined to be inadequate for a proposed extension. 
(f)  The city reserves the right to charge a developer that portion of the construction costs for sewer mains which the city has installed directly fronting his property or lot being developed. 
(g)  The city reserves the right to further extend or to allow service connections to sewer mains constructed under this Code. 
(h)  Extension made under this Code shall be and shall remain the property of the city. 
(i)  All developers shall present construction plans to the city manager. The city shall charge the applicant proposing a sewer main extension a fee for the city engineer's review of the proposed construction plans. This fee shall not exceed one percent of the construction cost. 
(j)  Obtaining all IEPA permits and approvals for the construction and operation of a proposed sewer main extension is the responsibility of the applicant.  
Secs. 38-5-57, 38-5-58. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 38-5-59. - Damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.  
Sec. 38-5-60. - Inspection and testing. 
(a)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States Environmental Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The director or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.  
Sec. 38-5-61. - Liability of city. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 38-5-60 above, the director or duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in sections 38-5-47 and 38-5-48.  
Sec. 38-5-62. - Private property inspections. 
The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.  
Secs. 38-5-63, 38-5-64. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 38-5-65. - Penalty. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this Code except division 4 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
The city may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this Code.  
Sec. 38-5-66. - Continued violations. 
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 38-5-65 shall be, upon conviction, fined in the amount not exceeding $750.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Sec. 38-5-67. - Liability to city. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 847, 10-25-89) 
APPENDIX III 
USER CHARGE CALCULATION 
City of Mascoutah Wastewater Treatment 
and Collection System - User Charge System 
Customers 
Class 1 (residential) 	= 	2,106 	Billable Flow Customers: 	122,377,900 	gallons per year 
Class 2 (commercial) 	= 	125 	Billable Flow Customers: 	14,291,000 	gallons per year 
Class 3 (industrial) 	= 	1 	Billable Flow Customer: 	973,000 	gallons per year 
Class 4 (instit/gov't) 	= 	14 	Billable Flow Customers: 	6,560,000 	gallons per year 
Total Customers 	= 	2,246 	with a Total Billable Flow: 	144,161,900 	gallons per year 
 
Billings 
Quarterly Bills 
None 
Monthly Bills 
2,246 billings/month x 12 months/yr = 26,952 billings/year 
O,M&R Cost Estimate 
	Estimated Annual Cost 	Cost $/1,000 gallons 
Purification and Supply 		
 Personal Services 	0.00 	0.00 
 Contractural Services 	150,000.00 	1.04 
 Commodities 	1,500.00 	0.01 
Collection System 		
 Personal Services 	55,000.00 	0.38 
 Contractural Services 	11,400.00 	0.08 
 Commodities 	2,500.00 	0.02 
 Joint-Use Interceptor O&M 	5,000.00 	0.03 
 J-Use Interceptor Replacement 	7,500.00 	0.05 
Administration 		
 Personal Services 	39,000.00 	0.27 
 Contractural Services 	26,000.00 	0.18 
 Commodities 	1,000.00 	0.01 
 Miscellaneous 	1,000.00 	0.01 
		
Total Annual Operational Expenditures 	299,900.00 	2.08 
		
Annual Debt Related Costs 		
1988 Treatment and Collection System Improvements 	276,500.00 
1996 IEPA Loan for Joint-Use Interceptor 	 51,530.00 
Total Annual Debt Service 	      328,030.00 
		
Rate: $8.72 charge for water consumption less than or equal to 2,000 gallons/month plus 
      $4.36/1,000 gallons of water consumed in excess of 2,000 gallons/month. 
		
Rates for Classes 1, 2, 3 & 4 
All customers are billed monthly only. 
		
Step 1 
If gallons consumed per month are less than or equal to 2,000 gallons then go to Step 2, else continue. 
		
O, M & R Charge 		
a) O, M & R cost/1,000 gallons 	2.08 
b) Customer usage in 1,000 gallons 	X _____ 
c) Total O, M & R Monthly Bill 	$ _____ 
		
Debt Service Charge 		
d) Debt Service cost/1,000 gallons 	2.28 
e) Customer usage in 1,000 gallons mi 	X _____ 
f) Total Debt Service Bill 	_____
		
Total Bill (c+f) 	_____
		
Step 2 		
		
Minimum Monthly Rates 		
a) O & M Cost per 1,000 gallons: $2.08/1,000 X 2= 	4.16 
b) Debt Service Cost per 1,000 gallons: $2.28/1,000 X 2= 	4.56 
Total Minimum Monthly Bill (a + b) 	8.72 
 
Customers 
Class 1 (residential) 	= 	_____	Billable Flow Customers: 	_____	gallons per year 
Class 2 (commercial) 	= 	_____	Billable Flow Customers: 	_____	gallons per year 
Class 3 (industrial) 	= 	_____	Billable Flow Customer: 	_____	gallons per year 
Class 4 (instit/gov't) 	= 	_____	Billable Flow Customers: 	_____	gallons per year 
Total Customers 	= 	_____	with a Total Billable Flow: 	_____	gallons per year 
 
Billings 
Quarterly Bills 
None 
Monthly Bills 
_____ billings/month x 12 months/yr = _____ billings/year 
O, M & R Cost Estimate 
	Estimated Annual Cost 	Cost $/1,000 gallons 
Purification and Supply 		
 Personal Services 	_____	_____
 Contractural Services 	_____	_____
 Commodities 	_____	_____
Collection System 		
 Personal Services 	_____	_____
 Contractural Services 	_____	_____
 Commodities 	_____	_____
 Joint-Use Interceptor O&M 	_____	_____
 J-Use Interceptor Replacement 	_____	_____
Administration 		
 Personal Services 	_____	_____
 Contractural Services 	_____	_____
 Commodities 	_____	_____
 Miscellaneous 	_____	_____
		
Total Annual Operational Expenditures 	_____	_____
		
Annual Debt Related Costs 		
1988 Treatment and Collection System Improvements 	_____
1996 IEPA Loan for Joint-Use Interceptor 	_____
Total Annual Debt Service 	_____
		
Rate: _____ charge for water consumption less than or equal to 2,000 gallons/month plus 
      _____/1,000 gallons of water consumed in excess of 2,000 gallons/month. 
		
Rates for Classes 1, 2, 3 & 4 
All customers are billed monthly only. 
		
Step 1 
If gallons consumed per month are less than or equal to 2,000 gallons then go to Step 2, else continue. 
		
O, M & R Charge 		
a) O, M & R cost/1,000 gallons 	_____
b) Customer usage in 1,000 gallons 	X _____ 
c) Total O, M & R Monthly Bill 	$ _____ 
		
Debt Service Charge 		
d) Debt Service cost/1,000 gallons 	_____
e) Customer usage in 1,000 gallons mi 	X _____ 
f) Total Debt Service Bill 	_____
		
Total Bill (c+f) 	_____
		
Step 2 		
		
Minimum Monthly Rates 		
a) O & M Cost per 1,000 gallons: _____/1,000 X 2= 	_____
b) Debt Service Cost per 1,000 gallons: _____/1,000 X 2= 	_____
Total Minimum Monthly Bill (a + b) 	_____
 
City of Mascoutah 
Proposed User Charge Information to Supplement Wastewater Service Charge Ordinance 
1) 	Total number of users by class 		
	Class 1, Residential 	2,106 	
	Class 2, Commercial 	125 	
	Class 3, Industrial 	1 	
	Class 4, Institutional/Governmental 	14 	
2) 	Annual Billable Flow by Class 		
	Class 1, Residential 	122,337,900 	
	Class 2, Commercial 	14,291,000 	
	Class 3, Industrial 	973,000 	
	Class 4, Institutional/Governmental 	5,405,580 	
			
	Total Billable Flow 	144,161,900 	gal/year 
			
3) 	Total Approximated, Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Charges by Class Without Debt Service Included: 
			
	Class 1 		
			
	Rate: 	$2.08/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	122,337,900 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual O M & R Income: 	$254,462.00 	
			
	Class 2 		
			
	Rate: 	$2.08/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	14,291,000 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual O M & R Income: 	$29,725.00 	
			
	Class 3 		
			
	Rate: 	$2.08/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	973,200 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual O M & R Income 	$2,024.00 	
			
	Class 4 		
			
	Rate: 	$2.08/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	6,500,000 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual O M & R Income 	$13,520.00 	
			
4) 	Annual OM&R Income by Class 		
			
	Class 1, Residential 	$254,462.00 	
	Class 2, Commercial 	$29,725.00 	
	Class 3, Industrial 	$2,024.00 	
	Class 4, Institutional/Governmental 	$13,520.00 	
			
	Total O M & R Income 	$299,709 	/year 
			
5) 	Total Approximated Annual Debt Service Income without O M & R: 
			
	Class 1 		
	Rate: 	$2.28/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	122,337,900 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual Debt Service Income: 	$278,930.00 	
			
	Class 2 		
	Rate: 	$2.28/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	14,291,000 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual Debt Service Income: 	$32,582.00 	
			
	Class 3 		
	Rate: 	$2.28/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	973,200 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual Debt Service Income 	$2,220.00 	
			
	Class 4 		
			
	Rate: 	$2.28/1,000 	gallons 
	Water Consumption: 	6,500,000 	gallons/yr. 
	Annual Debt Service Income 	$14,820.00 	
			
6) 	Annual Debt Service Income by Class 		
			
	Class 1, Residential 	$278,930.00 	
	Class 2, Commercial 	$32,583.00 	
	Class 3, Industrial 	$2,220.00 	
	Class 4, Institutional/Governmental 	$14,820.00 	
			
	Total Annual Debt Service Income 	$328,443.00 	/year 
 
City of Mascoutah 
User Charge System 
Supplemental Information 
1. 	Total Annual Flow (Including I & I): 		237,250,000 gals. 
2. 	Total Annual SS (lbs/yr): 		449,680 #/yr 
	OM&R Cost per lb.ss (approx. 25% of Total amount OM&R) 	
	(0.25)$299,900/yr 	= $0.17/#ss 	
	449,680 		
3. 	Total Annual BOD 5 (lbs/yr): 		408,800 #/yr 
	OM&R Cost per lb. BOD 5 (approx. 25% of total (OM&R) 	
	(0.25)$328,030/yr 	= $0.20/#BOD 5 	
	408,800 #BOD 5 /yr. 		
4. 	Loading per user class 		
 
	BOD 5 	SS 
	mg/l 	lbs/day 	mg/l 	lbs/day 
Residential 	215 	941 	245 	1,034 
Commercial 	220 	112 	250 	123 
Industrial 	215 	8 	245 	9 
Institutional 	210 	59 	245 	66 
 
City of Mascoutah 
User Charge System 
Supplemental Information 
Joint-Use Interceptor Replacement Account 
1.  During the next 20 years the replacement costs associated with the Joint-Use Interceptor sewer will result almost entirely from the use of the propose lift station to be located north of Crooked Creek, along the east Right-of-Way line of relocated Illinois Route 4. 
2.  The 20-year replacement cost for this lift is expected to be $150,000.00. This cost will result from the need to replace the pumps, valves, electrical controls, and the fiberglass housing unit. 
3.  Assuming straight-line depreciation, the annual Replacement Budget is calculated as follows: 
$150,000/20 years = $7,500/year 
City of Mascoutah 
User Charge System 
Supplemental Information 
1. 	Total Annual Flow (Including I & I): 		237,250,000 gals. 
2. 	Total Annual SS (lbs/yr): 		449,680 #/yr 
	OM&R Cost per lb.ss (approx. 25% of Total amount OM&R) 	
	(0.25)$299,900/yr 	= $0.17/#ss 	
	449,680 		
3. 	Total Annual BOD 5 (lbs/yr): 		408,800 #/yr 
	OM&R Cost per lb. BOD 5 (approx. 25% of total (OM&R) 	
	(0.25)$328,030/yr 	= $0.20/#BOD 5 	
	408,800 #BOD 5 /yr. 		
4. 	Loading per user class 		
 
	BOD 5 	SS 
	mg/l 	lbs/day 	mg/l 	lbs/day 
Residential 	185 	941 	219 	1,034 
Commercial 	185 	112 	219 	123 
Industrial 	185 	8 	219 	9 
Institutional 	180 	59 	219 	66 
  
Appendix A - APPLICATIONS 
(Execute in Duplicate) 	Application No. _______ 
 
APPLICATION FOR BUILDING AND MOBILE HOME OCCUPANCY PERMIT 
Office of the Mayor 	Application No. _______ 
City Hall 	
Mascoutah, Illinois 	DATE: _______, ___ 
 
_____
(DO NOT WRITE IN THIS SPACE - FOR OFFICE USE ONLY) 
DATE: _______, _______ 	PERM. PARCEL _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ 
[ ]  Permit Issued 	Fee Paid to City Clerk: 
[ ]  Permit Denied 	
[ ]  Application Appealed 	$ _____ DATE: _____, ___ 
	IF DENIED, CAUSE OF DENIAL: 
	_____
	_____
 
_____
INSTRUCTIONS TO APPLICANT: All information required by the application must be completed and submitted herewith. Applicants are encouraged to visit the City Hall for any assistance needed in completing this form. 
1.  Name of Owner(s): _____ 
(Attach additional sheets if necessary) 
Address: _____      PHONE: _______ 
(ZIP CODE) 
2.  Applicant's Name: _____      PHONE: _______ 
Address: _____ 
(ZIP CODE) 
3.  Property interest of applicant: _____ 
(Contract Purchaser, Etc.) 
4.  Address of proposed construction or mobile home: _____
_____ 
5.  Legal Description (Lot, Block, and Subdivision; attach metes and bounds description, if necessary). _____
_____
_____ 
Cost of Improvement: $_______ Square feet of Improvement _______ 
6.  Proposed construction (check one or more, as necessary): 
[ ] New Building       Type: _______ Brick/Frame       Number of Rooms _____ 
[ ] Alterations or additions to existing buildings (explain): _____
_____ 
7.  Use of existing and proposed structures (if applicable): 
Existing Use: _____ 
Proposed Use: _____ 
8.  Two (2) copies of a sketch plat (drawn to approximate scale shall be attached, showing the following: 
a)  Dimensions and use of all buildings; 
b)  Dimensions of lot; 
c)  Distance of each building from lot lines; 
d)  Distance of principal building from principal buildings on adjacent lot(s); 
e)  Distance between accessory buildings and principal buildings; 
f)  Distance from lot line to center line of abutting street(s); 
g)  Location [with dimensions] of driveways and off-street parking spaces; 
h)  Location of all easements; 
i)  Location of all underground utilities, including septic tanks, tile fields, and wells. 
9.  Application is hereby made for an Occupancy Permit as required under the City Code for the erection, moving, or alteration and use of buildings and mobile homes. In making this application, the applicant represents all of the above statements and any attached maps and drawings to be a true description of the proposed new or altered uses and/or buildings. The applicant agrees that the permit applied for, if granted, is issued on the representations made herein and that any permit issued may be revoked without notice on any breach of representation or conditions. (See Chapter 23) 
It is understood that any permit issued on this application will not grant right of privilege to erect any structure or to use any premises described for any purpose or in any manner prohibited by the City Code, or by other ordinances, codes, or regulations of the City. 
APPLICANT: _____ 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
The plans and specifications submitted with this Application are in conformity with the district requirements applicable to the subject property. Changes in plans or specifications shall not be made without written approval of the City Council. 
Failure to comply with the above shall constitute a violation of the provisions of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City. 
DATE: _____ , ___ 	_____
	BUILDING OFFICIAL 
 
APPLICATION FOR LIQUOR 
LICENSE REQUIRED BY 

TO BE FILED WITH THE CITY CLERK 	License No. _____ 	
	Date Issued _____ 	
	Expires _____ 	
	Checked By _____ 	
	Approved By _____ 	
	Date _____ 	
	Order to Receive No. _____ 	
	Amount _____ 	
	[ ] Cash 	[ ] Bank Draft 
	[ ] Cashier's Check 	[ ] Money Order 
	[ ] Certified Check 	[ ] ___________ 
 
_____
IMPORTANT — READ CAREFULLY — PERSONAL CHECKS NOT ACCEPTED UNLESS CERTIFIED 
This application properly completed and signed must be filed with the City Clerk and must be accompanied by a remittance in the proper amount, made payable to the City Treasurer. This remittance must be in the form of a Certified or Cashier's Check, United States Postal Money Order, Express Money Order, or Licensed Currency Exchange Money Order, Bank Draft, Bank Money Order, or Personal Money Order. Cash accepted. 
_____
The undersigned individual or partnership hereby makes application for a LIQUOR LICENSE and submits the following information: 
1.  Applicant: _____ 
(GIVE NAME OF INDIVIDUAL OR NAMES OF PARTNERS—TYPE OF PRINT PLAINLY) 
2.  Trade, Partnership or Assumed Name: 
_____
TYPE OR PRINT NAME PLAINLY       TELEPHONE 
3.  Location of above place of business (NUMBER AND STREET OR LOT AND BLOCK OR SECTION, TOWNSHIP AND RANGE MUST BE GIVEN) _____ 
_____
CITY/TOWN/OR VILLAGE       ZIP CODE       RURAL ROUTE AND POST OFFICE 
4.  Has your Assumed Name been filed with the County Clerk? _____ 
5.  Are alcoholic liquors stored but not sold at any location other than the one given above? _____ 
If "yes", give location: _____ 
NUMBER AND STREET OR LOT AND BLOCK OR SECTION, TOWNSHIP AND RANGE, CITY 
6. 	Check principal kind of business: 	[ ] Restaurant 	[ ] Grocery 	[ ] Hotel 	[ ] Other 
		[ ] Tavern 	[ ] Amusement Place 	[ ] Country Club 
		[ ] Package Store 	[ ] Department Store 	[ ] Social Club 
 
7.  Give number of your Current Liquor License for this location _____ 
A.  In whose name or names is your license issued? _____ 
B.  Date license issued _____      Date license expires _____ 
Month Day Year       Month Day Year 
8.  Give name and address of owner of premises: _____ 
When does your lease expire? _____ 
Month Day Year 
9.  Give the date you first made application for a Liquor License for any location in Illinois: _____ 
(Month/Date/Year). 
A.  Disposition of application: _____ 
B.  Give address _____ 
NUMBER AND STREET OR LOT AND BLOCK OR SECTION, TOWNSHIP AND RANGE, CITY 
10.  Give date you began liquor business at this location _____ 
Month Day Year 
11.  Give date partnership was formed under name given on Line 1: _____ 
Month Day Year 
12.  Has a Liquor License been revoked at this location within the past year? _____ 
13.  Is this business located within _____ feet of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children or any naval or military station? _____ 
A.  If answer to the above is "yes", is your place of business a hotel offering restaurant service, a regularly organized club, a food shop, or other place where the sale of liquor is not the principal business carried on? _____ 
(Month/Day/Year) 
B.  If answer to (A) is "yes", on what date was business started? _____ 
14.  Has any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor directly or indirectly paid or agreed to pay for this license, advanced money, or anything else of value, except as specifically permitted in the Act, or any credit, (Other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business as specifically permitted in the Act), or is such a person directly or indirectly interested in the ownership, conduct or operation of the place of business? ________ If answer is "yes", give particulars _____
_____ 
15. 	Name _____ 	16. 	Name _____ 
	A. 	Residence Address _____ 		A. 	Residence Address _____ 
		(NUMBER AND STREET OR RURAL ROUTE) 			(NUMBER AND STREET OR RURAL ROUTE) 
		_____			_____
		(NAME OF CITY, COUNTY AND STATE) 			(NAME OF CITY, COUNTY AND STATE) 
	B. 	Place of Birth: _____ 		B. 	Place of Birth: _____ 
		Date of Birth: _____ 			Date of Birth: _____ 
	C. 	Are you a citizen of the United States: _____ 		C. 	Are you a citizen of the United States? _____ 
		If a naturalized citizen, time and place of naturalization? _____
_____ 			If a naturalized citizen, time and place of naturalization? _____
_____ 
	D. 	Have you ever been convicted of a felony or otherwise disqualified to receive the license applied for by reason of any matter or thing contained in the Illinois Liquor Control Act or the Municipal Liquor Code? [ ] YES [ ] 		D. 	Have you ever been convicted of a felony or otherwise disqualified to receive the license applied for by reason of any matter or thing contained in the Illinois Liquor Control Act or the Municipal Liquor Code? [ ] YES [ ] 
		If "yes", name court of conviction _____
_____ 			If "yes", name court of conviction _____
_____ 
	E. 	Have you ever made application for a liquor license for any other premises? _____ 		E. 	Have you ever made application for a liquor license for any other premises? _____ 
		DATE: _____ 		E. 	DATE: _____ 
		State disposition of application: _____
_____ 			State disposition of application: _____
_____ 
		Give address: _____ 			Give address: _____ 
	F. 	Are you or is any other person, directly or indirectly interested in your place of business, a public official as defined in Sec. 2 (14) Art. VI of the Illinois Liquor Control Act? _____ 		F. 	Are you or is any other person, directly or indirectly interested in your place of business, a public official as defined in Sec. 2 (14) Art. VI of the Illinois Liquor Control Act? _____ 
		If so, office held? _____ 			If so, office held? _____ 
	G. 	Has any license previously issued to you by any State or local authorities been SUSPENDED? _____ 		G. 	Has any license previously issued to you by any State or local authorities been SUSPENDED? _____ 
		DATE: _____ 			DATE: _____ 
		If so, state reasons therefor: _____
_____ 			If so, state reasons therefore: _____
_____ 
		WHERE: _____ 			WHERE: _____ 
		(CITY       COUNTY       STATE) 			(CITY       COUNTY       STATE) 
	H. 	Has any license previously issued to you by any State or local authorities been REVOKED? _____ 		H. 	Has any license previously issued to you by any State or local authorities been REVOKED? _____ 
		If so, state reasons therefor: _____
_____ 			If so, state reasons therefore: _____
_____ 
		WHERE: _____ 			WHERE: _____ 
		      (CITY       COUNTY       STATE) 			      (CITY       COUNTY       STATE) 
	I. 	Will you comply with the Local Liquor Code and the Regulations in connection therewith? _____
_____ 			
	I. 	Will you comply with the Local Liquor Code and the Regulations in connection therewith? _____
_____ 			
 
_____ 
17.  Do you possess a current Federal Wagering or Gaming Device Stamp? [ ] YES [ ] NO 
Stamp No. _____      Amount _____ 
18.  Will this business be conducted by a manager or agent? [ ] YES [ ] NO If answer is "YES", Manager or Agent must give the following information: 
A.  Name _____      Date of Birth _____ 
B.  Residence Address: 
_____
(STREET AND NUMBER OR RURAL ROUTE AND BOX NUMBER CITY COUNTY STATE) 
C.  Place of Birth _____  Are you a citizen of the United States? [ ] YES [ ] NO 
D.  If a naturalized citizen, time and place of naturalization? _____ 
E.  Have you ever been convicted of any crime as stated in Question 15-D or 16-D above? 
[ ] YES [ ] NO       State Offense: _____ 
F.  Are you or have you ever been interested in any liquor business at another address? [ ] YES [ ] NO 
DATE: _____ If so, state reasons therefor _____ 
WHERE: _____ (CITY, COUNTY, AND STATE) 
G.  Has any license previously issued to you by any State or local authorities been SUSPENDED? [ ] YES [ ] NO DATE: _____ If so, state reasons therefor _____ 
WHERE: _____ (CITY, COUNTY AND STATE) 
H.  Has any license previously issued to you by any State or local authorities been REVOKED? [ ] YES [ ] NO DATE: _____ If so, state reasons therefor _____ 
WHERE: _____ (CITY, COUNTY AND STATE) 
NO LICENSE SHALL BE ISSUED UNLESS ALL THE ABOVE QUESTIONS ARE COMPLETELY ANSWERED 
AFFIDAVIT 
(PLEASE READ CAREFULLY BEFORE SIGNING) 
I (We) do solemnly swear (or affirm) that the statements given above are true and correct to the best of my (our) knowledge and belief; that I (We) will comply with all regulations of Federal, State and Local Liquor Control Laws; that a copy of an ordinance governing the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors and beverages in this municipality has been furnished to me (us); that I (we) understand the same, and agree to comply with all the provisions set forth therein. 
I (We) swear (or affirm) that I (We) will not violate any of the laws of the State of Illinois or of the United States of America in the conduct of the place of business described herein and that the statements contained in this application are true and correct and are made for the purpose of inducing the City of Mascoutah, Illinois to issue the license herein applied for. 
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO BEFORE ME THIS ________ DAY OF ________, A.D., ___. 
APPLICANT(S): 
___________ 
___________ 
	      CLERK 
 	 
(SEAL) 
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL APPLICATION 
A.  The undersigned, being the     (owner, owner's agent)      of the property located at    (Number)   (Street)        does hereby request a permit to install sanitary sewage disposal facilities to serve the   ; (residence, commercial building, etc.)   at the location. 
1.  The proposed facilities include: _____ to be constructed in complete accordance with the plans and specifications attached hereunto as Exhibit "A". 
2.  The area of the property is [_____] square feet or [_____] square meters. 
3.  The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work is _____
_____ . 
4.  The maximum number of persons to be served by the proposed facilities is _____ 
5.  The location and nature of all sources of private or public water supply within three hundred fifty feet (350;ft;) of any boundary of said property are shown on the plat attached hereunto as Exhibit "B". 
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES: 
1.  To furnish any additional information relating to the proposed work that shall be requested by the City. 
2.  To accept and abide by all provisions of the City Code and of all other pertinent codes or ordinances that may be adopted in the future. 
3.  To operate and maintain the wastewater disposal facilities covered by this application in a sanitary manner at all times, in compliance with all requirements of the City and at no expense to the City. 
4.  To notify the City at least twenty-four (24) hours to commencement of the work proposed, and again at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the covering of any underground portions of the installation. 
DATE: ________, ___ 	SIGNED: _____
   (APPLICANT) 
	_____
  (ADDRESS OF APPLICANT) 
 
_____
(CERTIFICATION BY CITY TREASURER) 
$_____ (Inspection Fee Paid) 	DATE: ________, ___ 
$_______ (Connection Fee Paid) 	signed: _____
      (CITY TREASURER) 
 
_____
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED) 
DATE: ________, ___ 	SIGNED: _____
     (CITY MANAGER) 
 
_____
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION 
The undersigned, being the   (owner, owner's agent)       of the property located at    (Number) (Street)     does hereby request a permit to install and connect a building sewer to serve the     (residence, commercial building, etc.)    at said location. 
1.  The following indicated fixtures will be connected to the proposed building sewer: 
NUMBER 	FIXTURE 	NUMBER 	FIXTURE 
_____	Kitchen Sinks 	_____	Water Closets 
_____	Lavatories 	_____	Bathtubs 
_____	Laundry Tubs 	_____	Showers 
_____	Urinals 	_____	Garbage Grinders 
 
Specify Other Fixtures: _____ 
2.  The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is _____ . 
3.  The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed work is _____ 
4.  Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached hereunto as Exhibit "A". 
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES: 
1.  To accept and abide by all provisions of the City Code, and of all other pertinent ordinances and codes that may be adopted in the future. 
2.  To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the City. 
3.  To notify the City when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the work is covered. 
DATE: _______, ___ 	SIGNED: _____ 
	(APPLICANT) 
	_____
	(ADDRESS OF APPLICANT) 
 
_____
(CERTIFICATION BY CITY TREASURER) 
$_____ (Inspection Fee Paid) 	DATE: _____ 
$_____ (Connection Fee Paid) 	SIGNED: _____ 
	(CITY TREASURER) 
 
_____
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED) 
DATE: _______, ___ 	SIGNED: _____ 
	(CITY MANAGER) 
 
_____
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
INDUSTRIAL SEWER CONNECTION APPLICATION 
The undersigned, being the    (owner, owner's agent)     of the property located at   (Number) (Street)       does hereby request a permit to  (install, use)   an industrial sewer connection serving the _______, which company is engaged in _______ at said location. 
1.  A plan of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains now existing is attached hereunto as Exhibit "A". 
2.  Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed under this permit is attached hereunto as Exhibit "B". 
3.  A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or expected to be produced at said property, including a description of the character of each waste, the daily volume and maximum rates of discharge and representative analyses is attached hereunto as Exhibit "C". 
4.  The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work covered by this permit is _____ 
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES: 
1.  To furnish any additional information relating to the installation or use of the industrial sewer for which this permit is sought as may be requested by the City. 
2.  To accept and abide by all provisions of the City Code, and of all other pertinent ordinances or codes that may be adopted in the future. 
3.  To operate and maintain a control manhole and any waste pretreatment facilities, as may be required as a condition of the acceptance into the public sewer of the industrial wastes involved in an efficient manner at all times, and at no expense to the City. 
4.  To cooperate at all times with the City and its representative(s) in their inspecting, sampling, and study of the industrial wastes, and any facilities provided for pretreatment. 
5.  To notify the City immediately in the event of any accident, negligence, or other occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewers of any wastes or process waters not covered by this permit. 
DATE: _______, ___ 	SIGNED: _____ 
	(APPLICANT) 
	_____
	(ADDRESS OF APPLICANT) 
 
_____
(CERTIFICATION BY CITY TREASURER) 
$_____ (Inspection Fee Paid) 	DATE: _____ 
$_____ (Connection Fee Paid) 	SIGNED: _____ 
	(CITY TREASURER) 
 
_____
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED) 
DATE: _______, ___ 	SIGNED: _____ 
	(CITY MANAGER) 
 
_____
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
APPLICATION FOR WATER SYSTEM SERVICE CONNECTION 
The undersigned, representing himself as owner of the property located at _______, hereby makes application for connection to the Water System of the City for said property, and in consideration of the furnishing of said service covenants and agrees as follows: 
1.  I agree to abide by all rules and regulations as specified in and by the ordinances of the City now in effect or enacted and passed from time to time providing for the regulation of service furnished by the City, it is further acknowledged and agreed that the undersigned, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns shall pay all charges for connection fees and water usage which shall become due as the result of the connecting of the water mains and the furnishing of water service to the above property, and that all such charges and fees for water service rendered to the property, together with penalties, if any, and the costs of collection are to be considered and become a charge against the property, the lien so created to be enforced in accordance with the ordinances of the City. 
2.  All bills for the aforesaid charges are payable within fifteen (15) days following the receipt of said bill and if not paid, are subject to a five percent (5%) penalty. 
3.  Each and all of the agreements and covenants herein contained shall run with the real estate above described whose present owner is signatory to this application. 
4.  I understand that after making this application, I am to await installation permit and instructions therewith. 
5.  SERVICE CONNECTION FEE: $ _____ is enclosed herewith, payable to the City. 
6.  Permission is hereby granted to the City and its authorized representatives at any reasonable time to enter the premises of the applicant and any portion thereof for the purposes of inspecting all connections appurtenant to the Water System. 
CONNECTION MUST BE INSPECTED BEFORE BACKFILLING: 
SIGNATURE: _____ 	_____
	(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)       
	(CITY, STATE AND ZIP CODE)       
	(TELEPHONE NUMBER)       (DATE) 
_____
Do not fill in the spaces to the right if the information is the same as the applicant above. 		( 
	MAIL BILLS TO: 	( _____ 
		(NAME) 
		( _____ 
		(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET) 
		( 
		( _____ 
		(CITY, STATE AND ZIP CODE) 
 
_____
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
APPLICATION FOR SANITARY SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION 
The undersigned, representing himself as owner of the property located at _______, hereby makes application for Sanitary Sewerage Service for said property, and in consideration of the furnishing of said service covenants and agrees as follows: 
1.  I agree to abide by all rules and regulations as specified in and by the ordinances of the City now in effect or ordinances enacted and passed from time to time providing for the regulation of the sanitary sewer system or specifying fees and rates to be charged for connection and sanitary sewer service furnished by the City. It is further acknowledged and agreed that the undersigned, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns shall pay all charges for connection fees and sewer usage which shall become due as the result of the connecting of the sewerage mains and the furnishing of sanitary sewerage service to the above property, and that all such charges and fees for sanitary sewerage service rendered to the property, together with penalties, if any, and the costs of collection are to be considered and become a charge against the property, the lien so created to be enforced in accordance with the ordinances of the City. 
2.  All bills for the aforesaid charges are payable within ten (10) days following the receipt of said bill and if not paid, are subject to a five percent (5%) penalty. 
3.  Each and all of the agreements and covenants herein contained shall run with the real estate above described whose present owner is signatory to this application. 
4.  I understand that after making this application, I am to await installation permit and instructions therewith. 
5.  SERVICE CONNECTION FEE: $ _____ is enclosed herewith, payable to the City. 
6.  Permission is hereby granted to the City and its authorized representatives at any reasonable time to enter the premises of the applicant and any portion thereof for the purposes of inspecting all connections appurtenant to the sewerage outlets, pipes and mains. 
(APPLICANT'S SIGNATURE)       	(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)       
(OWNER'S SIGNATURE, IF NOT APPLICANT) 	(CITY, STATE AND ZIP CODE)       
	(TELEPHONE NUMBER)       (DATE) 
_____
Do not fill in the spaces to the right if the information is the same as the applicant above. 		( 
	MAIL BILLS TO: 	( _____ 
		(NAME) 
		( _____ 
		(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET) 
		( 
		( _____ 
		(CITY, STATE AND ZIP CODE) 
 
_____
MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
RECEIPT 
Receipt is hereby acknowledged of the executed Application for Sanitary Sewer Service Connection from the person and for the property indicated below. 
This receipt does not authorize service connection is made, inspection and approval of the customer service line by an authorized representative of the City is required, and approval of such connection and issuance of a Certificate of Inspection and Approval and Permit is conditioned upon compliance with all the Ordinances, Codes, Rules and Regulations of the City. 
NOTE: 
1.  In the event the location of the sewer service connection is unknown, the Superintendent is to be contacted. 
2.  This office is to be notified the day before the work is to be done so that inspection may be arranged in accordance with specifications furnished. For example, if you desire inspection on Tuesday, contact us on Monday. If you desire inspection on Monday, contact us on Friday, etc. 
3.  If the sewer line is deep enough to drain your basement, if you have one, then the wastes from the basement as well as the other floor(s) of the property must go into the sanitary sewers. Downspout and surface drainage are prohibited inasmuch as this is not a storm sewer system. 
WARNING!  In order to coordinate our inspections, we must be advised a day in advance before the work is done. The inspection must be made before the trench is backfilled. If trench is backfilled before the inspection is made, it will have to be reopened to permit inspection. 
NO. _____ 	CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
ST. CLAIR COUNTY, ILLINOIS 
DATE: _____ 	
ADDRESS: _____ 	
OWNER(S): _____ 	
_____	
 
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION, APPROVAL AND PERMIT 
IT IS HEREBY CERTIFIED THAT inspection has been made of the individually-owned sewer mains and sanitary service connection for the property described below, and said installation is hereby approved as in compliance with the Specifications, Rules and Regulations established by the Revised Code (Ch. 38) of this Municipality. 
Permission is hereby granted to complete the construction of said individually-owned sewer main to the City Sanitary Sewerage System and to utilize the same for waste disposal in compliance at all times, with the Revised Code of this City. 
NO. _______ 
ADDRESS: _____ 
TYPE OF CONNECTION: 
_______ 	Single-Family Residence 
_______ 	Multiple dwelling or trailer court 
_______ 	Commercial 
_______ 	Industrial 
_______ 	Institutional 
_______ 	Governmental 
 
INSTALLATION BY: _____ 
THE SERVICE IS IN OPERATION AS OF THIS _____ DAY OF _____, ___. 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
ST. CLAIR COUNTY, ILLINOIS 
SIGNED: _____ 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
UTILITY MAIN EXTENSION CONTRACT 
AGREEMENT made and entered into this ________ day of _______, by and between the Utility System of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, hereinafter called the "Utility Department" and _______, hereinafter called the "Depositor". 
FIRST: 	That the Utility Department contracts and agrees to have installed by contract in accordance with its rules, utility mains as shown on the plat thereof, and the specifications are attached hereto and made a part hereof. 
SECOND: 	Bids having been taken and the lowest responsible bid having been in the amount of $_____, the Depositor agrees to deposit and does deposit herewith the cost thereof. 
	(A) The lowest responsible bid $_______. 
	(B) Engineering and Inspection Charge $_______. 
	(C) TOTAL: $_______. 
THIRD: 	Final costs to be adjusted up or down according to completed job cost. 
FOURTH: 	The ownership of the utility mains laid herein shall be at all times in the Utility Department, its successors and assigns. 
FIFTH: 	This Agreement shall be valid and binding on the Utility Department only when signed by the Mayor and Clerk. 
SIXTH: 	This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, executors, administrators, successors or assigns of the respective parties. 
EXECUTED in duplicate by the parties hereto on the date first above written. 
 
	UTILITY DEPARTMENT 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH, ILLINOIS 
	BY: _____
CITY MANAGER 
ATTEST: 	
_____
CITY CLERK 	_____
APPLICANT/DEPOSITOR 
WITNESSES: 	
_____	
_____	
 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
UTILITY SHUTOFF HEARING NOTICE 
This notice is being sent to you pursuant to the provisions of CHAPTER 38 OF THE REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES as adopted by the corporate authorities. 
CUSTOMER'S NAME: _____ 
ADDRESS: _____ 
TOTAL AMOUNT OF BILL: 	$_______WATER 	
	$_______SEWER 	
	$_______ELECTRIC 	
	$_______GARBAGE 	
		SUB-TOTAL: $_______ 
		PENALTY: $_______ 
		TOTAL DUE: $_______ 
DATE OF HEARING _______ 	
TIME OF HEARING _______ 	
LOCATION OF HEARING _____ 
_____
PHONE: _____ 	
 
If the consumer/customer fails to appear at the hearing, the applicable utility services shall be terminated [shut off] without further proceedings. 
If payment for the charges and fees is received prior to the date of the hearing, you may disregard this hearing notice. 
The City Manager, Mayor or City Clerk, or their designated representative(s), shall preside at the hearing. 
	      CITY CLERK 
 	 
DATED THIS ________ DAY OF ________, ___. 
NOTE: After services have been shut off there will be a reconnection fee of $_______. 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION 
APPLICATION NO. _____ANNUAL LICENSE FEE DUE MAY 1ST: $_____ 
(PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT) 
1.  Applicant's Name: ___________ PHONE ( )_______ 
2.  Applicant's Address _______ 
City _______ State _______ ZIP _______ 
3.  Length of resident at above address _____ years _____months 
4.  Applicant's Date of Birth_____/_____/_____ Social Security No. _______ 
5.  Marital Status _______ Name of Spouse _______ 
6.  Citizenship of Applicant _______ 
7.  Business Name ___________ PHONE ( ) _______ 
8.  Business Address _______ 
City_______ State_______ ZIP _______ 
9.  Length of Employment _____years _____months 
10.  All residences and addresses for the last three (3) years if different than above: _____ 
11.  Name and Address of employers during the last three (3) years if different than above: _____ 
12.  List the last three (3) municipalities where applicant has carried on business immediately preceding the date of application: _____ 
13.  A description of the subject matter that will be used in the applicant's business: _____ 
14.  Has the applicant ever had a license in this municipality? [ ] Yes [ ] No 
If so, when _____ 
15.  Has a license issued to this applicant ever been revoked? [ ] Yes [ ] No 
If "yes", explain: _____ 
16.  Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Code, etc.? 
[ ] Yes [ ] No If "yes", explain: _____ 
17.  Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony? [ ] Yes [ ] No 
If "yes", explain: _____ 
18.  LICENSE DATA: 
Term of License _____ 
Fee for License $ _____ 
Sales Tax Number _____ 
License Classification _____ 
19.  LIST ALL OWNERS IF LICENSE IS FOR LOCAL BUSINESS (PERMANENT): _____
_____
_____ 
OFFICIAL BUSINESS LICENSE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS 	) 		
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR 	) 	ss. 	
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 	) 		
			ILLINOIS SALES TAX NUMBER _______ 
 
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL BECOME GREETINGS: 
WHEREAS _______, having complied with all the requirements of the laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois in this behalf made and required license is, by authority of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois given and granted to the _______ to _______ at _______ in the City of Mascoutah, County of St. Clair, and State of Illinois, from the ________ date hereof until the ________ day of ________, ___, said _______ to be subject to all laws of the State of Illinois and all ordinances of the City of Mascoutah, Illinois, not in conflict therewith, which are now or hereafter may be in force touching the premises. 
(L.S.) 
Given under the hand of the Mayor of the City of Mascoutah, County of St. Clair, Illinois and the seal thereof, this ________ day of ________, ___. 
	      MAYOR 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
 	 
COUNTERSIGNED: 
      CITY CLERK 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 	
 	 
(SEAL) 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
APPLICATION FOR RAFFLE LICENSE 
Organization Name: _____ 
Address: _____ 
Type of Organization: _____ 
Length of Existence of Organization: _____ 
If organization is incorporated, what is the date and state of incorporation? 
Date: _____      State: _____ 
List the organization's presiding officer, secretary, raffle manager, and any other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle. 
PRESIDENT: 
SECRETARY:_______       Birth Date: _______ 
Address: _______ 
Social Security No.: _______       Phone No.: _______ 
RAFFLE MANAGER: _______       Birth Date: _______ 
Address: _______ 
Social Security No.: _______       Phone No.: _______ 
List any other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle on the back of this page. List name, date of birth, address, social security number, and phone number. 
_____	This request is for a single raffle license. 
_____	This request is for a multiple raffle license. 
 
The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded: $_______ 
Maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in the raffle: $_______ 
The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued: _______ 
The area or areas in which raffle chances will be sold or issued: _______ 
Time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold: _______ 
The date, time and location at which winning chances will be determined: _______ 
Date: _______       Time: _______ 
Location: _____ 
If multiple raffles license is requested, list on a separate sheet, the date, time, and location for each raffle to be held within the one (1) year period of time from the date of the issuance of the license. 
THE APPLICATION FEES ARE NONREFUNDABLE EVEN SHOULD THE APPLICATION BE REJECTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL. 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
APPLICATION FOR RAFFLE LICENSE 
SWORN STATEMENT 
The following officers attest to the not-for-profit character of the applicant organization. 
      (NAME OF ORGANIZATION)       
Dated this ________ day of ________, ___. 
	      PRESIDING OFFICER 
 	 
	      SECRETARY 
 	 
STATE OF ILLINOIS 	) 	
	) 	ss. 
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR 	) 	
 
Signed and sworn to before me this ________ day of ________, ___. 
PRESIDING OFFICER       	SECRETARY       
 
	      NOTARY PUBLIC 
 	 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
SINGLE RAFFLE LICENSE 
License No.: _____ 
Organization Name: _____ 
Address: _____ 
Area or areas in which raffle chances may be sold or issued: _____
_____
_____ 
Period of time during which raffle chances may be sold: _____
_____
_____ 
Maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold: $ _____ 
Date, time and location at which winning chance will be determined: 
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
 
THIS LICENSE SHALL BE PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED AT THE TIME AND LOCATION OF THE DETERMINATION OF THE WINNING CHANCES. 
WITNESS the hand of the Mayor of the City of Mascoutah and the Corporate Seal thereof, this ________ day of ________, ___. 
	      CITY MANAGER 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
 	 
      CITY CLERK 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 	
 	 
(SEAL) 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
MULTIPLE RAFFLE LICENSE 
License No.: _____ 
Organization Name: _____ 
Address: _____ 
Area or areas in which raffle chances may be sold or issued: _____
_____
_____ 
Period of time during which raffle chances may be sold: _____
_____
_____ 
Maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold: $ _____ 
This is a license for multiple raffles to be held within the maximum period of one (1) year from date of this license. The date, the and location of each raffle is as set forth on Exhibit 1, attached hereto and hereby incorporated by reference. 
THIS LICENSE SHALL BE PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED AT THE TIME AND LOCATION OF THE DETERMINATION OF THE WINNING CHANCES. 
WITNESS the hand of the Mayor of the City of Mascoutah and the Corporate Seal thereof, this ________ day of ________, ___. 
	      CITY MANAGER 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
 	 
      CITY CLERK 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 	
 	 
(SEAL) 
EXHIBIT 1 
The following is the date, time and location at which winning chances will be determined for multiple raffles to be held within a maximum period of one (1) year from the date of issuance of this license. 
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
	
Date: _____ 	Time: _____ 
Location: _____ 
 
APPLICATION FOR CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT 
I, ___________, do hereby request permission and authority to construct a culvert/driveway on the right-of-way of the City in accordance with the information provided on this application and the accompanying sketch. (Applicant must prepare a sketch showing location, length and pertinent details.) 
ADDRESS: _____ 
Pipe material will be: _____ 
Wall thickness or gauge will be: _____ 
Type of joint will be: _____ 
DATED: ________, ___ 	SIGNED: _____ 
	(APPLICANT) 
 
CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT 
APPLICATION     Approved ( ) Disapproved ( ) 
If disapproved, state reasons: 
_____
_____
_____ 
DATED: ________, ___ 	SIGNED: _____ 
 
CERTIFICATION 
The undersigned has inspected the construction and installation set forth above and finds that the same (is) (is not) in accordance with the permit. 
DATED: ________, ___ 	SIGNED: _____ 
 
EXCAVATION PERMIT 
NAME _____ 
FIRM NAME _____ 
ADDRESS _____ 
CITY/VILLAGE _____      STATE _____      PHONE _____ 
LOCATION OF PROPOSED EXCAVATION _____
_____
_____ 
NATURE OF EXCAVATION _____
_____
_____ 
BONDING COMPANY: 
NAME _____ 
ADDRESS _____ 
CITY/VILLAGE _____      STATE _____      PHONE _____ 
AMOUNT OF BOND $ _____ 
PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE (LIST CITIES AND/OR VILLAGES) 
	CITY/VILLAGE 	CITY/VILLAGE OFFICIAL 
1. 	_____	_____
2. 	_____	_____
3. 	_____	_____
4. 	_____	_____
 
I have read the municipal law with regard to excavations and my firm or company intends to fully comply with the Street Regulations Code provisions. 
	      (Applicant's Signature) 
 	 
TIF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION FORM 
Registration for City Residents: If you are a City of Mascoutah resident, and would like to register on the Interested Parties Registry for one or more tax increment financing (TIF) redevelopment project areas, please complete Part A of this form. Proof of residency is required. Please attach to this form a photocopy of one of the following: Driver's License, lease, utility bill, financial statement, or such other evidence as may be suitable to establish your current municipal residency. 
 
Registration for Organizations: If your organization is active in the City of Mascoutah, and would like to register on the Interested Parties Registry for one or more tax increment financing (TIF) redevelopment project areas, please complete Part B of this form. Please attach a one-page statement which describes the organization's current operations in the municipality. Note: existing organizational documents that provide this information will also be accepted. 
  
APPENDIX B - NUISANCE VIOLATION NOTICES 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
NUISANCE VIOLATION NOTICE 
TO: _______ 
_______ 
_______ 
You are hereby notified that the Police Chief or his representatives has determined that the property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the case may be) located at _______ located within the Municipality contains an unlawful nuisance(s) as defined by Section 25-1-1 of the Revised Code of Ordinances as follows: 
_____
_____
_____
You are required pursuant to Section 25-1-3 to abate and remove any nuisance(s) within five (5) days from the date of this notice as follows: 
_____
_____
_____
If you wish to appeal this notice, then the appeal shall be made to the City Hall by: _______. 
If the nuisance is not abated by the date prescribed and/or if no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the Police Chief or his representative will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against the property and/or impose a fine as provided by the Revised Code of Ordinances, Chapter 25; Article I and Chapter 1. 
Dated this ________ day of ________, ___. 
_______ CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
OR POLICE CHIEF 
CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
NOTE: The penalty for failure to abate said nuisance(s) may be as high as $750.00 per violation plus the cost of the clean-up. 
NOTICE 
UNLAWFUL WEED GROWTH 
TO: _______ 
_______ 
_______ 
You are hereby notified that _______ has determined that property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the case may be) at _______, located within the City Limits contains unlawful weed growth as defined by Chapter 25 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. 
You are required to remove all growth within five (5) days from the date of this Notice. 
If you refuse or neglect to remove such growth, the authorities of this Municipality may provide for the removal thereof. The cost of such growth removal shall be paid by you. 
	      POLICE CHIEF OR CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
 	 
Dated this ________ day of ________, ___. 
NOTICE 
UNLAWFUL GARBAGE AND/OR DEBRIS 
TO: _______ 
_______ 
_______ 
You are hereby notified that the _______ has determined that property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the case may be) located at _______, located within the City Limits contains garbage and/or debris as defined by Chapter 25, Article III, of the Revised Code of Ordinances. 
You are required to remove all such material within five (5) days from the date of this Notice. 
If you refuse or neglect to remove such garbage and/or debris, the corporate authorities of this Municipality may provide for the removal thereof. The cost of the garbage and/or debris removal shall be paid by you. 
	      POLICE CHIEF OR CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
 	 
Dated this ________ day of ________, ___. 
NOTICE 
INOPERABLE VEHICLE 
TO: _______ 
_______ 
_______ 
You are hereby notified that the Police Department has determined that an "inoperable vehicle(s)" owned by you (and/or stored by you, as the case may be) located at _______, located within the Corporate Limits of this Municipality contains an inoperable vehicle(s), as defined by Chapter 25, Article IV, of the Revised Code of Ordinances. 
You are required to abate and remove any and all inoperable vehicles within seven (7) days from the date of this Notice. 
If you wish to appeal said notice, then the appeal shall be made to the Corporate Authorities within five (5) days of this Notice. 
If you refuse or neglect to remove and dispose of the specified inoperable vehicle(s), the Health Officer or Police Chief of this Municipality may provide for the removal and abatement thereof. The cost of such removal and abatement shall be paid by you. 
	      POLICE CHIEF 
      CITY OF MASCOUTAH 
 	 
Dated this ________ day of ________, ___. 
LETTER OF NOTICE 
DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDING 
TO: _______ 
_______ 
_______ 
You, as owner(s) of the property lawfully described below, are hereby notified by the undersigned City of Mascoutah, Illinois that said property has upon it a building which is: 
[ ]  Dangerous and/or unsafe 
[ ]  Uncompleted and/or abandoned 
The lawful property shall be described as _______ 
      (legal description)       
located at 
      (address)       . 
Unless such building is put into safe condition or demolished within ninety (90) days of the receipt of this notice, the City shall apply to the Circuit Court for an order authorizing such action to be taken by the City with respect to the above described building. Any costs incurred by the City to restore the building to a safe condition or to demolish the building shall be recovered from the owner(s) of the above described property pursuant to Chapter 65, Paragraph 5/11-31-1, Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
Dated at _______, this ________ day of ________, ___. 
	      CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
 	 
(SEAL)  
APPENDIX C - SCHEDULE OF FEES 
SECTION 1 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
Part 1 - Building Permits 
Residential 	Use St. Clair County Fees table, 
Building Permit Schedule A + 
Flat $100 administration fee* 
Commercial/Industry 0$—$1 million 	Use St. Clair County Fees table, 
Building Permit Schedule B + 
10% of permit cost administration fee** 
Commercial/Industry>$1 million 	Use St. Clair County Fees table, 
Building Permit Schedule B + 
5% of permit cost administration fee** 
 
Part 2 - Occupancy Permit (Inspection) 
Single-Family Residence 	Change of ownership or occupancy 	$100 
Manufactured/Mobile Home Residence 	Change of ownership or occupancy 	$75 
Multiple-Family Residence 	Change of occupancy 	$50 
Re-Inspections 		$50 
Non-Residential Use 	Change of owner or occupant 	$100 
 
		Related Expenses 	
	+Engineer Exp. 	+Legal Exp. 	+Notice Mailing/Publishing Costs 
Part 3 - Planning/Zoning 
Variance Application 	$150 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Rezoning Application - text 	$150 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Rezoning - Code 	$150 		Yes 	Yes 
Sign Permit 	$30 			
Hearing - Publish/Mail Costs 	$50 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Street/Alley Vacations 	$150+ Expenses 		Yes 	Yes 
Site Plan Minor 	$25 	Yes 		
Site Plan Major 	N/A 		Yes 	
Conditional Use 	$200 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Part 4 - Subdivisions 
Planned Unit Dev.-PDP 	$400—$900 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Preliminary Plat 	$50+$10 per lot 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Final Plat 	$50+$10 per lot 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Plat - Minor Modifications 	$75 	Yes 		
Plat - Major Modifications 	$50+$5 per lot 		Yes 	Yes 
Part 5 - Utility Main Extensions 
Sewer Main Extensions 	$200 	Yes 	Yes 	
Water Main Extensions 	$200 	Yes 	Yes 	
Part 6 - Soil Erosion Control 
Residential (>2 acres) 	$50 	Yes 		
Non-Residential 	$100 	Yes 		
Part 7 - Airport Related 
Area Plan (Airport Zone) 	$100+$10 per acre 	Yes 	Yes 	
Special Use Permit 	$50 		Yes 	Yes 
Final Plan 	$50+$10 per acre 	Yes 	Yes 	
Part 8 - Minor Permits 
Fence 	$7.50/$1000 			
Demolition Permit ($20 for permit and $500 deposit) 	$20+$500 			
Appeals 	$50 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Pool 	$25 			
Inspections (City Employee) 	$50 			
Part 9 - Planning Documents 
Unified Land Dev Code Text 	$50 			
Zoning Maps 	$8 			
Other Maps/Aerials 	$1.00/sq ft 			
 
  
*Schedule A - Provides cost of residential construction and resulting Permit fees. Provides 03-04 - 07-08 fee schedules. 
**Schedule B - Provides cost of commercial/industrial construction and resulting Permit fees. Provides 03-04 - 07-08 fees schedules. 
GENERAL FEES 
Amusement Tax 	3% change effective 10/1/98 
Hotel/Motel Tax 	5% 
Liquor License 	The fee for license for a full year shall be: 
$1,050 - Class A 
$900 - Class C, D, E & F 
$500 - Class B 
Business License 	$50 initial, $10 (year, renewed annually) 
Vehicle Registration 	$5.00/vehicle, ($3.00 - Seniors 60 and over) 
Yard/Garage/Auction Sale Permit 	$2.00 
 
WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSION 
(A)  Sewer and water main extension connections, where a manhole is required as a result of the sewer extension connection to the main trunkline, the engineer and construction expense thereof shall be charged to the party requesting the extension. 
(B)  Engineer work is required. Applicant may use engineer of choice, with City Engineer plan certification, or; 
(C)  Application may choose to use City Engineer for extension plans. 
USER FEES 
Water 
Basic user rate: There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge and a basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the water facilities of the City of Mascoutah. 
(A)  A minimum charge of $9.00 per month shall be applied to all users whose water consumption in excess of 2,000 gallons per month. 
(B)  A basic user rate of $3.00 per 1,000 gallons shall be applied to all users for water consumption in excess of 2,000. 
Sewers 
Basic user rate: For the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the City of Mascoutah. 
(A)  A minimum charge of $7.00 per month shall be applied to all users whose water consumption does not exceed 2,000 gallons per month. 
(B)  A basic user rate of $2.42 per 1,000 gallons shall be applied to all users for water consumption in excess of 2,000 gallons per month. 
(C)  All non-metered residential users of the wastewater facilities shall pay a minimum flat rate charge per month adequate to cover the minimum service charge and the basic user rate of $2.42 per 1,000 gallons. 
(D)  The flat rate charge of $7.00 will allow a maximum of 2,000 gallons per month. 
(E)  In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the City Council to be in excess of 2,000 gallons per month, the City Council may require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied. 
SECTION 2: TAP FEES 
	Fees 
Water tap on fee 	
Residential 	$1,600 per unit 
Non-Residential 	$1,150 Base + formula of costs 
Outside City 	Existing * 2.0 
	
Sewer tap on fee 	
Residential 	$1,600 per unit 
Non-Residential 	$1,200 Base + formula of costs 
Outside City 	Existing * 2.0 
	
Electric tap on fee 	
Residential 	$425 per unit 
Non-Residential 	$1,500 Base + formula of costs 
 
  
(Res. No. 05-06-3, 7-5-05; Res. No. 07-08-18, 10-15-07) 
SECTION 3: GARBAGE RATES - effective 4/1/10 WM Renewal 
	
Garbage Rates: 	Effective through 3/31/11 
 Trash Hauling 	$10.87 
 Recycling 	$5.39 
 Yard Waste 	$10.12 
 Trash Hauling-Senior 	$9.60 
 Recycling-Senior 	$4.69 
 Yard Waste-Senior 	$8.85 
	
Extras 	
 90-Gallon Cart 	$2.50 
White Fixtures/each piece 	$25.00 
 
Waste Management will be billing customers directly at a $0.75 charge per month. 
(Res. No. 05-06-3, 7-5-05; Res. No. 06-07-19, 2-20-07; Res. No. 09-10-17, 3-15-10) 
SCHEDULE 4: RECREATION RATES 
City Pool Rates 
Swimming pool 	Resident Rate 	Nonresident Rate 
Daily rate 	$5.00 	$6.00 
Rate after 4:00 p.m. 	$3.00 	$3.00 
Daily—Child 3 years & younger 	Free 	Free 
Individual pass—Child, adult, senior 	$80.00 	$100.00 
Family pass (2) 	$150.00 	$170.00 
Family pass (3) 	$175.00 	$195.00 
Family pass (4) 	$200.00 	$220.00 
Family pass (5) 	$225.00 	$245.00 
Family pass (6) 	$250.00 	$270.00 
10-visit punch card 	$45.00 	$55.00 
20-visit punch card 	$90.00 	$110.00 
Swim lessons (2-week class) 	$60.00 	$70.00 
 
(Res. No. 05-06-02, 5-16-05; Res. No. 07-08-26, 4-7-08; Res. No. 09-10-12, 1-19-10) 
SECTION 4: IN-LIEU GREEN SPACE FEES 
	Fees 
Single Family Residence 	Cost per single family home = $650 
Multi-Family Residence 	Cost per dwelling unit = $650 
 
  
(Res. No. 05-06-8, 10-3-05; Res. No. 07-08-18, 10-15-07) 
SECTION 5: CEMETERY FEES - effective 9/20/07 
Grave Opening/Closing: 	
Adults 	
 Weekday's 	$500.00 
 Saturday's 	$650.00 
 Holiday's 	$800.00 
Cremains 	
 Weekday's 	$200.00 
 Saturday's 	$300.00 
 Holiday's 	$400.00 
Infants 	
 Weekday's 	$150.00 
 Saturday's 	$250.00 
 Holiday's 	$350.00 
Grave Purchases: 	
 Adults 	$400.00 
 Infants 	$125.00 
 
  
(Res. No. 07-08-09, 8-20-07) 
SECTION 6: SURCHARGES 
	Fees 
Sewer - North 	
Residential 	$900 per unit 
Non-residential 	$900 Base + formula of costs 
	
Fire Infrastructure 	
Residential 	$150 per unit 
Non-residential 	$375 per unit 
 
  
(Res. No. 07-08-18, 10-15-07)  
APPENDIX D - STREET AND ALLEY VACATIONS 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 	DATE ADOPTED 	DATE RECORDED 	DESCRIPTION OF VACATION 	PLAT BOOK 
271 	10/02/42 	10/21/42 	Vacating "Meadow Lawn" Addition 	V p. 48 
294 	03/13/47 		Alley "John Schmahl Addition" Lots 89, 90, 97, 98 	"A" p. 150 
301 	09/23/47 		Easement - Lots 34—35 - West Park Place 	Bk. 29 p. 38 
350 	08/18/52 		Alley - Flatho's Addit. Lots 1, 3, 5, 7 - North Side 	Bk. p. 
354 	01/19/53 	07/10/67 	Alley - Patterson's Addition - Block "C" between Lots #321 to 350 	Bk 2072 p. 76 
358 	03/02/53 		Easement - West Park Place Lot 23—24 	Bk. 29 p. 38 
372 	05/03/54 		Alley - Patterson's Add. Lots 369—386 	
373 	05/03/54 		Alley-Patterson's Add. Lots 351—368 	
406 	03/18/57 	07/20/67 	Alley-Fike's Second - Lots 388—399; 408, 409 	
428 	05/05/58 		Streets - Fike's Add. - Lot 352 - 50' x 142' 	
			Street - Schmahl's 4th - Lot 13 - 50' x 96' 	
			Street - Schmahl's 4th - Bl. 14; 50' x 92.2' 	
433 	07/21/58 	07/28/58 	Alley—Scheel's 3rd Add. North of Lots 189—199 p. 219 	Bk. 1568 p. 219 
436 	10/06/58 	10/25/58 	Vacating Public Square — Fike's Add. Lot 307—310 	Bk. 1584 p. 45 
463 	1960 		Street - Kolb's Add. Lots 7, 14, 15, 6 	Bk. 1718 p. 263 
464 	01/03/61 	01/10/61 	Alley—Leibrock's 5th Lots 280—289; Bl. 23 	Bk. 1719 p. 44 
484 	11/—/62 	12/03/62 	Alley—Dietz's Add. Block 6 	Bk. 1818 p. 174 
486 	12/—/62 	12/28/62 	Alley—Leibrock's Add. Lots 35—38 	Bk. 1821 p. 492 
517 	05/03/65 	07/15/65 	Alley—Leibrock's Add. Lots 65—81; (Bl. 6) 	Bk. 1963 p. 401 
519 	05/17/65 	07/15/65 	Alley—Scheel's Add. Lots 1—38; 50-61 	Bk. 1963 p. 403 
527 	09/20/65 		Alley—Schmahl's Add. Lots 73—80 	
541 	09/19/66 	03/12/69 	Alle—Scheel's 1st - Lots 153—160 	Bk. 2165 p. 511 
553 	10/16/67 	10/18/67 	Alley—Dietz's III Add. Lots 130—141 	Bk. 2088 p. 87 
571 	09/16/68 	yes 	Alley—Scheel's Add. Lots 153—161; 63-68 	Bk. 2140 p. 443 
613 	08/07/71 	09/27/71 	Alley—Fike's Add. Lots 1—6 (Liebig's) 	Bk. 2302 p. 632 
622 	03/20/72 	03/28/92 	Alley—Wilderman's Add. Lots 9—12 	Bk. 2323 p. 1284 
665 	02/02/76 	02/06/76 	Alley—Leibrock's Add. Lots 15—18 	Bk. 2394 p. 41 
698 	12/04/78 		Alley—Scheel's 3rd Add. (Railway to First St.) 	
729 	09/08/81 		Alley—Between 9th & 10th St. (South of W. South St.) 	
732 	11/16/81 		Lot 308 - Block 23 Fike's Add. 	
753 	09/19/83 	01/21/85 	Alley—Patterson's Add. Block A 	Bk. 2593 p. 1875 
759 	03/19/84 		Street—Lincoln Park No. 1 Lots 27—28 	
765 	05/07/84 		Alley—Leibrock's Add. Lots 274—279 	
769 	10/01/84 		Alley—Patterson's Add. Lots 288—305 	
801 	02/02/87 	Alley—Leibrock's Add. Block 16 		
803 	05/18/87 	05/14/87 	Alley—Eisenmayers Lots 9—14 Block 7 	Bk. 2674 p. 1823 
807 	07/20/87 		Alley—Dietz's Add. Block 1 	
827 	07/05/88 		Alley—Lincolnshire Add. Block 1 	
837 	12/19/88 		Street—West Mascoutah - Lots 29—32 	
857 	12/04/90 		Alley—Nelson's Add. Lots 1—10 	
07-01 	01/02/07 		Alley—Tetrick & Fike's Add. Blocks 15 & 16 	Bk. A, p. 48 
07-09 	05/21/07 		Alley—Runs east and west between N. Independence St. and N. John St. 	
13-10 	 6/17/13 		Easement—50 feet of right-of-way lying west of Lot 308 in Block 23 of Fike's Addition to the City of Mascoutah 	Bk. of Deeds "G-2", pg. 64 
15-17 	 8/17/15 		Easement—Lot 5 of Corrington Place 	Bk. 87 p. 90 
16-20 	 9/19/16 		Easement—30-foot wide drainage easement in Stonemill Estates 	Bk. 101, pg. 71 
16-28 	11/21/16 		Alley—East Corrington Street between lots 416 and 417 	Bk. N-2, pg. 40 
16-30 	12/5/16 		Alley—910 West South Street 	
17-01 	 1/03/17 		Easement—Portion of East Green Street, located between North John Street and North Independence Street 	Bk of Deeds N2, pg. 40 
17-17 	 9/05/17 		Alley—Between 303 East Main St. and 323 West Main St. 	Bk. A, pg. 48 
17-18 	 9/05/17 		Alley—On South 10th St. 	Bk. X, pg. 150 
 
