
CHAPTERl GENERAL  PROVISIONS

1.1	Marengo Municipal  Code
1.2	Definitions
1.3	Repeal of Ordinances
1.4	Ordinances Repealed Not Reenacted
1.5	Jurisdiction
1.6	Penalties
1.7	Citations or Hang On-Tickets
1.8	Responsibility for Acts
1.9	Separability of Provisions
1.10	Effective Date
1.11	Copies on File


1.1	MARENGO  MUNICIPAL  CODE

A.	TITLE: This Code of ordinances may be known and cited as the Marengo Municipal Code. Any references to "this Code" or "Code" herein shall also mean the Marengo Municipal Code.

B.	AMENDMENTS: Any additions or amendments to this Code are incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Marengo Municipal Code includes such additions and amendments.

C.	NUMBERING OF SECTIONS: Each section number of this Code shall consist of two component parts separated by a period, the figure before the period referring to the chapter number and the figure after the period referring to the section within the chapter.

D.	NUMBERING ADDITIONS: The decimal system shall be used for all additions and amendments to this Code. When a chapter or section is added the new chapter or section shall be given a decimal character.

1.2	DEFINITIONS

A.	Terms used in this Code, unless specifically defined in this Code, have the meanings prescribed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes for the same terms.

B.	Unless found elsewhere in this Code, terms used herein are defined in Appendix A.

1.3	REPEAL OF ORDINANCE

A.	All general ordinances or parts previously adopted by the Mayor and City Council, inconsistent with those included in this Code are repealed and the following are specifically contin­ ued in full force and effect:


Chapter 1, Page 1	7113/09
 


I.	Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issue of municipal notes or bonds.

2.	Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments;

3.	Ordinances budgeting and appropriating funds or establishing salaries.

4.	Ordinances granting franchises or rights to corporations;

5.	Ordinances relating to the establishment, dedication, opening, grading, nam­ ing, improvement, altering, railroad crossings, widening or vacating of any streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public grounds.

6.	Ordinances respecting the annexation oftetTitory to the City, or the convey­ ance or acceptance or real property or easements in real property;

7.	Ordinances authorizing or relating to patticular public improvement;

8.	Ordinances relating to zoning and subdivisions;

9.	Any other special ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this Code.

B.	The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of exist- ing ordinances are continuations of such ordinances and not new enactments. Any act done, offense committed or right accruing or acquired, or liability, penalty, fotfeiture or punishment incurred prior hereto shall not be affected, but may be enjoyed, assetted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if the repeal had not been effected.

1.4	ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED

No ordinance or pait of any ordinance previously repealed shall not be considered re-ordained or re­ enacted by vittue of this Code, unless specifically reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinance does not impair or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.

1.5	JURISDICTION

Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the City. Provisions of this Code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the City to regulate such par­ ticular acts outside the corporate limits.

1.6	PENALTIES
 

A.	STANDARD PENALTY: Unless another penalty is specifically provided by this Code for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any person violating any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of any Code adopted herein by reference, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $750 and prosecution  fees if allowable.

B.	COMMI1MENT: The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed for violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the City, upon order of the court before whom the conviction is had, may be committed to the County or Statejail, as provided by law, or to any other place provided by statute.

C.	EACH DAY OF VIOLATION: Eachactofviolationandeach day upon which a vio- lation occurs constitutes a separate offense.

D.	APPLICABILITY: The penalty provided by this section applies to the amendment of any section of this Code or a Code adopted herein by reference whether or not such penalty is reen­ acted in the amendatory ordinance.

E.	REFERENCE TO SECTIONS: Reference to a section of this Code shall be under- stood also to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto, unless othe1wise expressly pro­ vided.

F.	FAILURE OF OFFICERS TO PERFORM DUTIES: The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically pro­ vided in the section creating the duty.

G.	COLLECTION: Inthe event any fee, including, but not limited to those relating to re- tained personnel, fines, penalties, repair, abatement, restitution and reimbursement, found in any sec­ tion of the Code that is due the City and is not paid, the cost of collecting said fee shall be added to the fee. Collection costs shall include, but not be limited to, prosecution and attorney fees.

1.7	CITATIONS  OR HANG-ON TICKETS Amended,  09-7-2, 06-8-I, 02-2-2, 01-10-6

A.	PAYMENTS: Any of the following described offenses may be settled and compro- mised in the following manner: Settlement payment when made within seven days of the time a no­ tice is delivered to the offender, as listed in Column A, and settlement payment when made within 14 days of the time a notice is delivered to the offender, as listed in Column B. Provided, however, this settlement and compromise procedure shall not be allowed where the offender has violated the same ordinance two previous times within 12 consecutive months.

OFFENSE	Column Ain$	Column Bin$
Alcoholic beverages, Section 40.06	100	200
 

OFFENSE	Column Aiu$	
Column Bin$
Building violations, other than listed in Chapter 24	100	300
Consumption on premises, drinking on public streets, Section 3.228	50	100
Curfew, Section 40.03	100	200
Curfew, Section 43.16	25	25
Damaging propertv, Section 40.03	100	200
Damaging property, Section 43.09	25	50
Disorderly  conduct, Section 40.01	100	200
Disorderly conduct, Section 43.01	25	50
Dogs and other animals, Chapter 14	50	100
Drug paraphernalia, Section 40.08	100	200
Failure to have a building permit, Chapter 24	150	300
Failure to obtain a business license, Section 32.01	25	50
Failure to have a vehicle license, Chapter 42	75	150
Failure to disp]av a vehicle license, Chapter 42	75	150
False alarm, Section 12.l 0	25	50
Garage sale, Section 31.01	25	50
Garbage, Chapter 13	25	50
House numbering, per day, Section 6.21	25	50
Liquor, sale to persons under 21 years of age, Section 33.25	200	300
Littering, Section 43.10	25	50
Noise, Section 43.08	75	150
Nuisance and burning, Section 12.09	25	50
Parental responsibility,  Section 40.04	50	100
Parental responsibility,  Section 43.17	25	50
Parking, Chapter 15, except for Sections 15.06-A, 15.06-E, 15.06-F	25	50
Parking, Sections 15.06-A, 15.06-E and 15.06-F	10	25
Parks and Playgrounds, Chapter 8	25	50
Persons responsible for unlawful activities on their premises, Section 40.09	100	200
Raffle, Section 31.02	25	50
Setting off fireworks, Section 43.06	25	50
Sign Code, Chapter 16	25	50
Streets, deposit of dirt and mud, Section 24.17-C	50	100
Street gang activity, Section 40.05	100	200
Trespassing,  Section 43.11	25	50
Traffic, Chapter 15, except moving and parking violations	25	50
Water, emergency limitations, Section 24.17	50	100
Weapons, Section 43.05	25	50
Unauthorized use of parking space for persons with disabilities, Sec-	100	200
 


OFFENSE	Column Ain$	Column Bin$
tion 15.08		
Weed, grass nuisance, Section 12.07	25	50
Weapons, Section 40.07	100	200

B.    SETTLEMENTS: Settlement payments shall be made to the City Police Depaiiment who shall provide the alleged offender with a receipt in the amount of such payment.

C.	DISPOSITION OF PAYMENTS: The amounts paid to the City Police Depatiment in settlement of the foregoing claims shall be promptly deposited by the City Police Department with the City Treasurer and shall be credited by the Treasurer to the General Fund.

D.	PROSECUTION: The City shall refrain from prosecuting any alleged offender of the foregoing offenses after receipt of such settlement payment.

1.8	RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS

Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this Code, whether he/she directly commits the act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is punishable as if he/she had directly committed such act.

1.9	SEPARABILITY  OF PROVISIONS

Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this Code is separable and if any provi­ sion is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this Code nor any part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.

1.10	EFFECTIVE  DATE

This Code of ordinances shall take effect immediately upon its passage. Publication shall be in book form under the authority of the Mayor and City Council, as provided by law.

1.11	COPIES ON FILE

Copies of this Code shall be kept available at City Hall for public inspection or purchase during City Hall business hours. The cost of said Code shall be determined from time to time by the City Coun­ cil.
 
CHAPTER2 CITY COUNCIL

2.1	Government of City, Wards
2.2	Election, Terms and Powers
2.3	Regular and Committee of the Whole Meetings
2.4	Special Meetings
2.5	Presiding Officer
2.6	Quorum
2.7	Order of Business; Sergeant at Arms
2.8	Open Meetings Act
2.9	City Council Committees
2.10	Special Committee Assigmnents
2.11	Salaries of Officials
2.12	Rules of Order and Procedure
2.13	At Cost Participation in Employee Benefit Plans by Elected Officials



2.1	GOVERNMENT OF CITY, WARDS Amended 14-9-1

A.	CITY COUNCIL: The City shall be governed by a City  Council  which  shall consist of a Mayor and eight aldermen. The Mayor shall be elected at large and two aldermen shall be elected from each ward.

B. ELECTION WARDS ESTABLISHED: The City  is  divided  into  four  wards, bounded as followed:

Ward 1 Boundaries
Beginning at the west city limit at the Union Pacific Railroad Tracks, heading east to North Sponable Street as it dead ends at the railroad tracks, then south along Sponable to West Washington Street, then east on Washington to South Ford Street, then south on Ford to West Grant Highway (USH 20), then east to State Street (STH 23), then south on State Street (STH 23) to the city limit;
-and-

all property within the city limits south of Pleasant Grove Road /Coral Road, regardless of which side of State Street (STH 23) the prope1iy is located.

Ward 2 Boundaries
Beginning at the south city limit on State Street (STH 23) north of Coral Road, heading north along the highway (STH 23) and city limits east of the highway (STH 23) to Grant Highway (USH 20), then east on Grant Highway (USH 20) to the east city limit.

Ward 3 Boundaries
Beginning at the east city limit at Grant Highway (USH 20), heading west to East Street, then n01ih on East Street to Greenlee Street, then east to Grace Street, then n01ih on Grace to Van


Chapter 2, Page 1	7111117
 
Buren Street, then further north (at jog of Grace Street west and north at Van Buren) along the rear property lines (and ditch line) of those properties facing Grace Street on the east  to Telegraph Street (STH 176), then east on Telegraph (STH 176) to Kishwaukee Street, then north on Kishwaukee Street to Fifth Avenue, then west on Fifth to East Street, then north on East to Eighth Avenue, then further north along the east property line of 508 Eighth Avenue to the rear propetiy line of the those properties facing Eighth Avenue on the north, then west along those property lines facing Eighth Avenue on the north to the east property line of the Sewage Treatment Plant owned by the City of Marengo, then north along the east prope1iy line of the City of Marengo Sewage Treatment Plant to the city limit.

Ward 4 Boundaries
Beginning at the west city limit at the Union Pacific Railroad Tracks, heading east to North Sponable Street as it dead ends at the railroad tracks, then south along Sponable to West Washington Street, then east on Washington to South Ford Street, then south on Ford to West Grant Highway (USH 20), then east to East Street, then north on East Street to Greenlee Street, then east to Grace Street, then north on Grace to Van Buren Street, then further north (at jog of Grace Street west and north at Van Buren) along the rear property lines (and ditch line) of those properties facing Grace Street from the east to Telegraph Street (STH 176), then west on Telegraph (STH 176) to Kishwaukee Street, then north on Kishwaukee Street to Fifth Avenue, then west on Fifth to East Street, then north on East to Eighth Avenue, then further north along the east property line of 508 Eighth Avenue to the rear property line of the those properties facing Eighth Avenue on the north, then west along those propetiy lines facing Eighth Avenue on the north to the east property line of the Sewage Treatment Plant owned by the City of Marengo, then north along the east property line of the City of Marengo Sewage Treatment Plant to the city limit.

2.2	ELECTION, TERMS AND POWERS Amended, 07-4-1, 01-5-1

A.	The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four-year term, and until their successors are elected and qualified, as provided by law. The term of office for each elected member shall begin at the first regular or special meeting following receipt of the official election results.

B.	The powers of the City Council shall be purely legislative (the preparation and enactment of laws and administrative rules) except as may otherwise be provided by any other ordinance herein, act or by any article of the Illinois Municipal Code. The City Council shall approve for payment all expenses and liabilities of the City.

2.3	REGULAR  MEETINGS

All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of every month in the City Hall, 132 East Prairie Street, Marengo, Illinois, at 7:30 p.m.

2.4	SPECIAL  MEETINGS
 
Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the Mayor or any three members of the City Council, provided that written notice of such meetings shall be given to each member of the City Council no less than 48 hours prior thereto, the following accomplished.

I.		Written notice is given to all members of the public body by delivering to their residence a notice of the meeting which shall include the date, time, place, and subject matter of the special meeting. Minutes of the special meeting shall indicate how notice was provided to the members.

2.	Notice of the meeting shall be posted at the location of the meeting at the City Hall and at the police station. Said posted notice shall indicate the date, time, place and subject matter of the special meeting.

3.	Notification of the special meeting shall be  given  to  all  news  media  requesting notification as provided by law.

2.5	PRESIDING  OFFICER

The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the regular and special meetings of the City Council, and of other meetings when the City Council convenes as a Committee of the Whole. In the absence of the Mayor, the Clerk shall open the meeting and the temporary chairman shall be selected pursuant to Section 3.01-D herein.


2.6	QUORUM

A majority of the elected members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum thereof, but no ordinance shall be passed except upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the elected members of the City Council or according to the Open Meetings Act.

2.7	ORDER OF BUSINESS; SERGEANT AT ARMS

A.	ORDER OF BUSINESS: The order of business at all meetings of the City Council shall be determined by the Mayor.

B.	SERGEANT AT ARMS: The Chief of Police shall attend every meeting of the City Council and shall act as Sergeant at Arms. In the absence of the Chief of Police, the City Council shall appoint a responsible person to act as Sergeant at Arms. The Sergeant at Arms is authorized to prevent any unlawful disturbance or demonstration at such meetings, and shall provide for the good order of the meeting room prior to every meeting of the City Council.

2.8	OPEN MEETINGS ACT

All City meetings shall comply with the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1, et seq.)


2.9	CITY COUNCIL COMMITTEES Amended,  07-6-4
 

There is  hereby established the General Administration Committee, the Community Development Committee and the Transportation Committee of the City Council. Annually, the Mayor shall appoint four aldermen to each committee and the chairman of each cormnittee. Matters referred to the General Administration Committee shall include community events, finance, grants, insurance, legislation, personnel, personnel policies and procedures, police and public safety and such matters as may be assigned to the committee from time to time by the Mayor. Matters referred to the Community Development Committee shall include building, public properties, public works, subdivision, zoning and such matters as may be assigned to the committee from time to time by the Mayor. Matters referred to the Transportation Committee shall include long-term multi-modal transportation planning, parking matters, road network related items that affect City Transportation, pedestrian safety, traffic studies and other matters that may be assigned to the committee from time to time by the Mayor.

All meetings shall be held pursuant to the Open Meetings Act. The Chairman shall be responsible for the minutes of the meeting.

2.10	SPECIAL COMMITTEE  ASSIGNMENTS

The Mayor may appoint a special committee to conduct investigations, make detailed studies of pending proposals or projects and deliver specific findings to the City Council for final action.

The findings of any special committee shall be reduced to a written report. On presentation to and acceptance of the committees report to the City Council the special committee shall be disbanded.

Any special committee must conform to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) by posting a public notice of all committee meetings where two or more elected officials are in attendance. Minutes must be taken at all special committee meetings.

2.11	SALARIES OF OFFICIALS Amended, 08-9-5, 05-10-1, 00-11-2

A.	ALDERMEN: The City shall pay each Alderman a salary of $3,600 per  fiscal year, to be paid in monthly installments. As additional compensation,  Aldermen  shall be given the option to participate, at their own cost, in various insurance and benefit plans offered to City employees.

B.	MAYOR: The City shall pay the Mayor $10,000 per fiscal year, to be paid in monthly installments. As additional compensation, the Mayor shall be given the option to participate, at his or her own cost, in various insurance and benefit plans offered to City employees.

C.	CLERK: The City shall pay the Clerk $3,000 per fiscal year, to be paid in monthly installments. As additional compensation, the Clerk shall be given the option to pmticipate, at his or her own cost, in various insurance and benefit plans offered to City employees.
 

D.	LIQUOR COMMISSIONER:  The City shall pay the Liquor Commissioner $2,000 per fiscal year, to be paid in monthly installments.

E.	TREASURER:  The City shall pay the Treasurer $2,000 per fiscal year, to be paid in monthly installments.

2.12	RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE Amended, 17-6-2

The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations and meeting of the City Couucil aud the committees thereof.

1.	DUTIES:

A.	PRESIDING	OFFICER,	DUTIES	OF   THE   PRESIDING	OFFICER:	The
presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other members and shall decide all  questions  of  order subject to appeal. The presiding officer may speak to matters being considered by the City Council without relinquishing the chair.

In case of any disturbances or disorderly conduct, the presiding officer shall have the power to require the City Council room to be cleared.

B.	MEMBERS, DUTIES OF MEMBERS: While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member shall walk across or out of the City Council chambers.

Every member, previous to their speaking or making a motion, shall address themselves to the presiding officer and shall not proceed with their remarks until recognized and named by the chair. They shall confine themselves to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other member's argument or vote.

When two or more members address the chair at the same time, the presiding officer shall name the member who is first to speak.

2.	PUBLIC COMMENT AT MEETINGS: Members of the public are invited and pe1mitted to speak at any public, open meeting of the City Council subject to the following rules:

1.	Individuals wishing to be heard on an item that is not on the agenda may be recognized by the Mayor or Chairperson during the Public Comment portion of each meeting which will generally be held as one of the initial items of business on the agenda but may, by a majority vote of the members of the public body present at a particular meeting, be moved to a different point on the agenda for that meeting.

2.	Individuals wishing to be heard on an item that is included in the agenda will be provided an opportunity to speak by the Mayor or Chairperson during the consideration of that
 
item.

3.	Public comment may be restricted to no more than two minutes for  each  individual speaker.	The Mayor or Chairperson may permit additional comment in his or her discretion taking into account the number of persons wishing to be heard on a matter and the amount of business requiring attention.

4.	Members of the public may be asked to avoid repeating comments that have already been made, although they may be given the opp01tunity to indicate that they agree or disagree with an earlier speaker.

5.	Members of the public will be required to step forward to the podium and to identify themselves for the record. Members may be asked but are not required to provide an address for the record.

6.	The Mayor or Chairperson shall require that order and decorum be maintained at public meetings. This includes prohibiting outbursts from the public or other behavior that is threatening, disorderly or disruptive to the public business. The Mayor or Chairperson may eject from a public meeting any person who, in the Mayor or Chairperson's sole opinion, disrupts the. order and decorum of the meeting or otherwise violates the rules of this Section.

7.	Public comment shall be restricted to the p01tions of meetings which are required to be open to the public under the Open Meetings Act. Nothing in this  Section  shall  be construed to allow public access to or public comment at closed sessions or any other meeting of public officials which is not required to be open to the public under the Open Meetings  Act.

3.	PRESENTATION OF NEW BUSINESS AND DEFERMENT: Upon the request of any two City Council members present, any report of a committee of the City Council shall be deferred (for final action thereon) to the next regular meeting of the City Council after the report is made.

4.	DEBATE: No member shall speak more that once on the same question, except by unanimous consent, and then not until eve1y other member desiring to speak shall have had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent of the matter under consideration or the chairman of the committee whose rep01t is under consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and close debate. No member shall speak longer than five minutes at any one time, except by consent of the  City Council. In closing debate on any questions, as above provided, the speaker shall be limited to five minutes, except by special consent of the City Council.

5.	CALL TO ORDER: A member, when called to order by the chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take their seat, and the order of ruling by the chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right of appeal.
 
6.	VOTING: Every member who shall be present when a question is stated from the chair shall vote thereon or abstain at the time that their name is first called. A failure to vote shall be counted as an abstention and will count in the marmer established by law. Any member required to abstain on a matter due to conflict of interest shall so declare.

7.	ORDINANCES:

A.	Style of Ordinances: The style of all ordinances shall be "BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Marengo, McHemy County, Illinois," as provided by statute.

B.	"Yea" and "Nay" Vote: The yeas and nays shall be taken on the passage of all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability against the City, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any member of the City Council. Such vote shall be entered on the journal of the proceedings, as is provided by statute.

C.	Record of Ordinances: The Clerk shall record, in an ordinance book used for such purpose, all ordinances passed by the corporate authorities.

D.	Publication: All ordinances imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture or making any appropriation, shall be published as required by statute, either in a newspaper or in pamphlet form, in which case the ordinance in its pamphlet form shall be displayed for not less than 10 days in a public place in the City Hall.

E.	Time of Taking Effect: No ordinance that must be published to comply with the foregoing section shall go into effect until 10 days after it is so published unless a statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it and it achieves passage by a two-thirds vote of the members of the corporate authorities then holding office. In all other cases, the ordinances shall go into effect upon  the  passage thereof, as provided by statute, even though the operation of the ordinance may not take effect until a later date.

8.	ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER: The rules of parliamentary practice contained in the latest published edition of Robert's  Rules of Order shall govem the City Council in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of this City Council or the statutes or laws of the state.

9.	TEMPORARY  SUSPENSION  OF  RULES;  AMENDMENT  OF  RULES:  These  rules
may be temporarily suspended, repealed, altered or amended by a two-thirds vote of the corporate authorities then holding office.

10.	CENSURE  OF  MEMBERS;  EXPULSION  OF  MEMBERS:  Any  member  of  the
corporate authorities acting or appeaTing in a lewd, disorderly or disgraceful marmer, or who  uses  opprobrious,  obscene  or  insulting  language  to  or  about  any member  of the
 
corporate authorities, or who does not obey the order of the chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the corporate authorities and, in addition, may be fined not to exceed $100 for each such occurrence. With the concurrence of two-thirds of the corporate authorities elected, the corporate authorities may expel a member, but not a second time for the same offense.

2.13	AT-COST PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS BY ELECTED OFFICIALS 08-9-5

A.	POLICY: It is the policy of the City that the City's elected officials are valuable public servants and should be entitled to participate, at their own expense and without expenditure of City funds, in the insurance and benefits plans offered to City employees.

B.	EXERCISE OF OPTION: Any elected official taking office after the April 2009 municipal elections may, within 30 days of taking office, elect to participate  in any insurance of benefit plan offered generally to City employees. The exercise of this option must be made by notifying the Administrator in writing. After 30 days of taking office, the elected official may only opt in or opt out of the benefit plans as practicable in the discretion of the Administrator.

C.	CALCULATION OF COST: Within seven days of an elected official taldng office, the Administrator shall notify the elected official of (1) his or her right to participate in employee benefit plans at cost, and (2) the available plans and the annual premium for each. Ifno annual premium is available, the proper periodic premium shall be indicated.

D.	PERMITTED PLANS: Elected officials shall be entitled to patticipate in the following plans, if available to City employees, and these plans only, at their own expense and at the marginal cost thereof as if the participating elected official was an additional employee:

1.	Vision insurance;
2.	Dental insurance; and
3.	Life insurance.

E.	PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION: Any elected official who  elects  to participate in a plan under this Section shall tender the full annual premium to the Administrator. Ifthere is no premium, the total periodic premiums for one year shall be tendered.

F.	NO PAYMENT BY CITY: Under  no circumstances shall the  City pay for any premium, deductible or other cost under insurance or benefit plans for an elected official. The elected official must pay for all marginal payments related to his or her participation in the plan.

G.	EXCEPTION - DEDUCTION: Notwithstanding Sections 2.13-D and E, an elected official who elects to participate in an employee insurance or benefit plan may pay for the plan by authorizing the City to deduct from his or her monthly compensation an  amount sufficient to pay the cost of the official's participation in the insurance and benefit plans  so elected. To the extent the  elected official's compensation  is less than the premium,  the elected
 
official shall be responsible for any balance.

H.	OPTION AS COMPENSATION: The option to participate in the above-specified benefit and insurance plans at cost is compensation to elected officials. The exercise, or lack of exercise, or a change in the exercise of the option to participate in the said plans, shall be deemed not to be a change in compensation. Rather, the option itself is a non-monetary emolument. It shall be deemed paid for the duration of the term on the day of taking office.
 
CHAPTER3
CITY  ADMINISTRATION

3.1	Mayor
3.2	Clerk
3.3	Treasurer
3.4	Attorney
3.5	City Administrator
3.6	Planning and Zoning Commission
3.7	Reserved
3.8	Economic Development Commission
3.9	Bonds of Officers
3.10	Officers and Employees of the City
3.11	City Records
3.12	Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
3.13	Corporate Seal
3.14	Fiscal Year
3.15	City Datum, Bench Mark
3.16	Indenmification
3.17	Code of Ethics



3.1	MAYOR Amended,  09-8-4

A.	ELECTION AND TERM: The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified, as provided by law.

B.	DUTIES: The Mayor shall be the Mayor of the City Council and shall preside at properly called meetings of the City Council. S/he shall devote to the duties of the office whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require. The Mayor at all times may examine and inspect the books, records and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the City. The Mayor shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law, including City ordinances, and shall talce care that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.

The Mayor, from time to time, may and annually give the City Council information relative to the affairs of the City, and may recommend for its consideration such measures ass/he believes expedient.

C.	APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS: The Mayor shall have the power and authority to appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, all officers of the City whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in like manner.




Chapter 3, Page 1	7111117
 
D.	MAYOR PRO TEM: During any temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the City Council shall select one of their own as Mayor Pro Tern, who shall possess the powers and authority of the Mayor as provided by law and by ordinance.

E.	EMERGENCIES: Inthe event of an accident, disaster or other circumstance creating a public emergency, the Mayor may award contracts, make purchases and incur other obligations of the City for the purpose of meeting said emergency, up to $500. Inthe event such expenditure is for any claim against the City, a signed waiver shall be required from the party maldng the claim at the time of payment. As soon as practical, the Mayor shall file with the City Council a written statement of such emergency, the necessity for such action and an itemized account of all expenditures or obligations incurred.

F.	ACTING MAYOR: In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the City Council may appoint one of their own as the acting Mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled as provided by law.

G.	EMERGENCY INTERIM EXECUTIVE: Pursuant to the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act (5 ILCS 275/l et seq.), the following officers are designated as the emergency interim successors to the office of Mayor in the following order:

1.	The Alderman with the highest number of years in office.


2.	The Aldennan with the second highest number of years in office.


3.	The Alderman with the third highest number of years in office.

The powers and duties of the emergency interim successor shall be pursuant to the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act.

H.	BOND: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Mayor shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by law and by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. The City shall pay the premium on such bond.

The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the City on formal occasions and receptions. In the Mayor s absence or inability to attend any such function, the City Council may select any other City officer to so act.

3.2	CLERK

A.	ELECTION AND TERM: The City Clerk ("Clerk") shall be elected (or appointed if a vacancy occurs in the Office of City Clerk) and shall serve a four-year term, and until a successor is elected and qualified as provided by law.
 
B.	GENERAL DUTIES, OATH, BOND: The Clerk shall have all powers and perform all duties provided by the laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of the City. The Clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe the usual oath thereof and execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by law or by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Clerk's duties. The cost of the bond shall be borne by the City.

C.	DUTIES: The Clerk shall, in addition to the duties imposed by law, perform the following duties:

1.	To  attend  all meetings  of the  corporate  authorities  and keep  a full  and accurate record of their proceedings.

2.	To record all ordinances passed by the City Council, in a suitable book or books kept for that purpose. At the foot of the record for each ordinance there shall be a note of the date of the passage, approval and publication thereof, which record memorandum or certified copy thereof shall be evidence of the passage and publication of such legal ordinance for all purposes. The original of all ordinances passed by the City Council shall be filed with the Clerk.

3.	To deliver to the Mayor all ordinances  or resolutions to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor.

4.	To maintain custody of and retain possession of the corporate seal of the City and to affix the same to all papers and documents when required.

5.	To have custody of and safely keep and preserve  in the Clerk's office all papers, books, records, maps, documents and effects of every description belonging to the City and not in actual use and possession of other City officers. To deliver upon demand any of the aforesaid mticles, when not needed for immediate use to any officer of the City having a right to them. Upon his removal or resignation or the expiration of the term of office, to deliver all of such effects to the successor in the office of the Clerk.

6.	To sign and keep a record of all licenses and permits issued by and on behalf of the City and the applications therefor that are not the responsibility of any other officer or official.

7.	To file and keep in the Clerk's office the original of all ordinances passed or a pmnphlet thereof when the smne are published in pmnphlet form. When any ordinance is published in a newspaper, to secure from the publisher thereof and attach to such ordinance a certificate of such publication.
 
8.	To prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and other official documents required to be issued under the laws and ordinances of the City and to affix the corporate seal thereto. Inlike manner to attest all deeds for the sale of real estate conveyed by the City, unless otherwise provided by special ordinance.

9.	Shall attest the signature of the Mayor to any and all proceedings of the City Council.

D.	ABSENCE: In case the Clerk is absent from any regular or special meeting the Deputy Clerk, if any, shall act as Clerk Pro Tern. In the absence of both the Clerk and Deputy Clerk, the Mayor may appoint one of the Aldermen as Clerk Pro Tern; such appointment shall not prohibit such Alderman from acting in the capacity of Trustee also.

E.	FAlLURE TO PERFORM DUTIES: It shall be unlawful for the Clerk to knowingly and wilfully destroy any of the records of the City or knowingly or wilfully omit or fail to perform any of the duties of office. For the violation of any of the provisions of this Section 3.02, upon conviction, a fine may be imposed of not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.

F.	SALARY: The annual salary of the Clerk shall be that sum found in Section 2.17-C of this Code.

G.	DEPUTY CLERK: Subjectto the advice and consent of the Mayor and City Council, the Clerk may appoint one Deputy Clerk, who need not be a resident of the City. Because the Clerk's position is part-time, said appointment should be a full-time employee of the City. When performing the duties of Deputy Clerk, compensation shall be at the hourly rate paid to the City employee. The Deputy Clerk shall report to the Administrator.

3.3	TREASURER Amended, 08-9-1


A.	CREATION OF OFFICE AND APPOINTMENT: There is hereby created the office of City Treasurer ("Treasurer"), an executive office of the City. The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Cow1cil, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council. The Treasurer shall report to the Mayor and City Administrator.

B.	DUTIES: The Treasurer shall perform the following duties:


1.	Shall receive all money paid in to the City, either directly or from other City officers, and shallmalce out all checks of the City and pay out City funds only on vouchers, orders or checks properly signed by the Mayor and any one of either the Administrator, Treasurer or Clerk; verifying that the signatures are authentic or hand-stamped by the individual whose name is represented. Signatory priority shall be as stated herein. In the event there is a vacancy in the office of Administrator, the City Administrator's assistant is authorized to
 
sign checks.


2.	Shall deposit the City funds in such legal depositories as may be designated by the City Council by resolution or ordinance, and shall keep the City funds separate and distinct from his own funds and any others with the City funds, and he shall not make private or personal use of the City funds. Depositories designated by the City Council are: First National Bank of Marengo, Marengo; First National Bank of Chicago, Marengo; Harris Bank Marengo, Marengo; Prairie State Bank, Marengo; and The Illinois Funds, Springfield

3.	Shall keep and maintain accurate books and records of account showing all moneys received by him the purpose for which such money was paid out, and shall keep a record showing at all times the financial condition of the City, and shall make monthly reports to the City Council showing the funds received and disbursed during the month, and shall malce an annual report to
the Council between the first and 1o•h day of May of each fund, showing the
total amount of all receipts and expenditures of the City, and showing all of his transactions as Treasurer during the preceding year.

4.	Shall keep a register of all wairnnts, bonds or orders filed with the Treasurer or paid  by the Treasurer, and of all vouchers, as provided by law or by ordinance.

5.	From time to time the Treasurer may invest City funds not immediately necessary to meet City obligations in such depositories or in such securities as the Treasurer may deem in the best interest of the City, provided however, that at the next regular meeting of the Mayor and City Council, the Treasurer shall request ratification of the action in making any investment.

6.	In addition, the Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be required by law or by ordinance.

C.	BOND: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Treasurer shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by law and by ordinance, conditioned upon the City against any loss due to any neglect of duty or wrongful act on the pati of the Treasurer. The City shall pay the premium of such bond.

3.4	ATTORNEY

A.	CREATION OF OFFICE AND APPOINTMENT: There is hereby created the office of City Attorney, an executive office of the City. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council. The City Attorney need not be a resident nor a qualified elector of the City.
 

B.	DUTIES: The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City, and shall render advice upon all legal questions affecting the City whenever requested to do so by the Mayor, Administrator, Chief of Police or upon authorization of the City Council. Upon the request of the Mayor or the City Council, the City Attorney shall reduce legal advice opinions to writing.

The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or in equity to which the City may be a part, or in which the City may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the City on behalf of the City or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the City.

The City Attorney shall act to enforce in full all judgments, decrees or orders rendered or entered in favor of the City, and to carry out to completion all special assessment and condemnation proceedings as directed by the Mayor and City Council.

C.	BOND: The City Attorney shall not be required to furnish bond before entering upon the duties of the office.

3.5	CITY  ADMINISTRATOR


A.	APPOINTMENT: The City Council is hereby authorized to employ a City Administrator ("Administrator"). Such Administrator shall be retained and removed by the Mayor and Aldermen voting jointly. The Administrator need not be a resident or a qualified elector of the City. The City may contract for the services of the Administrator.

B.	COMPENSATION: Compensation of the Administrator shall be as determined by the City Council.

C.	DUTIES: The Administrator shall perform all duties assigned to him by the Mayor and City Council. Except for the Chief of Police, all City employees shall report to the Administrator.

D.	BOND: Before  entering upon the duties of his position, the Administrator shall execute a bond in the amount of$100,000 and with such sureties as may be required bylaw and by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Administrator's duties and to indemnify the City against any loss due to any neglect of duty or wrongful act on the part of the Administrator. The bond of the premium for said bond shall be borne by the City.

3.6	PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION Amended, 17-6-2, 01-4-4

A.	CREATION: A Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby created for the City to carry out the duties of a plan commission and zoning board of appeals. When used in this Section
 
3.06,  "Commission"  shall  be  construed  to  mean  the  Planning  and  Zoning  Commission  and "Commissioners" shall be construed to mean the members of the Commission.

B.	MEMBERSHIP: The Commission shall consist of a chairman and six members to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Mayor shall be an ex­ officio member of the Commission. The Chairman shall be appointed annually by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Annually, the Commissioners shall elect one of its own to serve as vice-chainnan.

C.	TERM OF OFFICE: The first appointees shall serve for the following terms, or until their respective successors, in similar manner, have been appointed and qualified: one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, one for five years, one for six years and one for seven years. Successors to each member so appointed shall serve five-year terms except that vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired te1m of the membership vacated. The te1m of each Commissioner shall expire April 30 of the year of the expiration of its respective term of office. Thereafter, the appointments shall be made at the first meeting of the fiscal year of the City Council.

D.	VACANCY: Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.

E.	REMOVAL: The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, may remove any member of the Commission for cause after a public hearing.

F.	COMPENSATION: The Chairman and members of the Commission shall receive, as compensation, $50 and $30, respectively, for each attended commission meeting.

G.	PLAN  COMMISSION,  ZONING  BOARD  OF APPEALS  REFERENCE:  Any
ordinance, code, regulation, etc., of the City or state statute that references the Plan Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission.

H.	DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The duties of the
Planning and Zoning Commission are as follows:


1.	To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan of public improvements looking to the present and future development of the City. After its adoption by the City Council this plan shall be known as the Official Plan of the City of Marengo. Thereafter, from time to time, the Commission may recommend changes in the Official Plan. This plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to the streets, alleys and public grounds in unsubdivided land situated within the corporate limits or in contiguous territ01y not more than 1Yz miles beyond the corporate limits and not  included  in any mnnicipality.  These requirements  shall be  effective
 
whenever this unsubdivided land is subdivided after the adoption of the Official Plan.

Following the adoption of the Official Plan no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the City or in contiguous territory outside of and not more than 1Yz miles from those limits and not included in any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys and public grounds in conformity with the Official Plan.

2.	To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time plans for specific improvements pursuant to the Official Plan.

3.	To give aid to the City officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan and to further the making of these projects, and generally promote the Official Plan.

4.	To exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted by this Code as may be conferred by the City and are granted a City under the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS), including, but not limited to Sections 5/11-12-1 to 5/11-12-12.

5.	To hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision or dete1mination of the Building Commissioner, relating to the Marengo Zoning Ordinance by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved thereby, or by any officer, department, Council or commission of the City. The appeal shall be taken within 45 days of the action complained of by filing a notice of appeal, in duplicate, specifying the grounds thereof, in the office of the City Clerk who shall transmit forthwith one copy to the Building Commissioner and one copy to the Chairman of the Commission. The Building Commissioner shall forthwith transmit to the Chairman of the Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.

An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building Commissioner certifies to the Commission that, by reason of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause innninent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order issued by the Commission or a court of record after notice to the Building Commissioner and on due cause shown.

The Commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to all interested parties and shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may
 
appear at the hearing and present testimony in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. The Commission may reverse or affinn, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Commissioner.

6.	To recommend to the City Council after holding a public hearing on application for variations from the strict enforcement of any provisions of this the Marengo Zoning Ordinance, in accordance with the rules and standards set forth therein.

7.	To recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on applications for special uses listed in each of the several zoning districts.

8.	To recommend to the City Council, after  holding a public hearing, on applications for planned developments referred to it by the City Council and to hear and decide other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the provisions of the Marengo Zoning Ordinance.

9.	To recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on petitions for amendment of the provisions of the Marengo Zoning Ordinance and the boundary lines of zoning districts established therein.

10.	To transmit to the City Council, with every recommendation, findings of fact and to refer to any exhibits containing plans and specifications relating to its recommendation, which plans and specifications shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Commission. The findings of facts shall specify the reason or reasons for its recommendation. The terms of the relief recommended shall be specifically set forth in a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact of the Commission.

11.	To file immediately in the office of the City Clerk every rule, order, requirement, decision or determination of the Commission after any meeting or hearing, which shall be a public record.

12.	Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the Commission to change any of the provisions of the Marengo Zoning Ordinance or district boundary lines established hereby. The concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Commissioner or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which the Commission is authorized to act.

13.	Additional duties of the Commission are also outlined in the Marengo Zoning Ordinance, this Code and the Illinois Municipal Code.
 

I.	SPECIAL ZONING COMMISSION: The Commission shall serve as a special zoning commission whenever a text amendment is proposed to the Marengo Zoning Ordinance.

J. MEETINGS: All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Commission and/or City Council may determine. The presence of four members shall be necessary for a quorum. All meetings shall be open to the public, and the public shall be permitted to comment before the Commission in the same manner as provided in Chapter 2.12(2) of the Marengo City Code except that for any public hearings, the public shall have the right to participate in the hearing in the manner established by the Chair of the Commission. The Chairman, or Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep record of its examinations and other official actions, prepare findings of fact and record the individual votes upon  every question. Expenses inculTed by the Commission in the performance of official duties are to be itemized and shall be reimbursed by the City.

3.7	RESERVED

3.8	ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION Amended, 05-6-2, 08-5-1, 17-6-2

A.	ESTABLISHMENT: It is hereby established a citizens commission which shall be known as the Marengo Economic Development Connnission (ACommission") for the purpose of structuring sound economic development programs through conducting such research and inventory of resources for the preparation of industrial fact profiles to be used in presentations to industrial and commercial prospects considering expansion or location in the Marengo area. The Connnission shall make its findings and recommendations to the City Council in the manner provided herein.

B. MEMBERSHIP The membership of the Commission shall  be composed of 11 Commissioners; residency in the City shall not be required by four members. The Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. One of the nine Connnissioners shall be appointed chairperson by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.

The term office for each Connnissioner shall be three years beginning on May 1.


Upon expiration of a member=s term, successors shall be appointed for three-year terms by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. In addition to the 11 members herein provided, the Mayor shall serve as an ex officio, non-voting member.

 


duties:
 
C.	POWERS AND DUTIES: The Commission shall have the following powers and
 
1.	To investigate and become informed about existing businesses, commercial enterprises and industries in the City and to promote rehabilitation and expansion wherever and whenever possible.

2.	To investigate and become informed about the economic climate in the City and, after findings of fact, make recommendations to the City Council.

3.	To provide information to the management of various industries and commercial enterprises which may be interested in locating their plants, facilities or businesses within the City and to promote the City for such purpose, in the event that, in the opinion of the Commission, such industries are of such a kind and nature that would enhance the City economically and would contribute to its natural expansion and growth.

4.	To evaluate economic forces for optimum contributions to creation of jobs and provision of service for the citizens of the City; for improvement of the tax base; for minimal impact on the natural environment and the community=s ability to provide basic services.

5.	To  recommend   to  the  City  Council  the  provision  or  procurement   of professional services to cany out the activities of the Commission.

D.	FUNDING: The Commission shall be authorized to expend no municipal funds other than those appropriated and approved by the City Council.

E.	VOLUNTEERS: The Commission is authorized to enlist the volunteer services of such other members of the community who will assist in achieving the goals of sound economic growth, recognizing broad community involvement will assure broad community support.

F.	REPORTING AND RECORDING KEEPING: The Commission shall comply in all respects with the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/l et seq.) and shall keep comprehensive minutes of all meetings which describe clearly and completely each and every subject discussed at said meeting and any action taken by the Commission. Copies of said minutes shall be provided to the City Council together with any support data, documents and attachments. The Commission shall meet no less than six times per calendar year. The Commission may also hold additional special meetings, as necessary, as part of its business visitation program. City staff shall supply the Commission with program status reports during those months when the Commission is not scheduled to meet. The Commission shall make periodic reports on its progress and shall make recommendations to the City Council regularly, but in no case, not less than once eve1y six months.

G.	COMPENSATION: Commissioners shall be paid a per diem in such amount as is established from time to time by the City Council; but in no case shall the Commissioners be paid for more than one meeting per month.
 

H.	VACANCIES: Ifa vacancy occurs on the Commission, said vacancy shall be filled by the appointment of a Commissioner by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. However, no such appointment shall be made until the expiration of 30 days after the occurrence of the vacancy.

I. PUBLIC COMMENT: The public shall be permitted to comment before the Commission in the same manner as provided in Chapter 2.12(2) of the Marengo City Code except that for any public hearings, the public shall have the right to participate in the hearing in the manner established by the Chair of the Commission.

3.9	BONDS OF OFFICERS

A.	Eve1y officer and employee of the City, as may be required so to do by law or by ordinance, before entering upon the duties of the office or position of employment, shall give a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by law or by the City Council, which shall be subject to the approval of the City Council, and which shall be conditioned upon the faithful pe1fo11nance of the duties of the office or position of employment. Unless otherwise provided for by law or by ordinance, such bonds shall have as surety a company or corporation licensed to act as surety in the State of Illinois and to do business in the State of Illinois. The premiums of such bonds shall be paid out of the general funds of the City.

B.	The penalty of bonds of certain elected and appointed officers and employees of the City shall not be less than:

 
Mayor Treasurer
 
$   10,000
$ 100,000
 

3.10	OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY Amended, 02-2-1, 01-8-2, 01-3-2

A.	EFFECT OF SECTION: The provisions of this Section 3.10 shall apply alike to all officers and employees of the City, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or position of employment, and regardless of the time of the appointment of the officer or employment of the employee.

B.	APPOINTMENTS: The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall make appointments to fill all appointive offices. The respective department heads shall select all employees and fill all positions of employment of the City, with the advice and consent of the City Council, with the exception of Police Department personnel, which fall under the jurisdiction of the Marengo Police Commission.

C.	TERMS OF OFFICE, VACANCIES: Every appointed officer of the City shall hold office for a period of one year from the date of appointment and until a success is appointed and
 
qualified. However, the term of office shall expire no later than the end of the last municipal year in the Mayor's te1m unless otherwise provided by statute.

D.	ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES: The City Council shall have the power and authority to assign to any appointed officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance or by law to some other specific officer, and the City Council shall mediate and determine all disputes or questions relating to the respective powers and duties of such officers.

E.	RECORDS: All records kept or maintained by any officer or employee of the City shall be open to inspection by the Mayor or any member of the City Council at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.

F.	MONIES RECEIVED: Every officer of the City shall daily turn over all monies received in their official capacity to the Treasurer, with a statement showing the source from which the same was received, and shall take the Treasurer's receipt therefore.

G.	OATH: Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all City officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the oath or affirmation as set forth in the Illinois Municipal Code.

I-I. SALARJES AND WAGES: All officers and employees of the City shall receive such salaries or wages as may be provided from time to time by ordinance. No officer or employee receiving a salary from the City shall be entitled to retain any pmiion of any fees collected or received in the performance of any duties as a City officer or employee, in the absence of specific authorization to the contrary as may be provided by law or by ordinance.

I. CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE: The Mayor, Alde1men, Chief of Police and policemen shall be conservators of the peace, and shall have such powers of anest, commitment and detention as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance.

J.       TERMINATION OF OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT: Every officer and employee of the City, upon the te1mination of an office or employment, shall deliver to his successor all books and records which may be the property of the City. If no successor has been elected, chosen or appointed within seven days after the termination of such office or position of employment, such property shall be delivered to the Clerk or to the Treasurer, and a receipt taken therefor.

3.11	CITY RECORDS

A.	DEFINITIONS: Except as provided in Appendix A, te1ms used in this Section 3.11 mean as follows:

Act: Freedom oflnformation Act, 5 ILCS 140.l et seq.
 
City Record: An original, not a copy, of all records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memoranda, books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings, electronic data processing records, recorded information and all other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having been prepared, or having been or being used, received, possessed or under the control of the City. A City Record includes, but is expressly not limited to:

1.	Administrative manuals, procedural rnles and instructions to staff unless exempted by the Act;

2.	Final opinions and orders made in the adjudication of cases, except employee grievance or disciplinary cases;

3.	Substantive rnles;

4.	Statements and interpretations of policy which has been adopted by the City Council;

5.	Final planning policies, recommendations and decisions;

6.	Factual reports, inspections reports and studies prepared by or for the City;

7.	All information in any account, voucher or contract dealing with the receipt or expenditure of City funds;

8.	The names, salaries, titles and dates of employment or election of all employees and officers of the City;

9.	Materials containing opinions concerning the rights of the City or of any other person;

10.	The name of every official and the final records of voting in all proceedings of the City;

11.	Applications for any contract, pennit, grant or agreement except as exempted from disclosure by the Act;

12.	Each report, document, study or publication prepared by independent consultants or other independent contractors for the City;

13.	All other information required by law to be made available for public inspection or copying; and

14.	Information relating to any grant or contract made by or between the City and another public body or private organization.
 
B.	RECORD DEPOSITORIES: City Records shall be kept in the City's official place of business, the City Hall or City maintenance building, as appropriate, or such other depositories as designated by the City Council, and be available for public inspection or copying, pursuant to the Act, during City Hall business hours.

C.	POSSESSION OF CITY RECORDS: Within five days after notification by the Administrator or Clerk, to be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, any person shall deliver to the Clerk all property, books and effects in his possession, belonging to the City, or pertaining to the office he has held. Upon his refusal to do so, he shall be liable for all damages caused thereby and subject to a fine of not less than $500 for each violation; each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The Clerk shall deliver those records deemed necessary to the successor in office to carry out his duties.

D.	LOCAL RECORDS ACT: The disposition of any City Record shall be in accordance with the Local Records Act, 50 ILCS 205/1 et seq.

3.12	ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL  RETIREMENT FUND

All persons who are employed by the City and who occupy an office or are employed in a position n01mally requiring performance of duty for less than 1,000 hours per year for the City are excluded from participation and eligibility for IMRF benefits. This provision shall not affect persons employed prior to January 1, 1982 in a position normally requiring performance of duty for 600 hours or more per year by the City.

3.13	CORPORATE  SEAL

The corporate seal of the City shall be as follows: A circular disc with the words ACity of Marengo, Illinois@ inscribed on the outer circle and, on the inner circle, the words Alncorporated August 14'\ 1893@ inscribed.

3.14	FISCAL YEAR


The fiscal year of the City shall begin on May !st of each year and ending on April 30th of the following year.

3.15	CITY DATUM, BENCH MARK

The City datum is hereby established as a rectangular bench mark, cut in the face of the stone, 50 feet below the top of the stone door sill of the brick building located on the southeast corner of State Street and Washington Street.

3.16	INDEMNIFICATION
 
A.	In the event a lawsuit is filed against any former or current elected City officer for acts relating to the City or City business affairs while in office, the City shall retain and pay counsel ofits choice to defend the City shall also indemnify the officers for any acts for which he or she is found liable within the scope of his or her office, duty or employment with the City. The protection afforded to officers in this Section 3.16 shall apply where defense and indemnity is not adequately provided for, without any conflict of interest, by the City's liability insurance carrier.

B. The City shall defend and indemnify all fonner and current City employees for acts within the scope of their duties and employment not otherwise covered by the liability insurance carrier of the City.

3.17	CODE OF ETHICS 04-5-3

A.	DECLARATION OF POLICY: The proper operation of democratic government requires that Officers and Employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics for all City Officers and Employees is adopted. The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all City Officers and Employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the City and by directing disclosure by such Officers and Employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting City life.

B.	CODE OF ETHICS: The requirements set forth herein shall constitute a Code of Ethics establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of Officers and Employees of the City.

C.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, the terms, whether capitalized or not, used in this Section 3.17 shall mean as follows:

Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a Political Organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice-presidential electors, but does not include activities: (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action; (ii) relating to collective bargaining; or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person s official duties.

Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3).
 
Collective Bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).

Compensated Time means, with respect to an Employee, any time worked by or credited to the Employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this Section 3.17, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the Employee is on a Leave of Absence. With respect to Officers or Employees whose hours are not fixed, Acompensated time@ includes any period of time when the Officer or Employee is on premises under the control of the Employer and any other time when the Officer or Employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless  oflocation.

Compensatory Time Off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an Employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that Employee as a condition of his or her employment.

Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9- I .4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).

Employee means a person employed by the City, whether on a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an Employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.

Employer means the City of Marengo.


Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an Officer or Employee.

Intra-Governmental Gift means any gift given to an Officer or Employee of the City from another Officer or Employee of the City.

Inter-Governmental Gift means any gift given to an Officer or Employee of the City from a member or employee of the legislative branch of the govemment of the State, ajudge or employee of the judicial branch of the govemment of the State, an officer or employee of the executive branch of the government of the State, an officer or employee of a unit of!ocal govemment, home rule unit or school district, or an officer or employee of any other governmental entity.

Leave of Absence means any period during which an Employee does not receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the Employer.
 

Officer means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity.

Political Activity means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any Political Organization, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person s official duties.

Political Organization means a party, committee, association, fund or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk.

Prohibited Political Activity means:


1.	Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other political event.

2.	Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any political fuud-raiser, political meeting or other political event.

3.	Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.

4.	Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a Political Organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.

5.	Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective officer or on behalf of a Political Organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.

6.	Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any Political Organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.

7.	Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a Political Organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.

8.	Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
 
9.	Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.

10.	Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.

11.	Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.

12.	Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.


13.	Managing or working on a can1paign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.

14.	Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party convention.


15.	Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.


Prohibited Source means any person or entity who:


1.		is seeking official action (i) by an Officer or (ii) by an Employee or by the Officer or another Employee directing that Employee;

2.	does business or seeks to do business (i) with the Officer or (ii) with an Employee, or with the Officer or another Employee directing that Employee;

3.	conducts activities regulated (i) by the Officer or (ii) by an Employee, or by the Officer or another Employee directing that Employee; or

4.	has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duties of the Officer or Employee.

Relative means those people related to the Officer or Employee as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle,  first cousin, nephew, niece, husband,  wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,  stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the Officer=s or Employee=s spouse and the Officer=s or Employee=s fiance or fiancee.

D.	PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
 
1.	No Officer or Employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited Political Activity during any Compensated Time, as defined herein. No Officer or Employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the City in connection with any Prohibited Political Activity.

2.	At no time shall any Officer or Employee intentionally require any other Officer or Employee to perform any Prohibited Political Activity (i) as part of that Officer or Employee=s duties, (ii) as a condition of employment, or (iii) during any Compensated Time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).

3.	No Officer or Employee shall be required at any time to participate in any Prohibited Political Activity in consideration for that Officer or Employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensat01y time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor   shall any Officer or Employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any Prohibited Political Activity.

4.	Nothing in this Section 3.17-D prohibits activities that are permissible for an Officer  or Employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an Officer or Employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this Section 3.17.

5.	No person  either:  (i)  in  a position  that  is  subject  to  recognized  merit principles of public employment; or (ii) in a position the sala:ty for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards  for  a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs,  shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a Political Organization or club.

E.	GIFT BAN:


1.	Except as permitted by this Section 3.17, no Officer or Employee, and no spouse of or immediate fa:tnily member living with any Officer or Employee (collectively referred to herein as Arecipients@), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any Prohibited Source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise  prohibited  by law or ordinance.  No  Prohibited  Source  shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this Section 3.17.

2.	EXCEPTIONS: Section 3.17-El is not applicable to the following:
 
a.	Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.

b.	Anything for which the Officer or Employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.

c.	Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code; or
(ii)	activities associated with a fund-raising event in support of a Political Organization or candidate.

d.	Educational materials and missions.

e.	Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.

f.	A gift from a Relative.

g.	Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals;
(ii)	whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual
who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other Officers or Employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.

h.	Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreslnnents are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this Section 3.17-E, Acatered@ means food or refreslnnents that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.

i.	Food, refreslnnents, lodging, transportation and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an Officer or
 
Employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the Officer or Employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.

J.           Intra-Governmental and Inter-Governmental gifts.

k.	Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death.


I.	Any  item  or  items  from  any  one  Prohibited  Source  during  any calendar year having a cumulative total value ofless than $100.

Each of the exceptions listed in this Section 3.17-E is mutually exclusive and independent of every other.

3.	DISPOSITION OF GIFTS: An Officer or Employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the Officer or Employee, does not violate this Section 3.17f if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a Prohibited Source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that  is exempt from income taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered or succeeded.

F.	ETHICS ADMINISTRATOR:


1.	The Administrator shall designate an appropriate City Employee to serve as the Ethics Administrator for the City.

2.	The Ethics Administrator shall provide information to the Officers and Employees of the City concerning the existence and content of this Section
3.17. This may be done by incorporating the contents of this Code of Ethics into the City of Marengo Employee Guidelines and Policy Manual and by providing this Manual to all Officers and Employees of the City.

3.	The Ethics Administrator shall refer any inquiries regarding the application or interpretation of this Section 3.17 to the Administrator.

G.	ETHICS COMMISSION:


1.	There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics Commission of the City of Marengo (ACommission@ for purposes of this Section 3.17). The Commission shall be comprised of three members appointed by the Administrator with the advice and consent of the City Council. No person shall be appointed as a member of the Commission who is related, either by
 
blood or maniage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected Officer of the City.

2.	At the first meeting of the Commission, the initial appointees shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two commissioners shall serve two-year terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a one-year term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two-year terms. Commissioners may be re-appointed to serve subsequent terms.

3.	At the first meeting of the Commission, the commissioners shall choose a chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or any two commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two commissioners, and official action by the Commission shall require the affirmative vote of two members.

4.	The Administrator, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may remove a commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after service on the commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than 10 days notice. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.

5.	The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

a.	To promulgate procedures and mies governing the performance ofits duties and the exercise of its powers.

b.	Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations,  issue  recommendations  for disciplinmy  actions, impose fines in accordance with this  Section
3.17 and refer violations of Sections 3.17-D and 3.17-E to the City Attorney for prosecution. The Commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this Section 3.17 and not upon its own prerogative.

c.	To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional info1mation and documents from persons who may have violated the provisions of this Section 3.17.

d.	To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all  Officers  and Employees  of the  City to  cooperate  with  the
 
Commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by the Commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.

e.	To prepare and publish such manuals and guides as the Commission deems appropriate to facilitate compliance with the terms of this Section 3.17.

f.	The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this Section 3.17.

6.	COMPLAINTS:

a.	Complaints alleging a violation of this Section 3.17 shall be filed with the Ethics Commission.

b.	Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three business days after receipt by the Commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time and place of the meeting to detennine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.

c.	Upon not less than 48 hours= public notice, the Commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this Section 3.17, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the Open Meetings Act. Within seven business days after receiving the complaint, the Commission shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the Commission=s rnling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessmy,  on probable cause to proceed. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
 
d.	Ifthe complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of Section 3.17-E and there is a determination of probable cause, then the Commission=s notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four weeks after the complaint=s receipt. Alternatively, the Commission may elect to notify in writing the City Attorney to prosecute such actions and request that the complaint be adjudicated judicially and the Commission=s notice to the parties shall indicate this fact.

e.	Ifthe complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of Section 3.17-D, then the Commission shall notify in writing the City Attorney to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the City Attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the Commission concerning the alleged violation. The Commission=s notice to the parties shall indicate these facts.

f.	Ifthe Commission elects to hear a case brought under Section 3.17-E, on the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours public notice of the meeting, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The heaiing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the Open Meetings Act.

g.	Within 30 days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing of a case brought under Section 3.17-E is concluded, the Commission shall either: (i) dismiss the complaint; or (ii) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the Administrator or other Officer having authority to discipline the Officer or Employee, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public infotmation.

h.	Ifthe hearing on a case brought under Section 3.17-E was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public heai·ing on the complaint within seven business days after  the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the recommendation or fine. Within 14 days after receiving the demand, the Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least 48 hours= public notice of the hearing and allow both patties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven days thereafter,	the Connnission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the Administrator or
 
other Officer having authority to discipline the Officer or Employee or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.

1.	If a complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a Candidate, the Commission shall render its decision as required under Section 3.l 7-G6g within seven days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven days preceding that election, the Commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible.

j.	A complaint alleging the violation of this Section 3.17 must be filed within one year after the alleged violation.

k.	Inthe event a member of the Commission is the subject of an alleged violation of this Section 3.17, such commissioner shall immediately recuse himself or herself from the investigation of such alleged violation, and shall take no part in the final action of the Commission regarding such alleged violation. A substitute commissioner shall be appointed pursuant to the terms of Section 3.17-G1 above for purposes relating to this matter only.

H.	PENALTIES:


1.	A person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 3.17-D may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.

2.	A person who intentionally  violates  any provision  of  Section 3.17-E is subject to a fine in an amount on not less than $1,001 and not more than
$5,000.


3.	The Commission may levy an administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who violates this Code of Ethics or who intentionally makes a false, frivolous, or bad faith allegation.

4.	In addition to any administrative fines imposed pursuant to Section 3.l 7-H3 above, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of Section 3.17 to the Ethics Commission, the State=s Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
 
5.	A violation of Section 3.17-D shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by the City Attorney by filing in the circuit court au infmmation, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the mies of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.

6.	A violation of Section 3.17-E may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by au attorney for the City, or the Ethics Commission, through the designated administrative procedure.

7.	In addition to auy other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an Officer or Employee who intentionally violates auy provision of this Section 3.17 is subject to discipline or discharge.

I. DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS: The Ethics Administrator shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every Officer and Employee of the City within ninety days after enactment of this Code ofEthics. Thereafter, this Code of Ethics shall be incorporated in the City of Marengo Employee Guidelines and Policy Manual.
 
CHAPTER4 POLICE  DEPARTMENT

 
4.01
4.02
4.03
4.04
4.05
4.06
4.07
4.08
4.09
4.10
4.11
4.12
Exhibit A

4.01
 
Department Established Chief of Police
Deputy Chief
Additional and Special Police Oath
Police Powers and Duties
Duties of Officers Order of Command
Police Depmtment Rules and Regulations Police Commission
Police Pension Fund and Police Pension Board
Police Officer Training Reimbursement and Pre-Employment Agreement Police Officer Training Reimbursement and Pre-Employment Agreement

DEPARTMENTESTABLISHED
 

There is hereby established an executive depaitment of the municipal government of the City, which shall be knowu as the Police Department (for purposes ofthis Chapter 4, "Depaitment"), and shall consist of a Chief of Police ("Chief'), Deputy Chief and of such number of lieutenants, sergeants, patrolmen and other employees as may be provided from time to time by the City Council.

4.2	CHIEF OF POLICE

The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, hereby retains the right to appoint a Chief.  The appointment shall be made mmually to coincide with the fiscal year.

The Chief shall superintend the work of the Depaitment, and the police and other employees of the Department shall be under his command. The Chief may exercise such powers, and shall perform such other duties as may be provided for by ordinance or resolution, or other action of the City Council. Whenever any statute, ordinance or resolution refers to the City Constable, City Marshal or similar title, it shall be constmed to mean the Chief. The Chief shall be the keeper of the City jail and have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. The Chief shall be custodian of all lost, abandoned or recovered stolen prope1ty in the City; shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the Department activities  as may be required  by statute or ordinance; shall be responsible for the Department's performance of all its fimctions and all Depaitment members, who shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief.

4.3	DEPUTY CHIEF

The position of Deputy Chief is hereby established for the Depaitment. The Deputy Chief, who shall  be  appointed  by  the  Chief  with  the  approval  of  the  Mayor,  shall  be  an  exempt  rank



 
Chapter 4, Page 1
 

7111117
 
immediately below that of the Chief and shall be appointed to the position pursuant to 65 ILCS 5110-2.1-4. The appointment shall be from the rank of sworn, full-time officers of the City. The Deputy Chief shall serve at the discretion of the Chief and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to appointment to the Deputy Chief position.

4.4	ADDITIONAL AND SPECIAL POLICE Amended, 01-11-1

A.	APPOINTMENT: In addition to the part-time  police  officers  and  employees  of the Department, the Mayor and the Chief may each appoint and employ such special police and other temponuy employees as either may find necessary or desirable, at such reasonable compensation as may be approved by the City Council. The Mayor or the Chief may, at the request of any property owner, or any person engaged in business of the City and in need of special police protection, appoint such persons as special police protection as either may find necessary or desirable.

B.	COMPENSATION: The City shall not be required to pay any person so employed for such special police protection but such person shall be paid for his services by the person for whom such special police protection is afforded.

C.	LIABILITY: Each person so appointed, together with the person requesting such special police protection, shall execute and file with the City Clerk an agreement in writing agreeing to save the City harmless of and from any and all liability for anything which such special police may do or fail to do while serving in such capacity, and agreeing to fully indemnify the City for any such liability in case any is imposed upon it, as well as all cost and expenses connected therewith, including all legal expenses connected with defending any and all lawsuits which may be instituted against the City for the enforcement of any such alleged liability. In addition, the City Council may require such other security as it may deem desirable as a condition to any such appointment or as a condition to the continuance of any such appointment.

D.	REVOCATION: The appointment of anyone as a special policeman pursuant to this Section 4.04 may, at any time, be revoked by the Chief or Mayor and City Council.


4.5	OATH

The Chief, each policeman and each employee belonging to the Department, before entering upon his duties as a member of the Department, shall take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation:

"I do solemly swear (of affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the ordinances of the City of Marengo, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of	_ of the City, according to the best of my ability."

This oath or affirmation, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
 
4.6	POLICE POWERS AND DUTIES

Every employee of the Department shall have all the powers provided for under the provisions of law and by ordinance of the City. It shall be the duty of the Department to use every responsible means for maintenance of law and order in the City, for the enforcement of the ordinances of the City and for the performance of such other duties and functions usually performed by police departments.

4.7	DUTIES OF OFFICERS

A.	LIEUTENANT: The lieutenant shall be immediately subordinate to the Deputy Chief. The lieutenant is charged with all juvenile matters with the City and management and administration of the records of the Department and with executing the proper performance of all other police duties for the subordinate members of the Department. In the absence of the Deputy Chief, it shall be the duty of the lieutenant to discharge the obligations and assume the responsibilities of the Deputy Chief. The lieutenant shall also be in command during all hours of duty during which the Deputy Chief is not specifically on duty.

B.	SERGEANT: The sergeant shall be subordinate to the lieutenant. Any sergeant is charged with executing the proper performance of patrol and other police duties for subordinate members of the Department assigned to duty during the sergeant's shift. In the absence of the Deputy Chief or  lieutenant, it shall be the duty of the senior sergeant to discharge all of the obligations and assume all of the responsibilities of the Deputy Chief or lieutenant. The sergeant shall also be in command on all patrols and during all hours of duty during which the Deputy Chief or lieutenant are not specifically on duty.

4.8	ORDER OF COMMAND

During the temporaiy absence of the commanding officers, the command devolves upon the subordinate present next in seniority to such commending officers. The command seniority is dete1mined first by rank and second by continuous service in the rank. The relative rank in position and order of command shall be as follows:

I.	Chief
2.	Deputy Chief
3.	Lieutenant
4.	Sergeant
5.	Patrol

4.9	POLICE DEPARTMENT  RULES AND REGULATIONS

The Department  shall be regulated  by the standard  operating procedures,  rules  and regulations and special orders issued by the Chief.

4.10	POLICE COMMISSION Amended, 17-6-2, 11-10-2, 01-11-1
 

Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., said prov1s10ns are hereby adopted and all applicable provisions therein (or as amended by the State legislature in the future) are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. At such times the Police Commission prepares to establish a register of eligibles, a non-refundable application packet fee shall be charged to  cover the cost of such packet. Except for the Chief, the Police Commission shall appoint all full-time police officers when authorized by the City Council. The public shall be permitted to comment before the Commission in the same manner as provided in Chapter 2.12(2) of the Marengo City Code except that  for any public hearings, the public shall have the right to participate  in the hearing in the manner established by the Chair of the Commission.



4.11	POLICE PENSION FUND AND POLICE PENSION BOARD

Pursuant to Article III of the Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) the provisions of Article III are hereby adopted and all applicable provisions therein (or as amended by the State Legislature in the future) are herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. Of those persons appointed to the Police Pension Board by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, one shall be a resident of the City. The public shall be permitted to comment before the Board in the same manner as provided in Chapter 2.12(2) of the Marengo City Code except that for any public hearings, the public shall have the right to participate in the hearing in the manner established by the Chair of the Board.



4.12	POLICE  OFFICER  TRAINING  REIMBURSEMENT  AND PRE-EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT Amended,  07-2-4

A.	It shall be the contractual obligation and duty of every police officer (the "Officer") to reimburse the City for the costs incurred by the  City  for  the  administration  of written and physical agility examinations; interviews; background investigations; medical, psychiatric, mug-screening and other employment-related examinations; uniforms and equipment issued by the City; Basic Law Enforcement Academy training; and salary  paid  during  field training sessions and when attending Basic Law Enforcement Academy training. Ifresignation  is prior to 24 months from the date of hire, reimbursement  shall  be  100 percent.  If resignation occurs prior to 36 month, but more than 24 months, from the date of hire, reimbursement shall be 50 percent.

B. Before an Officer begins employment with the City, the Officer shall enter into a pre-employment agreement with the City. Such agreement shall be in substantial form as Exhibit A of this Chapter.
 
EXHIBIT A

Please print your name in all of the appropriate blanks,  sign the agreement, have someone else witness your signature and submit the agreement WITH your Application for Employment.


MARENGO POLICE DEPARTMENT PRE-EMPLOYMENT  AGREEMENT

This Agreement is entered into on	I	I	,between ---------and the  City of Marengo, Illinois (hereinafter refetTed to as the CITY).

WTTNESSETH

WHEREAS,                                          has  expressed  an  interest  m  becoming  a police officer in the Marengo Police Department; and

WHEREAS,                                                 understands that, should he/she be hired as a police officer in the Marengo Police Department, the CITY will  incur  various  expenses, including but not limited to costs of administering tests and conducting interviews; costs of perfo1ming background investigations; costs of medical, psychiatric, drug screening, polygraph tests and other employment-related examinations; costs  of providing  uniforms  and equipment; costs for training sessions and travel conducted by the City of Marengo and the Marengo Police Department personnel and staff at a basic law enforcement training facility; and, salary paid to police officers during their training; and

WHEREAS, the CITY is willing to assume the various costs associated with the examination, interviewing, and investigation of prospective police officers and the provision of uniforms and equipment, training, and salary, etc. during training for newly-hired police officers, provided the CITY receives a commitment from an applicant that he or she will remain in the Marengo Police Department for a minimum period of 36 months; and

WHEREAS, the CITY seeks to have well-trained police officers on the Marengo Police Department; and

WHEREAS,                                         understands and acknowledges that, should he/she be hired as a police officer for the Marengo Police Department, he/she will be expected to remain in the employment of the CITY for a minimum of 36 months or else reimburse the CITY for the expenses incurred by the CITY in testing, interviewing, equipping, and training him/her.

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises and covenants contained herein below, the parties do freely and voluntarily enter into this Agreement.

SECTION 1. The recitals stated above are incorporated herein as part of this Agreement.

SECTION 2. The City agrees:
 

(a)	To consider                                                       for  employment  as a police  officer for the Marengo Police Department; however,                                                            acknowledges that execution of this Agreement in no way constitutes a guarantee of employment with the Marengo Police Department.

(b)	To administer various examinations in order to determine whether	_
 	is an appropriate candidate for employment as a police officer for the Marengo Police Department;

(c)	To provide initial uniforms and equipment;


(d)	To provide such training and instruction as the CITY, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate; and

 
(e)
 
To pay	his/her full wages during any period
 
in which	is being trained.

SECTION 3.                                                                    agrees that should he/she be hired as a police officer for the Marengo Police Department, he/she will remain in the employment of the CITY as a police officer for a minimum of thirty-six (36) months from the date of hire. If he/she does not remain in the employment of the CITY as a police officer for a minimum  of thirty-six
(36)	months from the date of hire, he/she will reimburse the CITY for any and all costs incurred
as enumerated in Section 4 below at the following rate:


(a)	100 percent, if resignation is prior to 24 months having elapsed from date of hire;

(b)	50 percent, if resignation occurs prior to the time 36 months, but more than 24 months have elapsed.

SECTION 4. Schedule of costs to be incurred by CITY:

(a)	Administration of written and physical agility examination;

(b)	Interviews;

(c)	Background  investigation;

(d)	Medical, psychiatric, drug-screening and other employment-related  examinations;

(e)	Uniforms and equipment issued by the City;

(f)	Basic Law Enforcement Academy Training facility; and

(g)	Salary paid  during field training  sessions and Basic Law Enforcement  Academy
 
training.

SECTION 5. This Agreement shall terminate after the completion of 36 months from the date of hire.

SECTION 6.	understands that employment
with the Marengo Police Department is contingent upon his/her completion of a probationary period of 12 months after completing of Basic Law Enforcement Academy training or after 12 months if previously certified and not requiring Basic Law Enforcement Academy training and continued performance to the satisfaction of the Marengo Police Department. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a promise or agreement by either the Marengo Police Depmiment or the CITY to retain                                     as a police officer for the Marengo  Police Department for 36 months or any portion thereof..

SECTION 7. The CITY and the Marengo Police Depmiment does not, by this Agreement, waive any of the rights, privileges, or prerogatives they possess to discipline, suspend or dischm·ge any employee pursuant to Rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the Rules and Regulations of the Marengo Police Department, and the labor Agreement between the CITY and the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 129, now in effect or as may be altered or modified in the future.

SECTION 8.	agrees that, should it become
necessary for the CITY to file suit in order to collect the costs as enumerated in Section 4 he/she will pay all costs of said suit, including reasonable attorney's fees and all interest allowed at the legal rate on the amount which is owed.

SECTION 9.	agrees that any outstanding
debt incmTed by the CITY enumerated in Section 4 will be deducted from the final payroll disbursement providing                                                is  in   agreement,   or   alternatively agrees that the CITY retains the right to commence legal proceedings against him/her to recoup any outstanding balance.

SECTION 10.	acknowledges	that	he/she
has examined this Agreement, that he/she has read and understands this Agreement, and he/she has the right to consult an attorney prior to entering this Agreement.

SECTION  11. Any notice that may be required  by this Agreement  shall be  sent to the parties at the addresses below:

City:	Chief of Police
c/o Marengo Police Department 142 East Prairie Street
Marengo, Illinois 60152

Applicant:	 	
 
Address:	 	



SECTION 12. The invalidity of any portion of this Agreement will  not  and  shall not affect the validity of any other provision. In the event that any provision of this Agreement is held to be invalid, the parties agree that the remaining provisions shall be deemed in full force and effect as if they had been executed by both parties subsequent to the expungement of the invalid provision.

SECTION 13. No modification of this Agreement shall be binding unless evidenced in writing and signed by both parties.

SECTION 14. The CITY and                                    agree  that   any  proceeding pursuant to or in connection with this AGREEMENT or amendment thereto shall be brought in the 22nd Judicial Circuit, McHenry County, Illinois and the CITY and	_ hereby consent to jurisdiction and venue in that court. This AGREEMENT has been executed and delivered at and shall be deemed to have been made in the City of Marengo, McHenry County, Illinois and shall be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois.

SECTION 15. The CITY agrees that it will not seek any of the costs enumerated in Section 4 should the CITY terminate or discharge                                from   the   Marengo Police Department.
Executed this	day of	, 20		_ Applicant's Signature:		_
Chief of Police: ------------------
City Administrator:	_

Witnessed: ------------	Attest:	_
City Clerk
 
CHAPTER 5
EMERGENCY  MANAGEMENT AGENCY

 
5.01
5.02
5.03
·5.04
5.05
5.06
5.07
5.08
5.09
5.10
 
Establishment Coordinator
Mobile Support Team Mutual Aid Emergency Action Compensation
Purchases and Expenditures Oath
Office
Budget; Levy of Taxes
 


5.01                  ESTABLISHMENT

There is hereby created the Marengo Emergency Management Agency eEMA") to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack , sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster ,in accordance with the State Emergency Management Agency 20 ILCS 3305/1 et. seq. as amended. The Emergency Management Agency shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the Coordinator.

5.2	COORDINATOR

The Coordinator of Emergency Management Agency shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Counciland shall serve until removed by same.

The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization , administration, training and operation of the Emergency Management Agency , subject to the direction and control of the Mayor and City Council as provided by statute.

In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the Coordinator , the Mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided herein.

5.3	MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM

The Emergency Management Agency shall perform such Emergency Management Agency functions within the City as shall be prescribed in and by the state Emergency Management Agency plan and program prepared by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision,municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided in the State Emergency Management Agency 20 ILCS 3305/1 et. seq.as amended.

All or any members of the Emergency Management Agency organization may be designated as members of a Mobile Support Team created by the director of the state Emergency Management Agency as provided by law.

The leader of such Mobile Support Team shall be designated by the Coordinator of the City Emergency Management Agency organization.

Any member of the Mobile Support Team who is a City employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the state director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the City, while so serving , shall receive from the State reasonable compensation as provided by law.
 
5.4	MUTUAL AID

The Coordinator may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipalities or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and City Council and by the state director of Emergency Management Agency.

5.5	EMERGENc·y ACTION

A.	.     STATE OR NATIONAL:  If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Emergency Management Agency to cooperate fully with the state Emergency Management Service Agency and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.

B. CITY: A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Mayor. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Clerk.

C.   EFFECT: The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency isto activate the response and recovery aspects of any and applicable local or interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.

5.6	COMPENSATION

A.	PAY RATE: Members of the Emergency Management Agency who are paid employees or officers of the City, if called for training by the state director or Emergency Management Agency, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such City employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the City Mayor.

B. REIMBURSEMENT: The Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the state to the City for expenses incident to training members of the Emergency Management Agency as prescribed by the Emergency Management Agency State Director,compensation for services and expenses of members of a Mobile Support Team while serving outside the City in response to a call by the Governor or Emergency Management Agency State Director, as provided by law, and other reimbursement made by the State incident to the Emergency Management Agency actMties as provided by law.

5.7	PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES

The Mayor and City Council may, on recommendation of the Coordinator ,authorize any purchase or contract necessary to place the City in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster or from man-made or natural disaster.

In the event of enemy caused or other disaster ,the Coordinator is authorized, on behalf of the City, to procure such services, supplies , equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedure or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to City contracts of obligations, as authorized in the State Emergency Management Agency 20 ILCS 3305/1 et. seq. as amended, provided that if the Mayor meets at such time he shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body.

5.8	OATH

Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Emergency Management Agency organization shall,
 
before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:

"I,	do solemnly swear (or affirm) that Iwill support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely , without any mental reservations or purpose of evasion; and that Iwill faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter, and Ido further swear (or affirm) that Ido not advocate, nor am I,nor have Ibeen a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as Iam affiliated with the Marengo Emergency Management Agency organization, Iwill not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."

5.9	OFFICE

The Mayor and City Council are authorized to designate space in a City building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Mayor, for the Emergency Management Agency as its office.

5.10	BUDGET; LEVY OF TAXES

The Mayor and City Council may budget the Emergency Management Agency for purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for the Emergency Management Agency purposes only, a tax not to exceed five cents per $100 of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by the State Emergency Management Agency 20 lLCS 3305/1 et. seq. as amended however, that amount collectable under such levy shall in no event exceed $0.25 per capita.
 
CHAPTER 6
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS

6.1	Names of Streets
6.2	Damage to Streets
6.3	Encroachments on Streets
6.4	Obstructing Streets
6.5	Material in Public Ways
6.6	Advertising on Streets
6.7	Debris in Streets
6.8	Excavations in Streets and Rights-of-Way
6.9	Protection of Work in Streets
6.10	Openings in Streets
6.11	Street Maintenance
6.12	Curbs and Gutters
6.13	Sidewalks
6.14	Snow on Sidewalks
6.15	Damage to Public Property
6.16	Moving Structures
6.17	Burning Leaves or Rubbish
6.18	Driveways
6.19	Easements, Rights-of-Ways, Ditches/Swales
6.20	Sump Pump Discharge
6.21	Numbering Buildings
6.22	Gas Pipes
6.23	Mailbox Installation
6.24	Trees (Located on Both Private and Public Property)

6.1	NAMES OF STREETS

All streets of the City shall be known and designated by the names applied hereto, respectively, on the map of the City kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. The street names designated on such map shall continue to be the names of the streets unless and until changed by ordinance of the City Council.

6.2	DAMAGE TO STREETS

No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way, park or other City or public property, or any post, wire, lamp, street sign, traffic sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or any other appurtenance thereon.




6.3	ENCROACHMENTS ON STREETS Amended, 06-6-4
 

A.	PERMIT: No person shall erect or maintain any structure or thing on, over or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public right-of-way except by permit from the City Council. Application for such permit shall describe the nature of the encroachment detail, as the City Council shall require. The Council, in its discretion, may issue or deny the permit and may impose any conditions to such permit as it deems appropriate. To the extent the provisions of this Section 6.03 may conflict with the provisions of Section 6.25 herein, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail.

B.	AWNINGS: Awnings made of a pliable substance attached to a building and extending not less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk may be erected and maintained without a permit.

C.	MAINTENANCE: Any encroachment on any street, sidewalk, alley or public way shall be maintained so that it does not endanger or obstruct the public.

D.	VIOLATIONS: Any encroachment maintained in violation of this Section 6.03 is declared a nuisance and may be abated by the City.

6.4	OBSTRUCTING STREETS

A.	FREE PASSAGE: No person shall obstruct or endanger the free passage or proper use of the public on any street, sidewalk, alley or public place, except as may be permitted by this Code.

B.	EXCEPTIONS: Goods, wares and merchandise may be placed on sidewalks for such reasonable time as may be necessary while loading and unloading, provided pedestrian traffic is not totally obstructed.

6.5	MATERIAL IN PUBLIC WAYS

No person shall place any materials on or over any street, sidewalk or public place without a permit from the City Council.

6.6	ADVERTISING ON STREETS

No person shall paint or post any signs or bills on any streets, poles or other structures in any street or on the surface of any street or sidewalk without permission from the City Council.

6.7	DEBRIS IN STREETS

A.	LITTERING: No person shall litter or deposit any foreign matter on any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or public place, except building materials and merchandise as permitted under this Code, or as may be permitted by the Chief of Police.
 
B.	PENALTY: Any person violating this Section 6.07 shall be liable for the cost of removal of the foreign matter in addition to the penalty provided for violation of this Section 6.07.

6.8	EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS and RIGHTS-OF-WAY

A.	PERMIT: In addition to any other governmental permit, no person shall excavate in or tunnel under any street or sidewalk in the City without first securing a permit and notifying JULIE at least 24 hours in advance of such work from the Building Department and Coordinator of Public Works.

B.	DEPOSIT: A deposit shall be made pursuant to Section 24.12 of the Building Code for any excavation in streets or right-of-way.

C.	RESTORATION: Restoration shall be pursuant to Section 24.12 of the Building Code including right-of-way restoration to the original or acceptable condition according to Section
6.15 herein.

D.	STANDING BOND: Any public utility or other person may deposit a bond with the City to assure the proper repair of City streets whenever work is done in the City.

6.9	PROTECTION OF WORK IN STREETS

Any person constructing, repairing, or making any excavation in or tunneling under, or placing any material on or over any street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades and other protective devices as necessary to prevent injury to any person(s) exposed to the construction process. Suitable lights shall be maintained during the night time to warn the public. No person, unless authorized by the City, shall interfere with or disturb any such warning devices.

A JULIE dig number shall be obtained and a permit shall be secured from the Building Department and the Coordinator of Public Works at least 24 hours in advance of placing any barricades in any street.

6.10	OPENINGS IN STREETS

A.	PERMIT: No street, alley, tree bank, public ground or place shall be disturbed or opened, nor shall any material or thing be placed or kept therein without first making application to the Coordinator of Public Works for the privilege of making said opening and to have a written permit issued by the Coordinator of Public Works for said opening.

B.	APPLICATION: Persons desiring such openings shall make application to the Coordinator of Public Works on a form furnished by the City. No permit will be issued until the permittee:

1.	Completes an application for opening on a form furnished by the City and
 
states fully all purposes for which the opening is required.

2.	Contacts all individuals or corporations operating gas, electric, telephone or other public utility in the area, as well as the City itself to receive from them the information as to the existence and location of any underground facilities, so that the proper precautions can be taken to avoid serious damage to the underground structures. Before opening is started the applicant shall furnish the Coordinator of Public Works with written statements from persons named above to the effect that they have been informed of the proposed project.

3.	Files a work scheduled approved by the Coordinator of Public Works indicating starting date and date of completion and number of hours each day that work will be undertaken.

4.	Agrees to make an opening in such a manner as to not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means of egress to or from properties affected.

If an opening requires the closing of a street permit approval is required from the City Council and the permittee shall provide for and pay all costs of detouring traffic.

5.	Secures an Illinois Department of Transportation permit if required.

6.	Secures appropriate City permits if opening is for the purpose of making connection to the water or sanitary sewer system.

7.	Pays a permit fee, which shall be determined from time to time by the City Council.

8.	Agrees to pay all costs of City engineering or inspection services if deemed necessary by the Coordinator of Public Works. Permittee may be required to place on deposit with the Clerk an estimated cost of engineering and/or inspection services. The permittee, however, shall only pay the actual costs of such services.

9.	File with the Clerk a good and sufficient bond payable to the City with surety approved by the City, conditioned that such person shall faithfully observe the ordinances of the City and shall make and repair such openings and space, and shall save and keep harmless the City from all costs arising in any manner or way from the granting of such permit. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the Coordinator of Public Works but in no case shall it be less than $1,000.
 
10.	Agrees to adequately protect all excavations with barricades, lights, or other means of protection required by the Coordinator of Public Works. He shall also place on file the name, address and home telephone number of the person responsible for the work.

11.	Agrees that materials used and methods of construction shall be in conformance with specifications established by the City Engineer or Coordinator of Public Works. All work shall be under the supervision of the Coordinator of Public Works.

12.	Agrees to secure and protect the City from any liability or damage whatsoever for injury, including death, to any person or property and files with the Clerk liability insurance certificates in an amount to be established from time to time by the City Council, but in no case less than $1,000.000.

C.	DEFAULT: In any case where a permittee shall be in default or shall fail to comply with the requirements of this Section 6.10, or shall fail to complete the work on the date agreed upon, the Coordinator of Public Works shall order the work completed by the City and shall so notify the permittee and surety in writing. The City shall recover the cost from the permittee or his surety.

6.11	STREET MAINTENANCE

A.	DUTY IMPOSED: It shall be the responsibility of every subdivider or developer to keep and maintain the streets and ways in and around the subdivision clean and free from all dirt, mud, construction material and other debris during the period of construction.

B.	STREETS: The duty imposed by Section 6.11-A herein shall apply to all streets within the subdivision, all streets designated as construction traffic routes and all perimeter streets or streets adjacent to the subdivision.

C.	REQUIRED CLEANING: Every subdivider or developer shall scrape each street described in Section 6.11-B herein every day during the period of construction, and shall sweep or cause the streets to be swept once every week. In addition to the foregoing, every subdivider shall be required to scrape, sweep or remove debris from the streets as from time to time directed by the Coordinator of Public Works, the Administrator or the City Engineer.

D.	SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL: In the event one or more Certificates of Occupancy have been issued for any structures located on an unaccepted street, the subdivider or developer shall be responsible for snow and ice removal. If required by the City, a subdivider or developer shall enter into a contract with the City for snow and ice removal. The cost of such service shall be approved from time to time by the City Council using the IDOT approved cost schedule..

E.	PENALTIES: Any subdivider violating any provision of Section 6.11 shall be subject
 
to one or more of the following penalties, said penalties being cumulative and in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed:

1.	A fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a separate violation occurs or continues.

2.	The City may undertake the necessary cleaning as required herein and then assess the costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, incurred by the City for such cleaning against the subdivider and may take action against the performance or construction bond for payment thereof.

3.	“Stop Work Orders” for the subdivision may be issued by the City until the subdivider complies with the requirements herein. No work shall be done in the subdivision while the stop work order is in effect.

4.	The City may withhold the issuance of Certificates of Occupancy for all residences within the subdivision until the subdivider complies with requirements herein.

F.	NOTICE: Prior to the imposition of the penalties set forth in Sections 6.11-E-3 and 4 herein, the City shall cause a written notice to be sent to the subdivider or developer setting forth the specific violations(s) of this Code. The subdivider or developer shall have five days after the date of the notice within which time to comply with the terms of the Code. In the event the subdivider or developer does not comply with the terms herein within said five day period, the City may proceed to impose the penalties provided for in Section 6.11-E-3 and 4 herein. No notice shall be required prior to the imposition of the penalties set forth in Sections 6.11-E-1 and 2 herein.

6.12	CURBS AND GUTTERS

A.	UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION: All curbs and gutters hereinafter built in the City shall be of uniform construction and built under the supervision of the City Engineer and Coordinator of Streets and Maintenance. No curb or gutter shall be constructed unless the same complies with the provisions herein stated, and all property owners complying with the provision shall pay the entire costs of constructing the curb and gutter adjacent to or abutting his property.

B.	CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED: Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets in the City at such times as the property owners wish, except when constructed by the City under special assessment proceedings made in connection with street improvements or when, in the discretion of the City Council, such construction is deemed necessary.

C.	LOCATION: The height and location of the curb shall be determined by the City Engineer.
 
6.13	SIDEWALKS

A.	SPECIFICATIONS: All sidewalks that may hereafter be built within the City shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications of the City Engineer.

B.	PERMIT: No person shall build any sidewalk along any public street without a permit from the Building Department.

C.	GRADE: The grade at which all sidewalks shall be laid shall be fixed and determined by the City Engineer and no person shall lay or construct any sidewalk within the City except at such grade.

D.	NOTICE: Whenever the City Council finds it necessary and proper to construct or rebuild any sidewalks along or upon any street or public alley in the City it shall require the City Engineer or Coordinator of Public Works to examine the matter and report back to the Administrator. When such report has been made, the affected property owner(s) shall be notified in writing that a walk shall be built. Said notice shall state, in detail, the specifications governing the construction of the walk.

E.	COUNCIL ACTION: If such owner or owners of the property, so notified to build such walk, refuse to build the same for a space of 15 days, after receiving the notice, the City Council shall pass an ordinance providing for the construction of such walk or walks, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes relating thereto.

F.	COST: The owner or owners of any lot, piece or parcel of ground in the City, along and in front of which the City Council orders a sidewalk to be built, either by special ordinance or otherwise, shall pay the entire cost of the building of such sidewalk, and the City shall not be responsible for any portion of the cost of any sidewalk within the City, except for such sidewalks as are laid along or in front of property owned by the City.

G.	COMPLIANCE: When any walk is built, constructed or rebuilt in accordance with this Section 6.13 it shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to see that the conditions and specifications pertaining to the construction of the walks are complied with, and the City shall have the right to accept or reject any sidewalks that do not comply with the specifications, as fixed by the City Engineer for the construction of sidewalks.

6.14	SNOW ON SIDEWALKS

The person occupying the ground floor of any building, the owner/user of any lot without a structure thereon, and the owner of any vacant building or other premises shall remove the snow and ice accumulating on the abutting sidewalks within 24 hours after any snowfall has ceased. If snow or ice cannot be removed the surface shall be sanded or otherwise treated to lessen the hazard for pedestrians until the climate permits removal.
 
6.15	DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY

No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way, park or other public property, or any post, wire, lamp, street sign, traffic sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or any other appurtenance thereon.

6.16	MOVING STRUCTURES

No person shall move any building or structure on any street without a permit from the Building Department. The Building Department may impose such conditions deemed appropriate to protect the City and the public. Upon granting such permit, the applicant for such permit shall deposit
$1,000 in cash with the City as security for the protection of the streets and other City property exposed during the moving process. The deposit shall be returned, less a $50 administration fee and any cost to repair public facilities damaged by the moving process. At no time shall a deposit be returned without written approval from the Coordinator of Public Works.

6.17	BURNING LEAVES AND RUBBISH

No person shall burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any street, sidewalk or alley.

6.18	DRIVEWAYS

A.	PERMIT: No person shall construct a driveway entering any street without a permit from the Building Department. Said driveway shall be constructed according to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, however all driveways in areas not served by curb and gutter must be constructed of asphalt or concrete, as defined in Section 24.11 of this Code, from the lot line to the edge of the paved roadway.

B.	CULVERTS: Culverts may be required in areas not served by curb, gutter and storm sewers prior to the point of entry of the driveway to the public road, as defined in Section 24.11 of this Code. The length, width, depth and location of the culvert shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer or Coordinator of Public Works.

In the event driveways are to be altered where there have been no previous culverts or previous culverts are inadequate, new culverts shall be installed pursuant to Section 24.12 of this Code.

If, in the judgment of the City Engineer, culverts are needed to remove any obstructions in drainage ditches or swales, the City shall install a culvert of the size and length determined by the City Engineer. The cost of the culvert and repaving that portion of any driveway that may be affected shall be borne by the owner of the property.

The City shall bear the cost of installation and re-graveling of that portion of any driveway
 
that may be affected by the installation of any culvert.

Maintenance to ensure proper water flows of all culverts, ditches and swales shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner or tenant.

6.19	EASEMENTS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, DITCHES/SWALES

That portion of each property in the City from the front property stakes to the roadway has already been dedicated to the City to be used for utilities, surface drainage and future roadway.

1.	Buildings, structures or any parts of appurtenances thereto shall not be constructed or placed in any easement so as to restrict drainage channels.

2.	The placement of any fill material in the right-of-way between the property line of the property owner and the public road shall require a permit issued by the Building Department.

3.	No permit to alter, build or fill any part of the dedicated roadway shall be issued by the Building Department until written approval is received from the City Engineer or Coordinator of Public Works that the proposed alteration, building or fill will in no way effect surface water run-off capacities or patterns of surrounding properties.

4.	The cost of the engineering review shall be born by the person(s) desiring the modification and shall be paid prior to the review being made.

5.	All ditches and swales shall have the appropriate vegetation in the form of grass to eliminate erosion and sedimentation that could be caused by water traversing the ditch or swale, unless some other form of erosion and sedimentation control is recommended by the City Engineer for the project.

6.20	SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE

No person shall construct, alter, maintain or in any way provide for the discharge of a sump pump, either directly or indirectly, to any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way.

6.21	NUMBERING BUILDINGS Amended, 09-4-4

A.	NUMBERING BUILDINGS: All buildings abutting streets of the City shall be numbered in accordance with the City Map prepared by the City Engineer, which map shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk.

B.	RESPONSIBILITY: It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every building in the City to have placed thereon or on the property, in a place visible from the street showing the number of the building. The address shall be in Arabic numerals or alphabet letters (script not permitted) at least four inches high, contrasting with the background and having a
 
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.

6.22	GAS PIPES

No person owning or maintaining any gas pipes or mains beneath the surface of any street in the City shall permit any leak to occur in such pipes or mains within a radius of 40 feet of any tree growing in any street or public place in the City. In the event that a leak exists or occurs in any such pipe or main, it shall be the duty of the person owning or using such defective pipe or main to repair the same immediately and stop such leak in a manner so as to prevent a recurrence of the same trouble, after receiving notice in writing from the Coordinator of Public Works, calling the attention of such person to the fact that such leak exists. If such person fails within five days after the receipt of such notice to stop such leak in a manner so as to prevent a recurrence thereof, such person shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of this Code.

6.23	MAILBOX INSTALLATION

Mailboxes installed along City streets shall be in accordance with U.S. Postal Service regulations. Mailbox posts shall not be reinforced or fortified so as to prevent or hamper its destruction upon impact. The placement of such mailboxes shall not interfere with street maintenance projects, such as snow plowing and street cleaning. For purposes of this Section 6.23, mailboxes of masonry construction shall be considered reinforced or fortified.

6.24	TREES (LOCATED ON BOTH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY) 16-12-7

A.	APPLICABILITY; INTENT:

1.	APPLICABILITY: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the provisions of this Section 6.24 shall apply to all trees on City-owned property or in City rights-of-way, and shall apply to such other tree-related matters as is stated herein. The City shall have the right and the authority to impose the regulations of this Chapter on all applicants, developers and other persons who place or maintain trees on City-owned property or in City rights-of-way, including, without limitation, the authority to review and approve tree species, locations and spacing under all circumstances. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Section 6.24 and the provisions of Chapter 22 of this Code or any other City code or ordinance, the provision deemed by the City Administrator to be most protective of promoting the proliferation and maintenance and care of trees shall apply and control.

2.	INTENT: It is the intent of this Section 6.24 to promote increases in the quality of trees and tree care in the City and to promote increases in tree populations in the City whenever practicable.

B.	DEFINITIONS: For the purposes of this Section 6.24, terms used herein are defined
 
in Appendix A of this Code.

C.	TREE SPECIES: The City shall maintain a list of acceptable tree species, to be used when planting within City limits. This list will consist of species currently deemed satisfactory by the Public Works Director. This list of trees, and no others unless approved by the Public Works Director, are hereby approved for planting within City limits. Copies of this list shall be made available at City Hall.

D.	TREE SPACING: The spacing of trees shall be no less than 40 feet between plantings. Trees shall be planted as close to the minimum spacing standard as possible. The Director of Public Works may reduce the minimum spacing standards set forth herein for special planting areas designed or approved by a landscape architect.

E.	Trees shall not be planted in City owned right of way.

F.	DISTANCES FROM CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS: No tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant, unless the location is previously approved by the Coordinator of Public Works.

G.	DISTANCES FROM UTILITIES: No tree other than those listed as acceptable tree species in the Public Works administration file, shall be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire. Nor shall any tree other than a small tree be planted over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other underground utility.

H.	CITY AUTHORITY TO CARE FOR TREES: The City and its authorized agents shall have the right, but not the obligation, to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs on City property and within any City right-of-way or utility easement, as may be necessary to ensure public safety, preserve and enhance the quality of vegetation, and beautify the City. The City also, for the same purposes, may prune or remove all portions of any tree or shrubs that overhang any City property, City right-of-way or utility easement.

The City may cause to be removed as soon as practical any tree on City property or within City right-of-way that is diseased or dying, or that poses an irreconcilable threat to a utility or that otherwise threatens the public health, safety or general welfare.

Guidelines set forth by the National Arborist Association will be used for tree trimming and maintenance activities performed by the City or its agents.

I.	TOPPING PROHIBITED: No person shall cause or allow the topping of any tree on City property or within any City right-of-way provided, however, that the City may permit the topping of a tree under exceptional circumstances, such as when the tree has been severely damaged by a storm or other cause, or when topping is otherwise the only practicable action.
 
J.	SITE CLEARANCE PRUNING: The owner of any tree on private property that overhangs any street or right-of-way within the City shall prune the branches of such tree, if necessary, so that such tree shall not obstruct the safe passage of vehicles, the light from any street lamp, the view of any street sign or the view of any street intersection. The owner also shall prune such tree so that there is a minimum of 10 feet of clear space between the surfaces of the street or a minimum clear space of eight feet between the surface of the sidewalk and the lowest hanging branch on such tree. The failure to so prune is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. If the owner fails or refuses to accomplish such pruning within 14 days after written notice to do so from the Director of Public Works, or his designee, the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, to cause such pruning to be accomplished by City staff, or by contractors hired by the City for such purposes.

If the owner fails to pay to the City all of the costs incurred by the City for such clearance pruning within 30 days after receipt of a written invoice, then the City shall have the right, to the extent provided by law, to place a lien on the property on which such tree was located and to perfect such lien as provided by law.

K.	SAFETY PRUNING: The owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the City shall prune all dead, diseased, decaying, broken or dangerous branches from such tree and shall prune from such tree all branches that constitute a menace to the safety of the public or to the health of any other tree. The failure to so prune is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. If the owner fails or refuses to accomplish such pruning within 14 days after written notice to do so from the Director of Public Works, or his designee, the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, to cause such pruning to be accomplished by City staff or by contractors hired by the City for such purposes.

If the owner fails to pay to the City all of the costs incurred by the City for such safety pruning within 30 days after receipt of a written invoice, then the City shall have the right, to the extent provided by law, to place a lien on the property on which such tree was located and to perfect such lien as provided by law.

L.	REMOVAL OF TREES AND STUMPS: The owner of any tree or stump in the City that constitutes a hazard to life or property or that harbors harmful insects or disease constituting a threat to other trees shall remove such tree within 60 days after written notice to do so from the Director of Public Works, or his designee. The failure to remove such tree or stump is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. If the owner fails or refuses to accomplish such removal within the required time period, the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, at the owner’s expense, to cause such tree or stump to be removed by City staff or by contractors hired by the City for such purposes.

If the owner fails to pay to the City all of the costs incurred by the City for such removal within 30 days after receipt of a written invoice, then the City shall have the right, to the extent provided by law, to place a lien on the property on which such tree was located and to perfect such lien as provided by law. No person, except those authorized or employed by the City, shall remove,
 
destroy, break, cut, deface, trim or in any way injure or interfere with any tree growing in any street or right-of-way without the written permission of the Director of Public Works.

M.	TAMPERING: No person shall attach or place any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill or other thing on any tree growing in any street, right-of-way, or any guard or protection of the same. No person shall remove, injure or misuse any guard or device placed or intended to protect any tree growing in any street or right-of-way.

N.	PROTECTION OF TREES: Unless otherwise specifically authorized in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person without a written Tree and Stump Removal Permit from the City to remove, injure, destroy or undertake any procedure the result of which is to cause the death or substantial destruction of any tree, within the City limits, having a diameter of 10 inches DBH or larger. Tree and Stump Removal Permits authorizing the removal of such trees may be issued by the Director of Public Works for, but not limited to, the following reasons:

1.	The tree is dead or dying;

2.	The tree is diseased;

3.	The tree is damaged or injured to the extent that it is likely to die or become diseased, or that it constitutes a hazard to persons or property;

4.	Removal of the tree is consistent with good forestry practice; and/or

5.	Removal of the tree will enhance the health of remaining trees within the immediate vicinity.

The Director of Public Works may issue a Tree and Stump Removal Permit where it is found that removal of the tree and/or stump will avoid or alleviate an economic hardship or hardship of another nature on the lot or residence located on the lot.

Upon receipt of a Tree and Stump Removal Permit, the permittee shall replace the tree so removed in each of the following instances:

1.	In the event the removal of a tree or trees will avoid or alleviate an economic hardship or hardship of another nature on the lot or the residence located on such lot.

2.	In the event a tree is damaged or injured by other than natural causes to the extent that it is likely to die or become diseased, or it constitutes a hazard to persons or property.

The permittee is encouraged to replace the tree in the event the tree is diseased, dead or dying from natural causes, or in the event the tree is damaged or injured by natural causes where it is likely
 
to die or become diseased.

The permittee may not be required to replace the tree in the event the Director of Public Works determines that removal of the tree is consistent with good forestry practice, or in the event the removal of such tree will enhance the health of remaining trees within the immediate vicinity.

The permittee shall make all replacements with a new tree or trees of not less than 22 inches DBH, the cumulative DBH of which shall equal or exceed the diameter of the tree or trees so removed, provided however, that the DBH of replacement trees may be less than the diameter of the tree or trees so removed in the event the Director of Public Works determines that full replacement would result in the unreasonable crowding of trees upon the lot. Such replacement shall be made within 12 months of the date of the removal of any trees for which such replacement is required, and such trees shall be installed at the time of year most beneficial for transplanting the particular species.

Tree and Stump Removal Permits may be denied by the Director of Public Works for, but not limited to, the following reasons:

1.	Tree does not meet any of the criteria outlined in this section;

2.	Tree is rare to the area and/or is a desirable specimen;

3.	Tree is to be used for milling;

4.	Tree is to be used for firewood;

The owner of a tree for which a Tree and Stump Removal Permit has been denied may appeal the decision of the City Council. A written request for review must be submitted to the City Council in care of the Director of Public Works. All findings and decisions of the City Council shall be final. Disregard for the decision of the Director of Public Works or the City Council shall be considered a violation of this Section 6.24.

O.	TREE PRESERVATION DURING CONSTRUCTION: In connection with projects involving the construction of new homes, additions or detached accessory buildings requiring building permits, a Tree Preservation Plan shall be filed with the building permit application in order to assure that all buildings and other structures shall be located upon a lot or parcel of land in such a way as to minimize tree damage and/or removal, consistent with the various setback requirements of the City Zoning Ordinance. The Tree Preservation Plan shall specify the following:

1.	Tree preservation area and building activity area upon the lot or parcel of land for which a building permit application has been filed. (Note: The tree preservation area shall be protected physically from the building activity area by a barrier to prevent penetration of construction vehicles, materials, spoils and equipment into or upon the tree preservation area); and
 

2.	The general contractor, who shall be responsible for the construction, erection and maintenance of temporary fencing or other physical barrier around tree preservation areas so that all trees in tree preservation areas shall be preserved.

A Tree and Stump Removal Permit will be issued only in the event the City finds that all reasonable efforts have been undertaken in the architectural layout and design of the proposed development to preserve existing trees. No building permit will be issued unless the Tree Preservation Plan has been filed with the building permit application and approved by the Director of Public Works.

During construction all reasonable steps necessary to prevent the destruction or damaging of trees (other than those specified to be removed) shall be taken, including, but not limited to the following:

1.	No construction activity, movement and/or placement of equipment or material or spoils storage shall be permitted outside the building activity area or within the tree preservation area. No excess soil, additional fill, liquids or construction debris shall be placed within the root zone of any tree that is required to be preserved;

2.	Crushed limestone, hydrocarbons and other materials detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the root zone of any tree, nor at any higher location where drainage toward the tree could conceivably affect the health of the tree;

3.	Appropriate protective fencing shall be temporarily installed for protection of remaining trees;

4.	All required protective fencing or other physical barrier must be in place and approved by the Director of Public Works prior to beginning construction. The fencing must remain in place during the entire construction period to prevent the impingement of construction vehicles, materials, spoils and equipment into or upon the tree preservation area. All fencing must be secured to metal posts driven into the ground spaced no further than 10 feet apart;

5.	No attachments, fences or wires, other than those approved for bracing, guying or wrapping, shall be attached to trees during the construction period;

6.	Other measures such as construction pruning and root pruning of trees directly impacted by construction must also be indicated on the plan or on an accompanying sheet and approved by the Director of Public Works; and
 

7.	Unless otherwise authorized by the Tree and Stump Removal Permit, no soil is to be removed from within the root zone of any tree that is to remain.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail to abide by the terms of any Tree Preservation Plan pursuant to which a building permit or Tree and Stump Removal Permit has been issued.

If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, the necessary precautions as specified in the Tree Preservation Plan were not undertaken before construction commenced, or are not maintained at any time during construction, a stop work order shall be issued by the Building Commissioner until such time as the permittee complies with the precautions herein.

Tree preservation during road construction shall be strictly enforced. Specific requirements of tree preservation during road construction are available from the Director of Public Works.

P.	APPLICATION FOR TREE AND STUMP REMOVAL PERMITS: In the event a
Tree and Stump Removal Permit is applied for in connection with work for which no building permit is required, there shall be no charge for such permit. The application for a Tree and Stump Removal Permit shall contain:

1.	Name of applicant;

2.	Commonly known address of the lot or property where said tree or trees are proposed to be removed is located (PIN of parcel if tree is in an undeveloped area of the City);

3.	A written statement indicating the reason for removing the tree or trees;

4.	A general description of other trees on the lot, including size and species; and

5.	Name and address of contractor or other person who will have the responsibility for tree removal and landscaping.

In the event a Tree and Stump Removal Permit is applied for in connection with construction requiring a building permit, the application shall be accompanied by:

1.	The Tree and Stump Removal Permit fee, to be determined from time to time by the City Council;

2.	A tree survey of the lot, which shall be drawn on a scale of not less than one inch equals 30 feet, and shall show trees having a DBH of 10 inches and larger, including a listing of species. In the event construction activity is to take place in the root zone of such trees, protected trees on adjoining lots
 
should be shown;

3.	A Tree Preservation Plan in conformance with the requirements of Section 6.24-Q herein; and

4.	A report from a certified arborist if required by the Director of Public Works.

Q.	EMERGENCIES: In order to avoid danger or hazard to persons or property, during emergency conditions requiring the immediate cutting or removal of a tree or trees protected hereunder, a Tree and Stump Removal Permit will be issued by the Director of Public Works without formal application.

In the event of such an emergency, if neither the Director of Public Works or Street Foreman is available to issue such a Tree and Stump Removal Permit, it shall be lawful to proceed with the cutting of the tree or trees to the extent necessary to avoid immediate danger or hazard. In such event, the person causing the cutting shall report the action taken to the Director of Public Works within 48 hours thereof.

R.	INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE WORK: No person shall prevent, delay or in any other way interfere with work undertaken by the City and its authorized representatives to plant, cultivate, mulch, prune, spray or remove any stump, street tree, park tree or other tree as authorized by this Section 6.24.

S.	PENALTY: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this Section 6.24 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation continues to occur. Further, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each tree injured, removed, destroyed or for any undertaking of any procedure, the result of which is to cause the death or substantial destruction of any tree, within the City limits, having a diameter of 10 inches DBH or larger.
 
CHAPTER 7
CITY HALL FACILITIES, COMMUNITY EVENT SIGN

7.01	City Hall Uses
7.2	City Hall Use Procedures
7.3	Community Event Sign


7.1	CITY HALL USES

A.	ACCEPTED USES: Access to City Hall meeting room areas {"facility") on matters other than official City business or City-sponsored events shall be restricted to the following classes of organizations, corporations or agencies:

1.	Governmental or quasi-governmental units or districts which are wholly or partly coterminous within the City; or

2.		Bona fide charitable or not-for-pr ofit organizations, entities or corporations which have a substantial involvement or provide a substantial benefit to the citizens of the City.

An organization shall be deemed to have substantial involvement or provide a substantial benefit in the City if either a majority of its members are residents or, in the case of regional organizations, if the City falls within the region.

B.	PROHIBITED USES: Prohibited uses of the facility are as follows:

1.	.      No religious services shall be permitted.  However, the offering of a prayer or invocation prior to a meeting shall not be considered a religious service.

2.	No commercial enterprises, solicitation or sales of merchandise whatsoever shall
be transacted.

C.	CANCELLATION: The City reserves the right to deny permission, or cancel permission once permission is granted, for any reason and shall not be responsible for any loss, cost, or damage or  injury of any sort, direct or indirect.

7.2	CITY HALL USE PROCEDURES

A, PROCEDURES : All requests for use of the facility shall be made in wnt1ng to the Administrator not less than 15 days prior to the date for of use . Such request shall identify one or more local residents for purposes of receiv ing any communication relative to the request and also to act as the responsible party for compliance with all rules and regulations pertaining to facility use. The Administrator may also request supporting documentation to confirm that the group is a permitted user .

8. CLEANUP: Any facility user shall be responsible for the condition of the facility and all property within it, and shall leave the facility and all property in its original condition. In the event the City has to cleanup, repair or replace the facility and/or any property the organization, through the designated responsible person, shall be responsible for the City incurred costs plus an administration fee equal to 50 percent of the cost.




Chapter 7, Page 1
 

C.	HOURS: Use of the facility is restricted to the hours of 6 a.m. to 11 p.m. Any user group may post a notice, subject to the approval of the Administrator ,in the front door area of City Hall not more than 36 hours prior to the use of the facility. Said notice shall be removed immediately after the use.

D.	RULES AND REGULATIONS: The Administrator shall make available to users any other
rules and regulations deemed necessary for the use of the facility .

E.	INDEMNIFICATION: Each organization using the facility shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from any loss, damage or claim of loss or damage or injury of any sort arising or alleged to have arisen from the use of the building. Proof of such insurance shall be provided to the Administrator prior to use of the facility.

7.3	COMMUNITY  EVENT SIGN

The following guidelines. rules and regulations shall apply to the use of the Community Event Sign (for
purposes of this Section 7.03. "Sign") located at North State Street:

1.	Access  to  the  Sign for  announcements  other  than  official  City  business  or City-sponsored
events shall be restricted to the following classes of organizations, corporations or agencies:

a.	Governmental  or  quasi-governmental  units  or  districts  which  are  wholly  or partly
coterminous with the City; or

b.	Bonafide charitable or not-for-profit organizations, entities or corporations that have a substantial involvement or provide a substantial benefit to the citizens in the Marengo community. An organization shall be deemed to have a substantial benefit in the community if either a majority of its members are City residents or, in the case or a regional organization,  the City falls  within the region.

2 .	No religious services may be announced or advertised on the Sign.

3.	No commercial enterprises, solicitation or sales of merchandise whatsoever may be announced
or advertised on the Sign .

4.	All requests for use of the Sign shall be made in writing to the City not less than 15 nor more than 180 days prior to the date for which the announcement is sought . Each such request shall identify one or more City resident for purposes of receiving any communication relative to the request and also to act as a responsible party for compliance with all rules and regulations pertaining to sign use. The City may also request supporting documentation to confirm the group meets the qualification s of this Section 7.03.

5.	No message shall remain on the Sign for less than seven days nor more than 14 days. For purposes of this Section 7.03, the time period for a message shall begin at 9 a.m.  each Tuesday and conclude at 9 a.m. the following Tuesday.

6.	The fee for the use of the Sign shall be determined from time to time by the City Council.

7 .	Requests for canceling a scheduled message must be tendered to the City, in writing, not less than 15 days prior to the scheduled appearance in order to receive a refund of the fee.




Chapter 7. Page 2
 
8.	Reservations for the Sign shall be on a first come first served space a va ilable basis using the City's receipt of the request as the date/time of receipt.

9.	Alt messages placed on the Sign will be with the standard fonts provided. The City reserves the right to edit the text of requested messages as it deems necessar y . One complete line of blank text shall remain between messages.

1O. Within 24 hours after an announcement is placed on the sign the City shall be notified of  any errors in the posted announcement .

11.		Each entity using the Sign agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any damage or claim of loss or damage or injury of any sort arising or alleged to have arisen from its use of the sign.

12.	The City shall not be responsible for any loss, cost or damage or injury of  any sort. direct or
indirect, associated  with the  message.

13.	The City reserves the right to withdraw permission for a scheduled message at any t ime.










































Chapter 7, Page 3
 
CHAPTER 8
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS

 
8.01
8.02
8.03
8.04
8.05
8.06
8.07
8.08
8.09
8.10
8.11
8.12
8.13
8.14
8.15
 
Definitions
Protection of Park Property Vehicles, Operation Motorized Vehicles
Speed Limit Parking
Firearms and Weapons Alcoholic Beverages Advertising and Signs Use of Park Area
Fires
Group Activity Swimming Operating policy Penalties
 


8.01	DEFINITIONS

In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, the term "park" as used herein shall mean all recreational areas owned and/or operated by the City.

8.2	PROTECTION  OF PARK  PROPERTY

A.	DAMAGE TO PROPERTY: No person shall mark, deface, injure, destroy, damage, tamper with, or remove any park property, facilities or equipment, whatsoever, either real or personal.

B.	SANITATION: No person shall throw, pour or in any other manner, discharge any substance or chemicals, whether liquid or solid, upon the water, grounds or property of the park which may be injurious to persons or park property.

C.	REFUSE: No person shall bring in, have brought in, or put into any park, any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other such material. Any refuse and rubbish generated from use of any park shall be deposited in receptacles provided in the park.

Where no such receptacles are provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.

D.	TREES AND VEG ETATl ON: No person shall damage, destroy, remove or climb upon, any tree or other vegetation located in any park or recreation area.

E.	ANIMALS : No person shall bring any animal into any beach, baseball or soccer field or marked perimeters of tot lots areas, whether on a leash or being ridden, except blind or other physically challenged persons being led or assisted by a guide dog. Animals on leashes will be allowed in all other City-owned parks as long as the owner has appropriate waste collection equipment and subsequently picks up any droppings eliminated by their animal.

F.	GOLF:   No person shall hit any golf balls in any baseball or soccer field at any time.
 
8.3	VEHICLES, OPERATION

No person shall operate any motor vehicle other than on roadways within City-controlled park lands except that the Superintendent of Public Works or the Chief of Police may grant special permission to individuals to operate vehicles on areas other than roadways.

8.4	MOTORIZED VEHICLES

No person shall operate a snowmobile or off-road vehicle within any parks controlled by the City except that the Superintendent of Public Works or the Chief of Police may grant special permission for a snowmobile to be operated on City-controlled park land.

8.05                 SPEED LIMIT

No person shall exceed a speed of 10 miles per hour unless it is otherwise posted on any roadway or traffic way within any City controlled park.

8.6	PARKING

No person shall park a motor vehicle in any prohibited area which is posted with signs, or park any vehicle in any area for the purpose of repair, except those immediate repairs necessary to remove the vehicle from the area.

8.7	FIREARMS. WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS

A .    FIREARMS, WEAPONS : No person, other than authorized police officers, shall display or use on City-controlled park lands, except as authorized by the Chief of Police, any gun, including a shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, air or BB-gun, or other weapon, including a slingshot bow and arrow, switchblade knife with spring-loaded blade, throwing knife, tomahawk or throwing axe, or any martial arts devices.

B.	FIREWORKS:  No person, except authorized personnel, shall bring, carry or use, in any
way, any fireworks or other explosive substance of any kind in any City-controlled park .

8.8	ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic  beverages on park lands, with the following
exceptions:

1.	The City Council may grant a daily exception permit to any organization  authorizing the
dispensing of beer and/or wine at any group picnic or similar funct ion authoriz·ed in any park.

2.	.	Such function must be open to the public and be held during hours that would not inhibit the use of the park by the general public .

3.	Before the permit is issued, the permittee must file a certificate of insurance naming the City
as an additional named insured.

4.	Unless specifically  provided otherwise, all requirements of the Chapter 33, Liquor Control and
Liquor Licensing, of this Code shall apply to permits granted under this Section 8.08 .
 
8.9	ADVERTISING AND SIGNS

A.	ADVERTISING:  No person shall announce, advertise or call to the public's attention in
any way, any article or service for sale or hire.

B. SIGNS: No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever on any park land or highway or road adjacent to any such park land, except as approved by the City Council.

8.10	USE OF PARK AREA

A.	REGULATED: No person in a park shall picnic, lunch or camp in a place other than that des ignated for such purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate activities in park areas whenever necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience  of all visitors.

B.	NON-EXCLUSIVE USE: No person shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other person, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable length of time if the facilities are crowded, unless a Park Use Permit is granted by the City Council.

8.11	FIRES

No person shall build a fire in any place other than a fireplace or grill affixed to the property by the City, or any portable grill constructed of a suitable fireproof substance, or in any other area designated by the City.  No persons shall leave a picnic area before their fire is completely extinguished.

8.12	GROUP ACTIVITY

Any group, association or organization desiring to use the park facilities for a particular purpose must first obtain a permit from the Administrator . A permit will be issued if it appears that the group , association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by the individual member s of the public and if the group, association or organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. The Administrator may require an indemnity bond to protect the City from any liability of any kind or character and to protect the City property from damage.

8.13               SWIMMING

No person shall swim or wade in any stream, creek, lake or pond, located in any park, unless such area
is expressly reserved for such activity and clearly posted as such .

8.14	OPERATING POLICY

A.	HOURS: City parks shall be o pen da ily to the public during the hours fr om dawn to dusk . It shall be unlawful for any person other than City personnel conducting City business therein to occupy o r be present in the park during any hours in which the park is not o pen to the public, except as approved by the City Counc il upon application for a Park Use Permit provided for in Section 8.09 herein.

B.	CLOSING PARKS : Any section or part of a park may be closed to the public by the Mayor at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular o r stated intervals.
 

8.15		PENALTIES

A.	Any person who violates Sections 8.02 through 8.06 herein shall be fined not less than
$100 for each offense.

B.	Any person who violates any other section of this Chapter 8 shall be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each offense.

C.	The violation of this Chapter 8 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to be abated
in the manner provided by law.
 
CHAPTER 10
CEMETERY and CEMETERY BOARD OF MANAGERS

 
10.01
10.02
10.03
10.04
 
City Cemetery Established
Cemetery Board of Managers Created
Powers and Duties of the Cemetery Board of Managers Cemetery Superintendent
 


10.1	CITY CEMETERY ESTABLISHED

The cemetery bounded by the north line of Prairie Street, Jackson Street and Grace Street is established as the Marengo City Cemetery. The care and supervision of the Marengo City Cemetery, including all physical and financial matters, shall be under the supervision of the Cemetery Board of Managers.

10.2	CEMETERY BOARD OF MANAGERS CREATED

The Cemetery Board of Managers is hereby created, consisting of three members, appointed by the Mayor with the advise and consent of the City Council. The Mayor shall designate the Cemetery Board of Managers chairman. Members of the Cemetery Board of Managers shall appoint a secretary and a treasurer. Each member shall serve a term of two years without compensation. Any member may be removed by the Mayor for failing to perform their duties or the misappropriation or wrongful use of funds or property.

10.3	POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CEMETERY  BOARD OF MANAGERS

A.	MEETINGS: The Cemetery Board of Managers shall meet at such times as it may determine.  Such meetings shall be pursuant to the Open Meetings Act.

B.	CEMETERIES: The Cemetery Board of Managers shall have charge and control of the Marengo City Cemetery and over any cemetery not under the control of any corporation, corporation sole or society located within the City.

C.	RECEIPTS: Receipts from the operation of the cemetery shall be deposited by the Cemetery Board of Managers treasurer into a Cemetery Board Fund. Said funds shall be used for the operation of the cemetery.

D.	OPERATION OF CEMETERY: The Cemetery Board of Managers shall establish rules for the conduct of the cemetery, the cost of lots and services, and may employ such persons necessary for the operation of the cemetery. Unless authorized by the City Council, the Cemetery Board of Managers shall not expend any other City funds  on the operation of the cemetery.

10.4	CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT

The Cemetery Board of Managers may appoint a Cemetery Superintendent who shall perform duties assigned by the Cemetery Board of Managers. The compensation of the Cemetery Superintendent shall be determined from time to time by the Cemetery Board of Managers.
 
CHAPTER12 NUISANCES



12.1	Definitions
12.2	Public Nuisances Prohibited
12.3	Public Nuisances Defined
12.4	Abatement of Public Nuisances
12.5	Cost of Abatement
12.6	Abandoned and Derelict Motor Vehicles
12.7	Boats, Trailers and Recreational Vehicles
12.8	Noxious Plants, Weeds, Bushes, Trees and Grass
12.9	Open Burning
12.10	False Alarms
12.11	Fire District Rapid Entry Key System
12.12	No Smoking



12.01                DEFINITIONS Ord. 08-2-2

In addition  to those terms defined  in Appendix  A of this Code, the following terms, whether capitalized or not, are defined as follows for the purposes of this Chapter:

Authorized  Private  Receptacle:  A  City-authorized  container  for  the collection  and  storage  of rubbish, waste, refu se, litter, garbage or other matter.

Litter: Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste. Litter may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging , construction material , motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of any dead animal, any nauseous or offense matter of any kind,  any object likely to injure a person or create a traffic hazard, potentia11y infectious medical waste as identified by characteristics or listing as hazardous under Section 3001 of the Resource and Recovery Act of 1976 or pursuant to the Illinois Pollution Control Board , or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise improperly disposed of, including any material which, if thrown or deposited improperly , may tend to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.

Park: A park reservation , playground, beach , recreation center or any other public area in the City,
owned or used by the City, and devoted to active or passive recreation.

Public place: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.

Refuse: All putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste (except body waste) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles and solid market and industrial wastes.
 

Rubbish: Non-putrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, metal cans, yard clippings, leaves, tree stumps, dirt, wood , glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.

Trash: Discarded, unwanted or worthless materials or objects.

12.2	PUBLIC NUISANCES  PROHIBITED

No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance
within the City or within the police jurisdiction  of the City.

12.3	PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED Amended , 12-5-3, 08-2-2

A.	GENERALLY: A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length oftime as to:

I .        Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public;

2.	In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;

3.	Greatly offend the public morals or decency ;

4.	Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way.

5.	Litter in pubbc and private places.


B.	PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH: The following acts, omissions, places and things hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of Section 12.03-A herein.

I . All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale the public;

2.	Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a
sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;

3.	Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash ,rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or machinery, scrap metal, discarded appbances or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed; or which may constitute a fire hazard.
 
4.	All stagnant water in which mosquitoes , flies or other insects can multiply;

5.	Garbage cans which are not fly-tight ;

6.	The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the City limits in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property;

7.	The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream , lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances;

8.	Any use of property, substance s or things within the City emitting or causing any foul, offensive noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the City;

9.	All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use;

10.	Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals;

11.	Any obstruction in or across any water course, drainage ditch or ravine;

12.	Any open burning contrary to City ordinance;

13.	The deposit of garbage, rubbish or any offensive substance on any street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private property, except as may be permitted by ordinance;

14.	Any noxious weed on private property as defined by 505 ILCS I 00/1 et seq.;
and

C.	PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY: The following
acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of Section 12.03-A herein:

1.	All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse;

2.	All gambling devices if any kind except as authorized by Section 33.38 of this Code;
 
3.	All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, breed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this Code; and

4.	Any place or premises within the City where ordinances or state Jaws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.

5.	Any person throwing, tossing, discarding or depositing litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the City except in public trash receptacles, authorized private receptacles for collection or in an official City disposal facility.

D.	PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY: The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the provisions of Section  12.03-A herein:

1.	All building erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to materials and manner of construction of building and structures;

2.	All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing;

3.	All trees, hedges or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;

4.	All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than eight feet above the surface thereof or less than I0 feet above the surface of a public street;

5.	All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the State of Illinois and ordinances of the City;

6.	All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use;

7.	All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground;

8.	All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under th e same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the City or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are
 
kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished;

9.	All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unu sed basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;

10.	All abandoned appliances;

11.	Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks;

12.	Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall , fence, sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the owner thereof;

13.	Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight feet above the sidewalk surface;

14.	Any condition or practice constituting a fire hazard;

15.	Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes;

16.	All unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped , junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery , implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, within the corporate limits of this City;

17.	All unsheltered storage of unlicensed automobiles for a period of 10 days or more within the corporate limits of the City; and

18.	All signs advertising garage sales, yard sales or other similar sales other than
those located on the property on which the sale is being conducted.

12.4	ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES

A.	INSPECTION OF PREMISES: Whenever complaint is made to the Mayor that a public nuisance exists, or has existed, within the City, the Mayor shall promptly notify the Chief of Police, or some other City official whom the Mayor shall designate, who shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected the premises and shall make a written report of his findings to the Mayor. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the office of the Administrator.
 
B.	SUMMARY  ABATEMENT:

1.	Notice to Owner: Ifthe inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Mayor may direct the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or a deputy sheriff, to serve a notice on the owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or persons causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours.

2.	Abatement by City: Ifthe nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the Chief of Police, the Coordinator of Public Works or some other City official whom the Mayor shall designate, may cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance, or person causing,  permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours.

C.	ABATEMENT BY COURT ACTION: If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists on priv ate premises but the nature of such nuisance is not an immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his findings with the Mayor, who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the City.

12.5	COST OF ABATEMENT

In addition to the penalty imposed by this Code for the erection, contrivance, creation , continuance or maintenance of the public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other special taxes.

12.6	ABANDONED AND DERELICT MOTOR VEHICLES Amended, 04-11-2

A.	LEGISLATIVE  FINDINGS  AND  DETERMINATIONS : The  City  Council,  in
keeping with the policy of the Illinois General Assembly as found in Section 5/4-301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (Chapter 625 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes), finds and determines that:

Abandoned and derelict vehicles constitute a safety hazard and a public nuisance; are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the general public by harboring disease, providing breeding places for vermin, inviting plundering , creating fire hazards and presenting physical dangers to children and others; produce scenic blights which degrade the environment and adversely affect land values and the proper maintenance and continuing development of the State of Illinois and all if its subdivisions; represent a resource out of place and an energy loss to the Illinois economy and require
 
state and local governmental attention , in conjunction with any federal governmental attention, in
order to assure the expeditious removal and recycling of these abandoned and derelict vehicles.

B.	ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES OR RETENTION OF DERELICT VEHICLES
PROHIBITED : The abandonment of a motor vehicle or any part thereof or the retention of a derelict vehicle anywhere in the City, in view of the general public, is unlawful except on the property of the owner in a completely enclosed permanent building or structure. Removal of the abandoned or derelict vehicle, or any part thereof, may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police after expiration of seven days from the date of violation.

C.	ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE; PRESUMPTION: The person to whom
last was issued the certificate of title to the vehicle by the Secretary of State is presumed to be the
person to have abandoned that vehicle but such presumption may be rebutted.

D.	RETENTION	OF	DERELICT	VEHICLE	ON	PRIVATE	PROPERTY;
PRESUMPTION: The person who owns the property on which the derelict vehicle is retained or who occupies the property on which the derelict vehicle is retained , or both , is presumed to be the person responsible for disposing of the vehicle in a safe and.timely manner.

E.	NOTICE TO POLICE: When an abandoned, derelict, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession of custody of a person in this state, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the City.

Upon receipt of such notification , the Chief of Police shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned , lost, stolen or unclaimed  motor vehicle or other vehicle.

The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner, or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided by this Section 12.06.

F.	REMOVAL  OF VEHICLES:

1.	When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a public right-of-way in the City 10 hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police.

2.	When an abandoned , derelict, unattended , wrecked , burned or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because ofits position in relation to the highway , a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police.

3.	When a vehicle is removed from either public or private property, as authorized by order of the Chief of Police, the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs.
 

G.	.    RECORDS OF VEHICLE REMOVED: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed , listing the color, year of the manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour oftow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.

H.	.      SEARCH FOR OWNER: When the Police Department does not know the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor vehicle records of the State oflllinois to be searched by a directed communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership information.

The Police Department shall cause the stolen vehicle files of the Illinois State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the Illinois State Police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the Illinois State Police. The information determined from these record searches will be used by the Police Department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.

I. NOTICE TO STATE POLICE: When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the Illinois State Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois State Police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of owner.

J.	RECLAIMING VEHICLES: Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein , the owner or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle .

No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this Section 12.06 until all towing and storage charges and fines have been paid.

K.	SALE OF VEHICLE: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven years of age or newer ,remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided herein , the Police Department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder.

Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least l 0 days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded.
 

At least I 0 days prior to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the Police Department or towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle .

In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Depa1iment due to the addressee having moved , or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required.

L.	OLDER VEHICLES: When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven years of age, or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this section, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by this Section 12.06 without notice to the registered  owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle .

When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is impounded as specified by this section, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of I 0 days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. Mail, public service or in person for a detennination of disposition , and an examination of the Illinois State Police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information.

At the expiration of the 10-day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner, the Chief of Police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.

A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is excluded from this Section 12.06.

M.	RECORDS: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or other wise disposed of as provided in this section, a record of the transaction shall be maintained by the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.

N.  DISPOSITION OF SALE PROCEEDS: When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the City is authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set forth in this Section 12.06, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the City treasury .

0. LIABILITY OF OFFICERS: Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages or his legal representatives , or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this Section 12.06.
 

12.7	BOATS, TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES

Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles is permitted only to the extent that such vehicles are stored in a safe and orderly manner in a compact and contiguous area not to exceed 180 square feet located behind the front yard building setback line. For purposes of this Section 12.07, a boat upon a trailer shall be considered a single vehicle.

12.8	NOXIOUS PLANTS, WEEDS, BUSHES, TREES AND GRASS Am ended, 08-7-
1

A.	NUISANCE DECLARED: Any weeds such as or known as jimson , burdock , ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, or other weeds of like kind , and plants or bushes of the species of tall , common or European Barberry , otherwise known as Barberis Vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties, found growing in any place or location within the corporate limits of the City, are declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any such weeds or plants to grow or remain in any place or location within the corporate limits of the City to a height in excess of eight inches . It is also hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit grass, except ornamental grass, to grow or remain in any place or location within the corporate limits of the City to a height in excess of eight inches, or refuse or neglect to trim trees or bushes, or remove nuisance bushes or trees in the City .

B.	REMOVAL OF NOXIOUS PLANTS, WEEDS, GRASS, BUSHES AND TREES: It
shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of every lot or tract ofland within the corporate limits of the City to ( 1) cut, destroy or remove, or cause to be cut, destroyed or removed, every such weed or plant or (2) cut any grass as hereinabove described or (3) trim trees or bushes, or (4) remove nuisance bushes or trees, upon every such lot or tract ofland in such manner and on or before such time as such weeds, plants or grass reach or exceed the height of eight inches or such trees or bushes become a nuisance. Upon the failure of any such owner or occupant so to do, it shall be the duty of the Building Department to serve or cause to be served a notice, demanding the abatement of such growth as a nuisance, within a period of five days from the date of such service. Failure of any owner or occupant to comply with the provisions and demands of such notice shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this Section 12.08.

C.	NOTICE: Any owner or occupant served with a 5-day notice shall be deemed to have refused or neglected to cut, trim or remove such weeds, trees,bushes,plants or grass pursuant to this Section 12.08. The written notice shall be in force for a period of 12 months from the date the notice was issued. Failure of any owner or occupant to comply with the provisions and demands of a notice served within the previous 12 months shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this Section
12.08 and it shall be a new violation every day the nuisance is allowed to continue. For purposes of this Section, an owner or occupant shall be deemed served when notice has been sent by certified mail and posted on the subject property. An owner may also be deemed served when notice has been sent via facsimile or electronic mail.

The cost of cutting, trimming or removing of weeds, grass, plants, trees or bushes shall not be a lien on the real estate affected unless a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail
 
to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding year. The notice shall be sent after the cutting, trimming or removal of the weeds, grass, plants , trees or bushes on the property .

D.	ABATEMENT :If, upon the expiration of the 5-day period provided in the notice, for a period of 12 months from the date of service, any owner or occupant of any premises in the City upon which any such weeds, plants, trees, bushes or grass are caused or permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this Section 12.08, it shall be the duty of the Building Department, or any department in the City directed to do so, to proceed to eliminate the nuisance by cutting, destroying or otherwise removing the weeds, plants, trees, bushes or grass and to keep an account of the expense thereof, and such expense shall be charged to the owner, or the owner and occupant jointly , of the premises , and it shall be the duty of the owner or the owner and occupant jointly to pay such expense.

E.	LIEN: The City shall have a continuing lien upon the premises and real estate upon which any noxious weeds or plants or nuisance trees, bushes or grass shall be caused or permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this Section 12.08, for or on account of which it is necessary for any expense to be suffered or incurred by the City for the cutting, destroying or otherwise removing of any weeds, plants, trees, bushes or grass. Every lien shall, upon compliance with the conditions hereinafter set forth, become and be prior and superior to the rights and interest of creditors, encumbrances, purchasers and other parties in interest in such premises and real estate.

Such lien may be preserved and enforced in the following manner: The Clerk shall, within 60 days after the accrual of such expense or cost or charge, file or cause to be filed with the Recorder of Deeds a claim for lien, verified by the affidavit of an officer of the City having knowledge of the facts, which shall consist of a brief statement of the facts of the claim, the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, the date or dates when such cost and expense were incurred by the City and a sufficiently correct description of the lot, lots or tract or tracts ofland or real estate to properly identify such land or real estate.No such lien shall be defeated in the proper amount thereof because of error or overcharging on the part of the City, nor shall any such lien be defeated upon proof that the expense or cost or charge resulted from or was incurred by reason or fault of any tenant or occupant or other person in possession other than the owner.

F.	FORECLOSURE OF LIEN : Ifpayment is not made as provided in this Section 12.08 of any amount due by virtue of its provisions when the same shall become due, the City may file or cause to be filed a petition or bill in the appropriate court for a foreclosure of mortgages . Such suit shall be commenced within two years after the accrual of such expense or cost or charge. Any decree rendered in court may be enforced and collected as other decrees or judgments in such court.

The remedy provided in this Section 12.08 shall not be construed to abridge or in any manner interfere with the right and power of the City to enforce the collection thereof by an action at law or as otherwise provided in this Section 12.08, but the remedy herein provided shall be taken and held as an additional means to enforce payment of such delinquent expense or cost or charge.

12.9	OPEN BURNING Am ended, 13-6-4, 10-6-4
 

A.	PROHIBITION: Except as provided in Section 12.09-B3, the open burning of any materials or substances is hereby prohibited within the City limits, other than the preparation of food on a temporary or permanent fireplace grill or barbecue pit and as otherwise provided  herein.

B.	EXCEPTIONS:

1.	Duly organized units of government shall be exempt from this prohibition when conducting a controlled bum and when authorized by the City Council. Any unit of government conducting an authorized controlled burn within the City shall notify the Police Department of the time and location of the controlled burn. The Chief of Police may impose such conditions and limitations upon said controlled burns as the Chief deems appropriate.

2.	Residents may apply for a Recreational  Bonfire  Permit  at  the  Police Department.  Subject  to  permit  approval  from  the  Chief   of  Police, Recreational Bonfire Permits may only be issued if the following conditions are met:

(a)	The recreational bonfire is attended by a responsible person over the age of 21 years, who shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use.

(b)	The recreational bonfire location is not less than 30 feet from any structure and adequate provisions are made to prevent fire from spreading to within 30 feet of any structure.

(c)	The recreational bonfire shall only be permitted between the hours of 5 p.m. and midnight on the date listed on the Recreational Bonfire Permit. Materials burned shall only be logs.

(d)	The Chief of Police shall forward a copy of the Recreational Bonfire Permit to the fire district/department having jurisdiction over the bonfire location prior to the time of the bonfire.

(e)	There shall be no charge for a Recreational Bonfire Permit.

(f)	Recreational  bonfires  shall be  limited  to  one  bonfire  permit  per
residence per month from April through October.

3.	Open burning is permitted in the AT Agricultural Transition District within the City pursuant to the McHenry County Department of Health Landscape Regulations, Article III - Section 1.29 regarding open burning restrictions, as amended.
 
C.	PENALTIES:  Any person who violates Section  12.09 shall be fined not less than
$100 for the first offense. The fine for a second offense shall be not less than $300 and the fine for a
third and any other subsequent offenses shall be not less than $500. The violation of this Section
12.09 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, to be abated in the manner provided by law.

12.10	FALSE ALARMS

A.	AUTOMATIC DIALER ALARMS: Automatic dialer alarms that dial directly into the Police Department are not allowed to be used within the corporate limits of the City, with the exception of those used by the City and those authorized by the Chief of Police based upon special facts involving medical and/or life threatening circumstances.

B.	AUDIBLE ALARMS: Any alarm that emits an audible alarm is required to have a cut-off timer that will shut the alarm off automatically after 30 minutes.

C.	FALSE ALARMS: Any person owning or leasing an alarm system that transmits an alarm activation, either indirectly or directly to the Police Department, shall be deemed to have transmitted a false alarm and be in violation of this Ordinance if that person's alarm system transmits more than four false alarms within any 12-month period. For purposes of determining guilt under this Section 12.10, a person's knowledge and intent are not elements of this offense.

12.11	FIRE DISTRICT RAPID ENTRY KEY SYSTEM

A.	FIRE DISTRICT RAPID ENTRY KEY SYSTEM: A Fire District Rapid Entry Key System (hereinafter referred to as "KNOX") shall be installed on all buildings equipped with a monitored fire alarm system. Installation, location and mode of KNOX box shall be approved by the fire district prior to installation .

B.	EXCEPTIONS: The  following situations will be  exempt from the KNOX box installation requirement in Section 12.11:

1.	Detached single family dwellings;


2.	Alarmed buildings that are occupied 24 hours a day throughout the year;

3.	Buildings with on-premises guard service with key access to all building areas.

12.12	NO SMOKING 08-1-3

A.	.    In addition to those terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, for the purposes of this Section , the following terms have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section unless different meanings are plainly indicated by the context:

Bar: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by
guests on the premises and that derives no more than 10percent of its gross revenue from the sale of
 
food consumed on the premises . Bar includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs , cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities and cabarets .

Employee: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.

Employer: A person, business, partnership , association or corporation , including a municipal corporation , trust or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.

Enclosed area: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with (i) solid walls or windows , exclusive of doorways, or (ii) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors.

Enclosed or partially enclosed sports arena: Any sports pavilion, stadium , gymnasium , health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool , roller rink , ice rink, bowling alley or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions or recreational  activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational or other events.

Gaming equipment or supplies: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.

Gaming facility : An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming
equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of accruing business revenue.


Healthcare facility: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical , mental, or emotional or other medical , physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories and offices of surgeons, chiropractors , physical therapists, physicians, dentists and all specialists within these professions. Healthcare facility includes all waiting rooms, hallways , private rooms, semiprivate rooms and wards within healthcare facilities.

Place of employment: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including but not limited to entrances  and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms; cafeterias and other common areas. A private residence or home-based bu siness, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a place of employment.

Private club: A not-for-profit association that (i) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three years prior to the effective date of the Act , whether incorporated or not, (ii) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times,
(iii) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic , political, benevolent or athletic
 
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and (iv) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, private club means an organization that is managed by a board of directors, executi ve committee,  or similar body chosen by the members  at an  annual meeting , has established bylaws, a constitution , or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. 501.

Private residence: the part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For the purposes of this definition , a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation , hospital, nursing home or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence.

Proprietor :Any individual or his designated agent who, by virtue of his office, position , authority or duties, has legal or administrative responsibility for the use or operation of property .

Public place: Any building or vehicle used by and open to the public , regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distances of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A public place does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises . A public place includes but is not limited to enclosed indoor areas used by the public or serving as a place of work including, but not limited to, hospitals , restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museum s, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, and all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned , leased or operated by the State or State subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers,retail service establishments , financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities,public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies,bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75 percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.

Restaurant: An eating establishment , including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, and/or a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. Restaurant includes a bar area within the restaurant.

Retail tobacco store: A retail establishment that derives more than 80 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. Retail tobacco store does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food or restaurant license.
 
Smoke or smoking: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or exhaling of any kind oflighted pipe,
cigar, cigarette, hookah , weed , herbs or any other lighted smoking equipment.


B.	SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED: No person shall smoke in a public place or any place of employment or within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the State, City or other political subdivision of the State. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and places of employment unless exempted by Section I 2.12-E.

C.	SMOKING PROHIBITED IN STUDENT DORMITORIES: Notwithstanding  any
other provision of this Section, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms , laundry areas, lobbies and hallways,of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utili zed by a public or private institution of higher education.

D.	POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS; DESIGNATION OF OTHER
NON-SMOKING  AREAS:


1.	"No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Section by the owner, operator, manager , or other person in control of that place.

2.	Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Section shall have posted at every entrance a conspicu ous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited .

3.	All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this Section by the owner, operator, manager , or other person having control of the area .

4.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, any employer, owner, occupant lessee, operator, manager , or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of a public place or place of employment , including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuou sly post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in this Section.

E.	EXEMPTIONS :Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, smoking is
allowed in the following areas:
 
1.	Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or other healthcare facility or any other home-based business open to the public.

2.	Retail tobacco stores in operation prior to January 1, 2008 . The retail tobacco store shall annually file with the Illinois Department of Public Health by January 31st an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale ofloose tobacco, plants or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date of January 1,2008,may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.

3.	Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed r to remain in a room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing home.

4.	Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than 25 percent of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed . The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed , except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.

F.	ENFORCEMENT: The Illinoi s Department of Public Health, State-certified local public health departments and local law enforcement agencies shall enforce the provisions of this Section and may assess fines pursuant to Section 12.12-G. Any person may register a complaint with the Illinois Department of Public Health, a State-certified local public health department or a local law enforcement agency for a violation of this Section.

G.	VIOLATIONS:

1.	A person , corporation , partnership , association or other entity, who violates this Section, shall be fined no less than $100 and not more than $250 plus the City 's cost of prosecution , including reasonable attorney fees.Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

2.	A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates this Section shall be fined (i) not less than $250 for the first violation , (ii) not less than $500 for the second violation within one
 
year after the first violation , and (iii) not less than $750 for each additional violation within one year after the first violation.

H.	INJUNCTIONS: The lllinois Department of Public Health, a State-certified local public health department , local law enforcement agency or any individual personally affected by repeated violations may institute, in the circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this Section.
 
CHAPTER 13
SCAVENGERS. RECYCLABLES AND REFUSE

 
13.01
13.02
13.03
13.04
13.05
13.06
13.07
13.08

13.01
 
Definitions License Required
Application for License License Fee;Term Collection of Recyclables Conditions of License License Revocation Duties of Customers

DEFINITIONS
 

In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, the following term used in this Chapter 13 is defined as follows:

Scavenger: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation conducting any of the enumerated activities of collection and disposal of waste materials for set fees or payments.

13.02              LICENSE REQUIRED

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger or the collection o r disposal of residential, commercial or industrial garbage, refuse or waste without having first obtained a Scavenger License from the City.

13.3	APPLICATION FOR LICENSE

A.	APPLICATION:  Application  for  a Scavenger  License shall be made to the City  and
referred to the City Council. A Scavenger License shall be issued upon order of the City Council.

8.	APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS : The following information shall be submitted with the application:

1.	Applicant's  residential and  business  name  and address  and  the  names and
addresses of its owners and officers;

2.	The location of the disposal facilities to be used by the licensee. This location
shall be a site approved by the IEPA, or its successor .

3.	The location where scavenger  vehicles will be parked when not in use.

4.	Certificates of insurance to be issued by a company approved by the City and which is authorized to issue insurance in the State, showing that the applicant has public liability insurance of not less than $1 ,000,000 covering the business activities within the City . The licensee shall also have insurance coverage on motor vehicles and property damage in an amount acceptable to the City. The certificate shall show the date of expiration, which shall not expire during the term of the Scavenger license . Upon cancellation or expiration without renewal of the insurance , a City issued Scavenger License shall be void.


Chapter 13, Page 1
 
13.04	LICENSE TERM, FEE Amended, Ord. 01-2-6

The annual license fee for residential and commercial scavenging shall be $350. The license period shalt
be from May 1 to the following April 30.

13.5	COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLES

A.	PICKUP REQUIREMENTS: It shall be a prerequisite to obtaining a Scavenger License that the applicant agrees to pick up and deliver to an appropriate recycling facility the following recyclable materials: aluminum, corrugated cardboard, glass bottles and containers, newsprint and plastic milk containers. In addition , the licensed scavenger shall pick up and deliver to an appropriate facilit y branches, tree cuttings, leaves and lawn rakings.

B.	NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS: Upon approval by the City Council, any not-for-profit organization or tax exempt charitable institution may pick up one or more of the categories of recyclable materials .However,City Council approv al will be conditioned upon the activity's impact on the business of licensed scavengers within the City; the City Council may impose restrictions it deems reasonable, including times and dates, of said approval.

13.6	CONDITIONS OF LICENSE

A.	VEHICLES:

1.	Spilling Loads: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any vehicle for the purpose of carrying, carting, hauling or transporting garbage, refuse, waste or recyclables to cause any of the substances to dump, fall, scatter, spill or leak on any public way or othe r place. The scavenger shall use exclusively enclosed leakproof packer-type disposal truck bodies for the collection of all residential, commercial and industrial garbage. For the collection or all other refuse and rubbish, the scavenger shall have equipment to be used when necessary, tarpaulins or substantial tight covers designed to prevent the scattering of the refuse and rubbish from the container or truck.

2.	Cleanliness of Vehicles: All scavenger vehicles shall be cleaned and disinfected when not in use so that the vehicles do not become offensive or in violation of federal, state or local laws.

B.	PARKING; TEMPORARY STORAGE OF WASTE: Except in an emergency, it shall be unlawful to park a scavenger truck containing any garbage, refuse or other waste overnight, or for an unnecessary length of time during daylight hours within the City limits. In the event the contents of a storage container becomes frozen and unmovable it shall be permissible to store said container in an enclosed building up to 48 hours. The scavenger must notify the Superintendent of Streets and Chief of Police immediately of any emergency .

C.	RESIDENTIAL PICKUP HOURS: Except in an emergency, residential pickup shall be limited to the hours between 6 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday.

13.7	LICENSE REVOCATION

In the event a licensed scavenger firm violates any provisions of this Chapter 13 or any federal, state or local laws, the City shall have the right, in addition to enforcing criminal penalties against the firm,


Chapter 13, Page 2	2126101
 
to revoke the Scavenger license. In such case no consideration for a refund in part or whole of the license fee shall be given.

13.8	DUTIES OF CUSTOMERS

A .  LOCATION FOR PICK-UP:  All refuse, compostable yard waste and recyclable material shall be placed immediately behind the curbside. When a conflict arises concerning a specific location the City shall have the exclusive right to determine the final pickup point for the property in question.

B.	PREPARING MATERIALS: It is the responsibility of the customer to properly bag,bundle and tag all refuse, recyclables and compostable yard waste.

C.	RECEPTACLES REQUIRED: It shall be the duty of every owner, or his agent, or the occupant of any house, dwelling or other building in the City wherein people reside or lodge, or where animal or vegetable food is prepared or served, and at all times, to maintain in good order and repair a separate receptacle to be used for the purpose of depositing garbage and other similar refuse. Such recepta cle shall be watertight, made or constructed of metal or plastic and shall be equipped with a close fitting  cover .

D.	DEPOSIT ON STREETS AND PROPERTY: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage or other similar refuse in any street, alley or public way. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage or other similar refuse upon any private property , unless such garbage or other similar refuse shall be placed in a receptacle as hereinabove described, and it shall be unlawful to place such receptacle upon any street, alley or public way.

E.	LITTER ING: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or locate garbage or other similar refuse in any manner so that the same could be blown about or scattered by wind or access ible to animals.

F.	BURNING : It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned any garbage or similar refuse within the corporate limits of the City.

G.	.    STORAGE OF RECEPTACLES : The storage of receptacles shall be in such a manner so as to be no closer to the streets or public ways than the building setback lines as required under the Zoning Code.






















Chapter 13, Page 3
 
CHAPTER14
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS

14.1	Definitions
14.2	Cruelty to Animals
14.3	Dangerous Animals
14.4	Noisy Animals
14.5	Animals Prohibited
14.6	Diseased Animals
14.7	Dog Licenses
14.8	Dogs and Cats Running at Large
14.9	Dog Bites
14.10	Dog Litter
14.11	Limit


14.01   DEFINITIONS


In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:

Animal: Every living creature, domestic or wild, not including man.

Dangerous Animal: Any lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena, wolf, coyote or life-threatening snake or reptile.

Domestic Animal: Any animal, except birds or fish, the ownership of which is not prohibited under the definition of "prohibited animal" set forth herein.


Owner: Any person who has:

1.	A right of property in an animal;

2.	Keeps an animal;


3.	Has an animal in his care of custody; or


4.	Who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.


Run at Large: To be free ofrestraints off the premises of the owner.


Prohibited Animal: Pigs, swine, sheep, chickens or other fowl, cattle, horses, goats or similar ani­ mals, or any naturally wild animal, except birds or fish, whether or not bred for domestic purposes.




Chapter 14, Page 1	9/10/2019
 
Such animals shall, however, be permitted in zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, edu­ cational institutions or veterinary hospitals.

Vicious Animal: Any animal which bites, or in any other manner, attacks or attempts to attack, ex­ cept that any animal that bites, attacks or attempts to attack any person unlawfully entering upon its owner's premises, or which is provoked to attack, shall not be deemed a vicious animal.

14.2	CRUELTY TO ANIMALS

No person shall crnelly treat any animal. Any person who inhumanely beats, under feeds, overloads or abandons any animal is guilty of a violation of this Section 14.02.

14.3	DANGEROUS  ANIMALS

All persons owning or in possession of any dangerous or vicious animal shall restrain said animal from running at large within the City. Exhibitions or parades of dangerous or otherwise prohibited animals as defined in Section 14.01 herein may be conducted upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police.

14.4	NOISY ANIMALS

No person shall harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises.

14.5	ANIMALS PROHIBITED Amended,  09-7-2

A.	FARM ANIMALS: No person shall stable, keep or maintain any prohibited animals as defined in Section 14.01 herein in the City, nor shall any person ride, walk or lead such prohibited animals in the City, except by special pe1mission granted by the City Council; provided that horses may be led through the City on a public roadway when safe to do so without disrupting traffic. And except also that the City may issue a permit for the use of any horse-drawn caniage for a particular event or ceremony.

B. EXOTIC ANIMAL: Except as provided herein, no person shall own, keep or harbor within the City any animal deemed to be dangerous including snakes, reptiles or lizards that are poi­ sonous; any rodent weighing more than one pound, with the exception of guinea pigs; or any other exotic animals as defined in Section 2.09 of Article XVII of the McHenry County Animal Control ordinance. This prohibition shall not apply to property properly zoned for facilities such as zoos, an­ imal shelters, animal hospitals, kennels, ponds, pet stores and scientific or research laboratories.

14.6	DISEASED  ANIMALS

A.	All persons owning or in possession of any animal afflicted with a contagious or in- fectious disease shall restrain said animal from running at large within the City where the public


Chapter 14, Page 2	911012019
 
health may be affected. No diseased animal shall be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner except under the supervision of an animal control officer or the state veterinarian. No diseased animal shall be brought into the City.

B.	The animal control officer shall secure the disposition of any diseased animal and the treatment of affected premises so as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act.

14.7	DOG LICENSES

No person shall pennit a dog to be or remain in the City without being registered and licensed by the McHemy County Health Department. The registrations and licensing rules of the county shall pre­ vail. Inno case shall a dog that has not been inoculated against rabies be allowed to be or remain in the City.

14.8	DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE Amended, 19-9-1, 09-7-2

A.	RUNNING AT LARGE: It shall be unlawful to pennit any dog or cat to run at large in the City at anytime. Dogs and cats which are on any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place without being held securely on a leash or restrained shall be deemed to be running at large

B.	NUISANCE: Any dog found in the Village either without a license or running at large is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be relinquished to the Animal Control Division of McHenry County.

C.	REDEMPTION: The owner of any dog impounded may redeem it by paying all the costs, charges and penalties that have accrued by the City or County.

D.	DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS: Any dog that has been involved in an in- cident which may result in a dangerous and vicious dog determination shall be relinquished to the Animal Control Division of McHerny County for such a determination under the te1ms of Sec­ tion 5, Dangerous and Vicious Animals, of Article XVII, of the McHemy County Animal Con­ trol ordinance.  Guide dogs for the blind and hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped of police owned dogs are exempt from this Section provided such dogs are in com­ pliance with Section 14.07 of this code.



14.9	ANIMALS BITES

Whenever a dog or other animal bites a person, the owner of the animal shall immediately notify the Chief of Police who shall order the animal held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded for a period of two weeks.




Chapter 14, Page 3	9/10/2019
 
The animal shall be examined immediately after it has bitten any person and the animal's owner is known, the Chief shall deliver written notice to the owner who shall give up the animal to the Police Department for confinement or the owner shall confine the animal himself with the written consent of the Police Depmtment.

14.10	DOG LITTER

It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or otherwise having possession or control of a dog to walk said dog in or upon any public way or other public place in the City without having on his person sufficient equipment to remove from the public way or other public place any dog litter which may be deposited by said dog.

It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or otherwise having possession or control of a dog to allow said dog to deposit any litter upon any public way or other public place in the City or upon any private prope1ty not owned by that person unless that person has the permission of the owner of the property or immediately removed said dog litter from the property.

14.11	LIMIT


A.	SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises or pmtion thereof more than four dogs, cats or domestic animals as defined in Section
14.01 herein over four months of age or more than two such animals boarded for compensation or sale. Ifmore than one person resides on any lot or premises or pmtion thereof, then the person who owns, leases, possesses or controls said premises shall be presumed, for purposes of this Chapter 14, to be the keeper of all animals kept thereon, regardless of the legal ownership thereof. However, in no event shall a non-resident owner of property be held liable hereunder, where there is a person on the premises.

B.	MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING: No more than one dog or two other domestic an- imals shall be permitted in a multiple family dwelling unit.

C.	EXCEPTIONS: This Section 14.11 shall not apply to pet shops, zoological parks, per- forming animal exhibitions, educational institutions, veterinmy hospitals or duly organized animal shelters.















Chapter 14, Page 4	911012019
 
CHAPTER 15 TRAFFIC

15.1	Traffic Regulations
15.2	Parallel and Diagonal Parking
15.3	Reserved, Ord. 01-10-04
15.4	Parking Limitations/Prohibitions
15.5	School Parking Areas
15.6	Restricted Parking Areas
15.7	Parking After an Ice Storm or Snowfall
15.8	Parking Places Reserved for Persons With Disabilities
15.9	Restricted Access
15.10	Reclaimed Vehicles, Expenses
15.11	Careless Driving
15.12	One-Way Streets, Alleys
15.13	Snowmobile Routes, Local Regulations
15.14	Truck Routes
15.15	Speed Limits
15.16	Traffic Control Signals
15.17	Jake Brake Use Prohibited
15.18	Yield Intersections
15.19	Stop Intersections
15.20	Vehicles for Sale
15.21	Loading Zone
15.22	Alleys
15.23	Taxicab Stands; Bus Stands
15.24	Time Limit Parking
15.25	No License
15.26	Abandoned Vehicle
15.27	Street Cleaning
15.28	Off-Street Storage of Vehicles
15.29	Outdoor Storage of Recreational Vehicles
15.30	Enforcement Procedure



15.1	TRAFFIC REGULATIONS Amended, 01-7-1

A.	ADOPTION   AND   INCORPORATION   BY   REFERENCE   OF   SPECIFIC CHAPTERS OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE: That pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/20-204 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, the City of Marengo hereby adopts and incorporates by reference all paragraphs and sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code and subsequent amendments (625 ILCS 5/1- 100 et seq.) in whole, as Chapter 15 of its Municipal Code (Marengo Municipal Code, Chapter 15 §§1-100 et seq.). The section numbers used in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be identical to those section numbers in the Marengo Municipal Code except that the Marengo Municipal Code sections shall be preceded by the number “15” in accordance with a directive from the Circuit Clerk of McHenry County.
 

B.	PENALTY: All penalty provisions contained or referred to or incorporated in Section 15.01 are also adopted and incorporated, including but not limited to those contained in the Unified Code of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.), as Chapter 15.907-01 of the Marengo Municipal Code, (Marengo Municipal Code, Chapter 15 pars. 1-100 et seq., 11-100 et seq., 12-100 et seq., 15-100 et seq., 16-101 et seq. and 20.101 et seq.), with the exception of the fine penalties listed for persons found guilty of violating Chapter 15, pars. 11-501(a)(1), 11- 501(a)(2), 11-501(a)(3), 11-501(a)(4) and 6-303(a). Any person found guilty of violating Chapter 15, pars. 11-501(a)(1), 11-501(a)(2), 11-501(a)(3) and 11-501(a)(4) shall be fined not less than
$1,250 nor more than $2,500 for each offense. Any person found guilty of violating Chapter 15, paragraph 6-303(a) shall be fined not less than $300 nor more than $2,500 for each offense. All other penalties listed for violations of these offenses shall be applicable.

C.	APPLICABILITY: The penalty provided by this Section 15.01-C applies to the amendment of any section of this Chapter 15 adopted herein by reference whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance.

D.	REFERENCE TO SECTIONS: Reference to a section of this Chapter 15 shall be understood to also refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.

15.2	PARALLEL AND DIAGONAL PARKING

A.	PARALLEL PARKING ONLY: Parallel parking shall only be permitted along Grant Highway between West Street and Locust Street. Parallel parking shall be permitted along either curb line between Ann Street and State Street, and along the south curb line between Page Street and a point approximately 200 feet west of Page Street.

B.	DIAGONAL PARKING ONLY: Diagonal parking shall only be permitted on the east side of Illinois Route 23 from north of Washington Street to 150 feet north of Prairie Street.

15.3	Reserved, Ord. 01-10-04

15.4	PARKING LIMITATIONS/PROHIBITIONS Amended, 13-7-1, 08-1-2, 04-11-1, 03-1-2, 01-
10-04, 01-8-1

A.	SIGN RESTRICTIONS: No person shall park a vehicle at a prohibited location or for a period of time longer than indicated upon signs posted pursuant to this Section 15.04.

B.	STREET PARKING RESTRICTIONS: Parking on any City street within the Central Business District, as depicted on the current Marengo Zoning Map, between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. is prohibited. Parking on any street outside of the Central Business District between the hours of midnight and 6 a.m. is prohibited.

1.	EXCEPTION: Two parallel parking spaces shall hereby be established at the northwest corner of West Prairie Street and Ford Street. The zone shall
 
commence at the northerly right-of-way of West Prairie Street on the east side of North Ford Street directly in front of 117 and 117½ Ford Street.

C.	MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT RESTRICTIONS: Parking in City owned municipal parking lots is allowed, 24 hours a day (with a permit required between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.) as follows:

1.	In the one westernmost row of parking spaces in Municipal Parking Lot #1 (located immediately west of the Marengo Public Library).

2.	In the entire easternmost row of parking spaces in Municipal Parking Lot
#3, 115 E. Washington Street.

3.	In the northern most row of Parking Lot #2 (located north of the Marengo Police Department and Village Hall).

Permit parking is limited to vehicle owners living in apartments with no parking, as evidenced by their lease agreement. A limit of two permits, per apartment, may be obtained, at no cost, from the City Hall. The following regulations shall also apply to Municipal Parking Lot #2: (1) Vehicles exceeding 10,000 pounds shall not be parked for more than two hours and only for the purpose of delivery, loading or unloading. No tractor-trailer shall be separated from the tractor and parked with the small parking wheels lowered. These restrictions shall not apply to any emergency vehicle including; and (2) Speed shall be restricted to 15 miles per hour.

D.	Without a special permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to congregate or gather with others or to remain in areas designated as municipal parking lots for purposes other than those reasonably related to access to and from vehicles lawfully parked in said municipal parking lots.

E.	As provided herein, no parking shall be allowed on private property without the consent of the owner or in the following locations:

Street/Subdivision	Side(s)	From
Ann Street, South	West	Area in front of the accessibility ramp leading to the sidewalk in front of the First Presbyterian Church
Briden Drive	All	
East Street	East, West	Except between Jackson Street and E. Van Buren Street where posted for Zion Lutheran Church
Ford Street	West	
Commencing  at  the  northerly  ROW  of  West Prairie Street on the west side of Ford Street
Ford Street (south)	West	Grant Highway to W. Washington Street
 

Street/Subdivision	Side(s)	From
Franks Road	East, West	From the (102 block of Franks Road) (North) to
the cul-de-sac and from the cul-de-sac to the 102 block of Franks Road (South) (1,448.3 feet, 0.3 miles)***
Grant Highway (East)	North, South	Within the City except where parking spaces are provided
Grant Highway (West)	
North, South	From State Street to the City limits
Indian Trail Subdivision*	All	
Jackson Street	North	In front of the Zion Lutheran Church doors, 27 feet in length, the midpoint being immediately east of the center of the church doors fronting on Jackson Street
Johnson Street	West	400 block only
Lindow Lane	North,
South	From  Franks  Road  to  the  curve  (200  block)
(East) and from the curve (200 block) (West) to Franks Road (749.6 feet)***
Maple Street	East	Between Grant Highway and Francis Street
O’Connell Drive	All	
Page Street	All	East Prairie Street, East Grant Highway
Park Drive	East	Entire length
Prairie Street, West	North	Ann Street to West Street
Prairie Street, East	All	Taylor Street, Page Street
Prairie Street, East	North	
Taylor Street to the point where curb and gutter end
Prairie Street, West	
southwest corner	Commencing at the southerly ROW of West Prairie Street on the west side of South State Street and extending 33 feet south, being 12 feet in width as measured from the curb.
Prairie Street, west	northwest corner	Commencing at the northerly ROW of West Prairie Street on the west side of North State Street and extending 33 feet north, being 12 feet in width as measured from the curb.
Prospect Street		entire length
 

Street/Subdivision	Side(s)	From
State Street, North	East, West	railroad tracks to northern City limits
State Street, South	East, West	Grant Highway to southern City limits
Telegraph Street	
North, South	From State Street east to the City limits
Washington Street, West	South	Ann Street to West Street
Washington Street, East	All	Taylor Street, Page Street
Washington Street, East	North	Taylor Street to Prospect Street
Washington Street, East		6   parking   spaces   at   intersection   of   Taylor Street**
Washington Street, East		Area in front of the accessibility ramp to the sidewalk in front of the Marengo United Methodist Church
*Except in designated parking spaces.
**One day per week, as designated by the corporate authorities, except for members of the Marengo Senior Citizens Council, or those individuals who are 60 or more years of age.
***School days between 8 a.m. and 3 p.m. Excepted from this parking restriction are construc- tion personnel vehicles and construction equipment. This parking restriction to be reviewed on an annual basis.

15.5	SCHOOL PARKING AREAS Amended. Ord. 02-2-2

Parking and traffic in parking areas of any and all schools for which there is a contract between the school district and City for the regulation of parking and traffic shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this Section 15.05. For the purposes of this Section 15.05, the term “parking areas” shall mean the area or areas of land near or contiguous to said schools and used as a means of access to and egress from the said schools and for the parking of motor vehicles.

No person shall park any vehicle or cause any vehicle to stop or stand in any designated safety zone or fire lane, nor shall any person park any vehicle in any designated loading zone except as provided herein.

No person shall park any vehicle or cause any vehicle to stop or stand in any restricted parking area unless authorized by the School District Board of Education. Parking in said restricted areas shall be limited to vehicles registered with the school authorities, faculty or administration vehicles and non-student vehicles on official school business.
 
No person shall park or abandon any vehicle in a school parking area during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency so as to constitute an obstruction to traffic.

The School District Board of Education shall erect and maintain, in the school parking areas, signs posting speed limits and designating safety zones, loading zones, fire lanes and restricted parking areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to exceed said posted speed limits or to violate the restrictions or prohibitions designated by said signs.

Any person who violates the provisions of this Section 15.05 may be punished by a fine not less than $25 nor more than $50. In addition to said fine, any vehicle parked or abandoned in violation of this Section 15.05 may be removed and stored by the City authorities, and the owner or operator of any vehicle parked or abandoned in violation of this Section 15.05 shall be liable for the payment of reasonable charges for the removal and storage of said vehicle.

15.6	RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS Amended. 14-3-2, 02-2-2

A.	ANN STREET: Except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, parking is prohibited between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. in the following restricted parking zone: 44 feet in length on the west side of Ann Street in the vicinity of the 180-foot sidewalk servicing the First Presbyterian Church so as to allow three parking places in the area north of the no-parking zone and south of the sidewalk on West Washington Street and to allow six parking places south of the no-parking zone and north of Grant Highway, all on the west side of Ann Street.

B.	DIAL-A-RIDE: Parking in the alleyway east of City Hall shall be limited to the Dial-A-Ride vehicle.

C.	POLICE VEHICLES: Directly behind the Police Department.

D.	TRUCK PARKING: Except for Class D vehicles equipped with only front and rear single-wheel single axles, any vehicle displaying an Illinois Class D, F, H. J, K, N, P, R, S, T, V, X or Z license registration plate, or an equivalent if registered in another state or country, shall be prohibited from parking in any residential zoning area except for the purposes of loading or unloading the vehicle.

E.	30-MINUTE PARKING: 30-minute parking shall only be permitted in the three parking spaces on the north side of Washington Street, from the leading dock easement access road east of the parking lot entrance at 131 E. Prairie Street, being approximately 68 feet.

F.	TWO-HOUR PARKING: Unless otherwise posted, two-hour parking shall be permitted in the Central Business District, as defined in Appendix A herein.

G.	One parking space on the south side of East Prairie Street immediately west of the alley in front of 113 East Prairie Street as a fifteen (15) minute parking space.

15.7	PARKING AFTER AN ICE STORM OR SNOWFALL Amended, Ord. 01-10-04
 
A.	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on a public street at any time after an ice storm or two inches or more of snowfall, unless the City has completed its work to cover the street with salt or sand and clear it of snow.

B.	The Police Department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away, any car or other vehicle illegally parked which prevents or obstructs snow removal from public streets.

C.	Cars or vehicles so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a pound designated by the Police Department and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon the payment of all towing and storage fees.

15.8	PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES Amended,
04-11-1

The parking of any motor vehicle not bearing registration plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities, as defined in the Motor Vehicle Code, is prohibited in the following locations:

1.	South Ann Street: on the east side, the fourth parking space south of West Prairie Street.

2.	South Ann Street on the west side south of its intersection with Washington Street, contiguous with the “No Parking Area,” two parking spaces as posted.

3.	East Street: On the west side, contiguous to the no-parking area, two parking spaces as posted.

4.	Jackson Street: On the north side, contiguous to the no-parking area, two parking spaces as posted.

5.	Washington Street on its south side, west of its intersection with Taylor Street, contigu- ous with the “No Parking Area,” two parking spaces as posted.

6.	Municipal Parking Lot #1: two parking spaces as posted.

7.	Municipal Parking Lot #2: one parking space as posted.

8.	Any other parking space properly posted by the City.

15.9	RESTRICTED ACCESS Ord. 06-3-1

Vehicular traffic within the City is restricted as follows:

1.	Southbound vehicular traffic on Ford Street shall only access the westbound land of Grant Highway (U.S. Route 20).

1.	Northbound vehicular traffic on Page Street shall only access the eastbound land of Grant Highway (U.S. Route 20).
 

15.10	RECLAIMED VEHICLES, EXPENSES Amended, 09-5-2

Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/4-207 (Illinois Vehicle Code), any vehicle impounded by the City shall not be released to the owner, lien holder or other person until all towing and storage charges incurred by the City have been paid in full. If the City stores the vehicle on City property, a storage charge shall be paid to the City. The charge for said storage shall be $50 per day.

15.11	CARELESS DRIVING

It shall be unlawful for any person to drive carelessly within the City. For purposes of this Section 15.11, careless driving is failure to maintain a vehicle under control, exceeding the posted speed limit by more than 10 miles per hour and operating a vehicle in any manner other than as permitted by law. Any person who violates any provision of this Section 15.11 may be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000.

15.12	ONE-WAY STREETS, ALLEYS

That the following described streets are hereby designated as a one way street or one-way alley in the City for all vehicles other than postal service vehicles and refuse/recycling/yardwaste collection vehicles in the performance of their regular duties:

Direction	Street

Southbound	Alley from West Prairie Street to West Washington Street Southbound	Alleyway east of City Hall
Northbound	Alley at the end of Dietz Street, running from Grant Street through West Washington Street

Eastbound	Prairie Street, between Ann Street and Taylor Street Westbound	Washington Street, between Taylor Street and Ann Street
15.13	SNOWMOBILE ROUTES, LOCAL REGULATIONS Amended, 01-3-5

A.	LOCAL  REGULATIONS:  It  shall  be  unlawful  for  any  person  to  operate  a snowmobile in the City under the following circumstances:

1.	Upon any sidewalk in the City, except where the tree bank, shoulder or unpaved right-of-way has a natural or hazardous obstruction to the extent of blocking the passage of any snowmobile.

2.	At speeds in excess of 10 miles per hour.
 
3.	Upon any street, except to cross the right-of-way thereof, except where the tree bank, shoulder or unpaved right-of-way has a natural or hazardous ob- struction to the extent of blocking the passage of any snowmobile.

4.	On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas and golf courses, whether public or private, without express written per- mission to do so by the property owner or property authority.

5.	In a manner that creates loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.

B.	PARKING: It shall be unlawful to park any snowmobile on any sidewalk or street within the City, or on the private property of any person, without the express permission of the owner or occupant of any such private property.

C.	UNATTENDED VEHICLES: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or with the keys for starting the vehicle left in the ignition.

D.	SNOWMOBILE ROUTES: The following streets and roads are designated as routes of travel by snowmobiles and provide access into and out of the City; these streets and roads are not to be used for practice or amusement purposes, except to travel between a residence and the nearest designated route for the purpose of driving into or out of the City:

1.	Upon any portion of the City right-of-way within the 35 foot tree bank on the south side of Railroad Street between its intersection with West Street on the east and the City limits on the west.

2.	Upon any portion of the City right-of-way within the eight-foot tree bank on the  west side of West Street between its intersection with Railroad Street on the  north through and including a line drawn parallel with the Railroad Street  right-of-way and located 350 feet south of the southerly line of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad.

15.14	TRUCK ROUTES

The following streets in the City are designated as Class II truck routes and shall comply with the regulations set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code. In addition, all truck traffic shall be restricted for local delivery and pickup only.

STREET	FROM	TO
Business District:
Prairie Street, east	State Street, south	North Taylor Street
Prairie Street, west	State Street, south	Ann Street
 

STREET	FROM	TO
Washington Street, east	State Street, south	North Taylor Street
Washington Street, west	State Street, south	Ann Street
Residential District:
Ann Street	West Grant Street, north	West Prairie Street
East Street	East Grant Street, north	136 N. East Street
Greenlee Street		Grace Street
Maple Street		Randall Court
Prairie Street, west	West Street, east	Sponable Street
Prospect Street	East Grant St., north	Telegraph Street
Railroad Street	Page Street, west	1,000 feet west of West Street
Sponable Street	West Prairie Street, north	Chicago	&	Northwestern Railroad crossing
Taylor Street	East Grant Highway, north	Railroad Street
West Street	Railroad Street	West Grant Street

15.15	SPEED LIMITS Amended, 04-5-4

A.	SPEED LIMITS: The following speed limits shall be observed on the designated roadways within the City:

5 miles per hour

All alleys within the City.

10 miles per hour

Indian Oaks Park

20 miles per hour (School Zone Only)

State Street from Grant Highway to Railroad Street All posted school zones

25 miles per hour

All residential areas unless otherwise posted.
Maple Street from Grant Highway south to James Court
 
Prospect Street from Grant Highway north to the Chicago and Northwestern Railway railroad crossing

30 miles per hour

Grant Highway from the 900 block on East Grant Highway to the 2100 block on West Grant Highway
Prospect Street from Telegraph Street south to the Chicago and Northwestern Railway railroad crossing
Railroad Street from State Street to West Street
State Street from Grant Highway south to Forest Street State Street from Railroad Street north to Telegraph Street

35 miles per hour

Grant Highway from the 900 block of East Grant Highway to the 19900 block of East Grant Highway
James Court to Bauman Street
Maple Street from James Court south to Bauman Street State Street from Forrest Street south to South Street
State Street from Telegraph Street north to the City sanitary sewer treatment plant Telegraph Street from State Street east to Grace Street

40 miles per hour

Grant Highway from the 2100 block west to the western City limits

45 miles per hour

Grant Highway from the 19900 block east to the 19600 block Maple Street from Bauman Street south to the southern City limits State Street from South Street to the southern City limits Telegraph Street from Grace Street east to the eastern City limits

55 miles per hour

Deerpass Road
Grant Highway from the 19600 block east to the eastern City limits

B.	PENALTY:  The  penalty  for  any  violation  of  this  Section  15.15  shall  be  in accordance with Section 15.01, Traffic Regulations, of the Code.

15.16	TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS
 
Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-304, traffic control signals are hereby designated at the following intersections in the City. Stop signs may be employed at such times when said traffic control signals are not in working order.

State Street and the Grant Highway intersection; State Street and the Telegraph Street intersection

15.17	COMPRESSION/RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE USE PROHIBITED

No person shall operate or cause to be used or operated within the City any compression/release engine brake on any vehicle for any reason. For purposes of this Section 15.17, compres- sion/release engine brake is defined as any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle by converting engine power to compressed air which results in excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle, or otherwise known as jake-braking.

15.18	YIELD INTERSECTIONS

Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-304, yield signs are hereby designated at the following intersections in the City:

TRAFFIC ON	YIELDS AT
Barbara Court, eastbound                               Dietz Street

15.19	STOP INTERSECTIONS Amended, 12-9-1, 08-9-2, 04-8-2, 01-6-4

Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-302, stop signs are hereby designated at the following intersections in the City:

Traffic On	Stops At:	Traffic On
Center Drive	Stops At:
Telegraph Street
One-Way Stop:
Adams Street	
State Street	Chapel Street
Cherokee Trail	Ann Street
Seneca Trail
Adams Street	Taylor Street	Cherokee Trail	Tioga Trail
(S) Ann Street (W)	Forest Street	Doral Drive	Lura Lane
(S) Ann Street (W)	Prairie Street	Doral Drive	Maple Street
Ann Street	Van Buren Street	Doral Drive	Spring Drive
Autumn Court	Maple Street	Dietz Street	Grant Highway
Bauman Street	Maple Street	Doral Drive	Lura Lane
Briden Drive	Meyer Road	Doral Drive	Maple Street
Briden Drive	Park Drive	Doral Drive	Spring Drive
Briden Drive	Seneca Trail	Dunham Court	Georgeann Court
Circle Court	State Street	Dunham Court	Randall Court
Caroline Street	Locust Street	East Street	Telegraph Street
Caroline Street	Maple Street	Eighth Avenue	(N) State Street
Center Drive	Deerpass Road	Eisenhower Drive	Briden Drive
 
Eisenhower Drive	Keppler Drive Elm Street	(E) Forest Street
Elm Street	(E) Grant Highway
Fifth Avenue	(N) State Street
First Avenue	(N) State Street
First Avenue	Taylor Street
(S) Ford Street	Grant Highway
Ford Street	Railroad Street
Ford Street	Van Buren Street
(E) Forest Street	Maple Street
(E) Forest Street	(S) State Street
(W) Forest Street	Park Drive
(W) Forest Street	Stanford Street
(W) Forest Street	(S) State Street Forth Avenue	(N) State Street
Foxglove	Buttonwood Court
Francis Street	Locust Street
Francis Street	Maple Street
Grace Court	Spring Drive
Hale Street	Eighth Street
Hale Street	Railroad Street
Hayden Drive	Mayer Road
Hayden Drive	Seneca Trail
Jackson Street	Grace Street
Jackson Street	State Street Jacquelyn Court	South Street James Court	Dunham Court
James Court	Maple Street
Johnson Street	Briden Drive
Joy Court	Courtney Drive
Kennedy Drive	Briden Drive
Kent Drive	Dietz Street
Keppler Drive	Park Drive
Kermin Court	Spring Drive Kishwaukee Street	Fifth Avenue Kishwaukee Street	Telegraph Street Linda Court	Courtney Lane
Lura Lane    Spring Drive LynnAnn Court Spring Drive Majic Way                  Spring Drive
Maple Street	(E) Grant Highway
Mary Court	Riley Drive
Mohawk Trail	Seneca Trail
Mohawk Trail	Tioga Trail
Navajo Trail	Seneca Trail
Navajo Trail	Tioga Trail
 
Oak Manor Drive	(W) Forest Street Oak Manor Drive	State Street
Page Street	Eighth Avenue
Page Street	Jackson Street
Pawnee Trail	Navajo Trail
Pawnee Trail	Seneca Trail
Park Drive	(W) Grant Highway
(W) Prairie Street	State Street
(W) Prairie Street	West Street Rainbow Drive	Telegraph Street Randall Court	Maple Street
Ridge Drive	Lura Lane
Ridge Drive	Spring Drive
Riley Drive	Randall Court Rowland Court	Grant Highway Royal Oak Drive	Oak Manor Drive,
north intersection Royal Oak Drive	Oak Manor Drive,
south intersection
Ruth Court	Ridge Drive
Sara Lane	Spring Drive Second Avenue	(N) State Street Seventh Avenue	East Street Seventh Avenue	East Street Seventh Circle	Eighth Avenue
Seventh Circle	East Street Sponable Street	(W) Washington
Street Spring Drive
northbound	Doral Drive Sixth Avenue	(N) State Street
South Street	State Street
Taylor Street	(E) Grant Highway
Taylor Street	Eighth Street
Third Avenue	(N) State Street
(W) Washington St.	(N) Ann Street
(W) Washington St.	(S) Ann Street
(W) Washington St.	State Street
(W) Washington St.	West Street West Street	Grant Highway
West Street	(W) Railroad Street
Willow Drive	Van Buren Street

Two-Way Stops:
(S) Ann Street	Grant Highway
(S) Ann Street (W)	Washington Street
 

Chapel Street Chestnut Lane Clark Street Cottonwood Lane East Street
Fifth Avenue Fifth Avenue Fifth Avenue First Avenue First Avenue First Avenue Ford Street
(W) Forest Street Forth Avenue	Dietz Street Cottonwood Lane
(E) Washington Street Buttonwood Court Jackson Street
Hale Street Page Street
(N) Taylor Street East Street Kishwaukee Street Page Street
(W) Prairie Street Dietz Street
East Street	South Street Taylor Street Taylor Street Third Avenue Third Avenue Third Avenue Third Avenue
(E) Van Buren Street
(E) Van Buren Street
(E) Van Buren Street
(E) Washington St.
(W) Washington St.

Four-Way Stops:	Dietz Street
(E) Prairie Street Telegraph Street East Street
Hale Street Page Street Taylor Street East Street Page Street Taylor Street East Street Ford Street
Forth Avenue	Page Street	Cottonwood Lane	Walnut Lane
Forth Avenue	Taylor Street	Cottonwood Lane	Woodland Lane
Greenlee Street	Prospect Street	Courtney Lane	Spring Drive
Hale Street	Adams Street	East Street	Fifth Avenue
Hale Street	Jackson Street	East Street	Second Avenue
Hale Street	Telegraph Street	Fifth Avenue	East Street
Hale Street	Van Buren Street	Fifth Avenue	Hale Street
Jackson Street	East Street	Fifth Avenue	Page Street
Jackson Street	State Street	Fifth Avenue	Taylor Street
Locust Street	(E) Grant Highway	Fourth Avenue	Kishwaukee Street
Locust Street	(E) Washington Street	Hale Street	Fifth Avenue
Navajo Trail
Page Street	Pawnee Trail
Telegraph Street	Hale Street
Jackson Street	Second Avenue
Taylor Street
(S) Page Street	Grant Highway	Kishwaukee Street	Forth Avenue
(S) Page Street	(E) Washington Street	Kishwaukee Street	Second Avenue
(E) Prairie Street	East Street	Page Street	Fifth Avenue
(E) Prairie Street	Taylor Street	Page Street	Second Avenue
(W) Prairie Street	Sponable Street	(E) Prairie Street	East Street
Prospect Street	Telegraph Street	Second Avenue	Taylor Street
Railroad Street	State Street	Second Avenue	East Street
Railroad Street	Taylor Street	Second Avenue	Hale Street
Riley Drive	Georgeann Court	Second Avenue	Kishwaukee Street
Seventh Avenue	Hale Street	Second Avenue	Page Street
Seventh Avenue	Page Street	Taylor Street	Fifth Avenue
Seventh Avenue	Taylor Street	Taylor Street	Jackson Street
Sixth Avenue	East Street	Taylor Street	Second Avenue
Sixth Avenue	Hale Street	Walnut Lane	Cottonwood Lane
Sixth Avenue	Page Street	Woodland Lane	Cottonwood Lane
Sixth Avenue	Taylor Street		

15.20	VEHICLES FOR SALE
 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any public right of way for the purpose of displaying it for sale.

15.21	LOADING ZONE

It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed 30 minutes, in any place designat- ed by the City Council as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following designated places:

1.	At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.

2.	At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance to a public building between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m., except on Sunday.

3.	Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater is open for business.

15.22	ALLEYS

No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.

15.23	TAXICAB STANDS; BUS STANDS

No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a taxicab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.

15.24	TIME LIMIT PARKING Amended, 02-2-2

Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated between in any area designated as a limited parking area and so marked, or as restricted by ordinance or statute.

15.25	NO LICENSE

No vehicle without a current state license shall be allowed to be parked on City streets, and the City police are authorized to tow away and place in storage any vehicle found to violate this Chapter 15.
 
15.26	ABANDONED VEHICLE Amended, 01-10-04

Any vehicle parked on any City street or municipal parking lot for seven consecutive days without being moved shall be deemed abandoned and shall be towed away and placed in storage, at the owner’s cost, by the City police.

15.27	STREET CLEANING

It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion thereof in the City at any time when the street is being cleaned or snow removed. Signs indicating cleaning or snow removal shall be posted before the work is done.

15.28	OFF-STREET STORAGE OF VEHICLES Amended, 03-1-2, 02-2-2, 01-10-05

The following standards and regulations shall apply to the storage of vehicles in parking lots and parking areas on a lot in a residential zoning district:

1.	STORAGE DEFINED: For purposes of this paragraph, the terms “storage” or “stored” shall mean the parking of a vehicle for a continuous period of longer than 72 hours.

2.	SURFACE: No motorized vehicle or unmotorized trailers shall be stored on any lot except  on a surface constructed with concrete, asphalt or patio blocks. The width and length of the improved surface shall be at least the same dimensions of the body of the vehicle or trailer. The only exception to this rule shall apply to lots within a designated flood plain wherein the owner has received written correspondence from the federal gov- ernment to the effect that a hard surface such as required herein is not permitted.

3.	PERMANENT LOCATION PROHIBITED: No stored vehicle shall have its wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent its ready removal.

4.	RESIDENTIAL USE PROHIBITED: No vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes on any lot for more than 10 days in any given calendar year. Any time a vehicle is connected to any public utility, there will be a presumption that such ve- hicle is being used for residential purposes.

5.	UNLICENCED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES: No vehicle without current license nor any vehicle incapable of being driven or used for the purpose or use for which it was designed shall be stored in any parking lot or parking area on any lot in a residential zon- ing district.

6.	OUTDOOR   STORAGE   OF   RECREATIONAL   VEHICLES:   Outdoor   storage   of
recreational vehicles is permitted only to the extent that such vehicles are stored in a safe and orderly manner in a compact and contiguous area not to exceed 180 square feet lo- cated behind the sidewalk. No single recreational vehicle shall exceed 180 square feet for storage. For purposes of this Section 15.29, a boat upon a trailer shall be considered a single vehicle.
 

15.29	OUTDOOR STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES

Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles is permitted only to the extent that such vehicles are stored in a safe and orderly manner in a compact and contiguous area not to exceed 180 square feet located behind the front building setback line. For purposes of this Section 15.30, a boat upon a trailer shall be considered a single vehicle.

15.30	ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE Amended, 01-10-6

A.	Upon determining that a vehicle has been stored in violation of this Chapter 15, the Police Department, by and through its personnel, shall give the person, firm or corporation owning, leasing or occupying the property notice by placing written notice on the windshield of the improperly stored vehicle that the person, firm or corporation shall have 24 hours from the date of notice to remove the vehicle from the property. Thereafter the police department may cause the vehicle to be towed at the owner’s expense. In the event the owner fails to comply with said notice, the owner shall be liable for penalties hereinafter provided.

B.	PENALTIES: Any person storing a vehicle in violation of this Chapter 15 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each day that a violation exists plus the City’s cost of prosecution, including attorney’s fees, and, if applicable, towing and storage charges.
 
CHAPTER16
SIGN CODE



16.1	Purpose and Intent
16.2	Definitions
16.3	General Provisions
16.4	Removal of Certain Signs
16.5	Non-Conforming Signs
16.6	Prohibited Signs
16.7	Permitted Signs Allowed Without a Permit
16.8	Calculation of Sign Area Allowance
16.9	Temporary Signs
16.l 0	Permitted Signs
16.11	Overlay District
16.12	Structural Maintenance and Requirements
16.13	Administration and Enforcement


16.1	PURPOSE AND INTENT

The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a framework for regulating a system of street graphics, thereby promoting pleasant communication  between people and our environment.  It is the intent of this Chapter to assist in achieving the following objectives:

1.	To foster high quality commercial  and industrial development and to enhance  the economic vitality of existing businesses/industries by promoting  the reasonable, orderly and effective display of street graphics;

2.	To  encourage  sound  street  graphics  display  practice  and  to  mitigate  the  objectionable effects of competition in respect to the size and placement of street graphics;

3.	To protect pedestrian  and motorists from any damage or injury that might result from the
improper construction, placement and use of street graphics;


4.	To protect the public investment in streets and highways by reducing the obstructions and distractions, which may cause traffic accidents;

5.	To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of street graphics
with nearby land uses;

6.	Ensuring signs are appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain ; and


7.	Guide development to reinforce distinct district s.


16.2	DEFINITIONS
 
In addition to those definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, for the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meanmg .

Abandoned sign : A sign structure that has ceased to be used and the owner no longer intends to
use for the display of sign copy, or as otherwise defined by state law.

Animated sign: A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion .


Architectural projection: Any projection that is not intended for occupancy and that  extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but that does not include signs as defined herein.
(e.g. awning, canopy, cornice).


Awning: An architectural projection made of cloth, metal or other material attached to a building when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use.

Awning sign: A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces of an awning.


Backlit awning: An awning with a translucent covering material and source of illumination contained within its framework.

Backlit sign: A sign with opaque painted, raised letters lit by an electric lamp or lamps from behind the sign to create a silhouette effect.


Banner: A temporary sign of lightweight fabric or non-rigid material with or without enclosing framework, a flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges.

Billboard sign: Any general outdoor advertising sign, which is designed to advertise or direct attention to a business or activity conducted or a product , commodity, service, real property , entertainment, or facilities offered or sold elsewhere to where it is affixed,  or which  directs persons to a location different from where the sign is installed.

Blight: A severely spoiled or ruined state, especialJy of an urban area


Building: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels; and when separated by division walls from the ground up and without opening, each portion of such building shall be deemed as a separate building.

Building front: That portion of a building where the primary entrance is located . Where more than one primary entrance is provided , the building front shalJ be that portion of the building facing toward the street to which the legal address has been assigned. Comer lots shall have only one building front. For the purpose of this definition, the terms "building front" and "building
 
fa9ade" shall be deemed synonymous.

Building elevation: The entire side of a building, from the ground level to the roofline, as viewed
perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.

Building marker: A sign indicating the name of the building and date of erection, or historic data or information, when cut or etched into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other materials approved by Chapter 24, Building Code, of the Marengo Municipal Code, and mounted on the building.

Canopy (attached): A multisided overhead structure or architectural projection supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may be illuminated by means of an internal or external source of light . See also "marquee."

Canopy (freestanding): A multisided overhead  structure supported by columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and/or soffits of an attached canopy may be illunUnated by means of an internal or external source of light.
Canopy sign: A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or free-standing canopy. Changeable  sign: A sign with the capability of content  change by means of manual  or remote
input, including signs which are:


1.	Electrically activated: Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display. See also "electronic message sign or center."

2.	Manually  activated : Changeable  sign  whose  message  copy  or  content  can  be  changed
manually .


Chapter : Chapter 16, Sign Code, of the Marengo Municipal Code.


Code Official: Enforcement officer named as Building Commissioner, Building Inspector and/or Zoning AdnUnistrator.

Column: An upright support shaped like a long cylinder.


Construction sign: A temporary sign identifying an architect, engineer, contractor, subcontractor, and/or supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located.
 
Copy: Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements comprising  the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals identifying the street address only

Directional sign: Any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of providing direction,
instructions, and/or facility orientation for pedestrian and vehicular traffic .

Double-faced sign: A sign with two faces, back to back.

Electrical sign: A sign or sign structure in which directional electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used .

Electronic message sign or center: An electrically activated changeable sign whose message changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means or whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed . This shall not include areas of signs which indicate time and temperature.

Exterior sign: Any sign placed outside a building.

Externally illuminated sign: A sign illuminated by a source of light which is cast upon the
surface of the sign to illuminate by reflection of that light.

Face of sign: The surface of the sign, upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.

Facade: The front or main face of a building; the side of a building, the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view .

Flag: A piece of fabric, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a
symbol of a government, religious or political subdivision.


Flashing sign: A sign in which the illumination intermittently flashes off and on in whole or in part used primarily to attract attention.

Foot candle: A unit of measure for  luminance. A unit of luminance on a surface  that is everywhere one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot.

Freestanding sign: A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to the ground , and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground .

Frontage (building): The length of an exterior building wall or structure of a single premise oriented to the pub lie way or other properties that it faces. (The length of the property line of any one lot along a public right-of-way which it borders.)
 
Frontage (property): The length of the property line(s) of any single premise along either a public way or other properties on which it borders . (The length of an outside wall that is adjacent to a street.)

Frontage (tenant): In a multiple unit building, that portion of the building frontage that is the length of a unit for occupancy by an individual tenant or owner. The tenant frontage is measured from the center line of the tenant separation wall to the center line of the tenant separation wall; in the event the wall is an outside wall, it is measured from the outside of the outside wall to the center of the tenant separation partition .

Government sign: A temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the City, county, state, federal government or political subdivision for traffic direction or other municipal signs; legal notices; railroad crossing signs; danger or other temporary emergency or non-advertising signs; or for designation to any school, hospital, historic site, public service, property or facility.

Ground sign: A sign supported by two or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground surface.


Height (of a sign): The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including decorative embellishments to the natural surface grade beneath the sign, excluding berms, planter boxes, etc.

Historic sign: Any sign that is historic in nature or historically established for use in relationship to a structure that is exactly or reasonably preserved or restored to the condition of its original historic period .

Illegal sign: A sign that does not meet the requirements ofthis Chapter.


Illuminated sign: A sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projecting through its
surface(s) or reflecting off its surface(s).


1.		Exposed bulbs and neon : A sign that is lighted by a direct external artificial light source that is integral to the sign, such as neon tubes or light bulbs mounted on the face of the sign.

2.	External: A sign which  is lighted by an artificial light source which is not incorporated within the sign, such as flood lights or spot lights.

3.	Internal: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated within the sign for the purpose
of lighting the sign.


Incombustible material: Any material which will  not ignite at or below a temperature of 1200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to bum or glow at that temperature .

Institutional  sign: A sign which identifies a public or private organizational, educational or
public health or safety institution.
 

Interior sign: Any sign placed within a building, and is readjly visible from the exterior.


Lot: The word lot when used alone shall mean a zoning lot.

Maintain or repair: The replacement  of existing work with equivalent  mat erials for the purpose of its maintenance, including but not limited to cleaning, painting, repair or replacement of defective parts of a sign; but not including any addition, change or modification in construction from the original permit approval.

Mansard   sign:  A  wall   sign  erected   on  a  sloped   roof   or  roof-like   favade  architecturally
comparable to a building wall.

Marquee: Any hood of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building but not supported by the ground or sidewalk serving the purpose of providing shelter and protection from the weather.

Marquee sign: A sign attached to, hung from or supported by a marquee .


MHPC: Marengo Historic Preservation Committee.

Monument sign: A ground mounted sign, completely or principally self supported by a monument base that is wide, low to the ground and incorporates architectural detailing/merit to the overall.

Moving sign: Any sign which rotates or moves or gives the visual impression  of rotation or
movement.


Multiple faced sign: A sign containing three or more faces.


Multiple-tenant building: A building developed under one ownership, containing two or more individual businesses .

Nameplates: A non-electric  on-premises identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation  of an occupant or group of occupants.

Neon sign: A sign made of glass tubing, which is electrified to cause fluorescent agents to glow in
various colors.


Non-illuminated sign: A sign having no illumination .


Occupancy: The portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented or otherwise occupied
for a given use.


Off-premises sign: A sign which directs attention to a use, business, commodity,  service or
 
activity not conducted , sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located .


On premise sign: A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed.

Owner: A person recorded as such on official records.


Painted wall sign: A sign which is directly applied with paint or similar substance on any portion of an exterior building wall, fascia, parapet , chimney, on a fence or fence type wall, retainin g wall, bench, fence post, refuse enclosure, utility box, storage shed, bus shelter, satellite dish, antenna or other accessory structure, except wall signs regulated herein .

Parapet: The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.


Pennant:  A temporary  sign of lightweight  plastic, fabric or other  material, whether  or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string.


Permanent sign: A sign or sign structure which is directly affixed to the ground surface or any part of a building or structure.

Pole sign: A sign supported by one upright or brace in or upon the ground surface.


Political sign: A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement, cause or candidate for office and also known as a campaign or election sign. A legally permitted outdoor advertising sign shall not be considered to be a political sign.

Portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a building or building surface. Usually of a temporary nature, designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed, including but not limited to: signs to be transported by means of wheels menu and sandwich boards signs, umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles or trailers located for the primary purpose of displaying said signs, unless the vehicles are used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business .

Post sign: A sign supported by one upright or brace in or upon the ground surface.


Projecting sign: A sign supported by a building or other structure which projects over any street, sidewalk, alley or public way or public easement, structure or supporting wall. A sign that is affixed perpendicular to a building in such a manner that its leading edge extends  more than twelve inches beyond the line of such building or beyond the lot line.

Public right-of-way: Land either owned by or prescribed to the municipality that is used for public purposes, such as streets, sidewalks, utilities or green space. A right-of-way includes all land and improvements located within the property lines of said right-of-way.
 
Public sign: Any infonnationa1 sign which is owned or maintained by a local, regional , state or
federal government.

Pylon sign: A ta11 vertical structure on or forming part of a sign. Pylons are not poles, posts or cylindrical in shape.

Real estate sign: A temporary sign erected for purpose of advertising the sa1e, rental or lease of
the premise or property upon which it is located.


Revolving sign: A sign that revolves 360 degrees about an axis.


Roof line: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections .

Roof sign: A sign erected, constructed or maintained in whole or in part upon or over the roof of a building or structure.


Setback: The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the  applicable  building, structure or sign, measured perpendicularly  to the property line.

Sign: Any device visible from a public place that displays either commercial or non-commercial messages by means of graphic presentations of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations.

Sign area: The area of the  smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the combination  of regular
geometric figures, which comprise the sign face.


Sign copy: Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of numerals identifying a street address only.

Sign face: The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural features of a building or  sign  structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.

Sign structure: Any structure supporting a sign.


Subdivision sign: A sign identifying a recognized subdivision, complex or  residential development.

Temporary sign: A sign intended to display either commercia1 or non-commercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable signs or any sign not pennanently embedded  in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is embedded into the ground, are considered temporary  signs.

Vehicle  sign: Any advertising  or business  sign attached to a motor vehicle which  is parked  or
 
placed in position for the purpose of displaying the same to the public.

Wall sign: A sign mounted, attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a building or structure
in a plane parallel to that of the supporting wall.

Window sign: A sign visible from the exterior of a building or structure which is painted on a window; depicted upon a card, paper or other material; or placed on, taped on or hung immediately behind the window; or displayed from a window for the specific purpose of attracting attention of the passerby to a sale or to promotional items or other products or services.

16.3	GENERAL  PROVISIONS

A.	PERMIT REQUIRED : It shall be unlawful for any person  to erect, alter, construct, enlarge or relocate within the City any sign or other advertising structure, as defined in this Chapter, without first obtaining a permit from the Building Department and paying the permit fee pursuant to Exhibit A of Chapter 24 of the Marengo Municipal Code.

B.	PERMIT APPLICATION : Applications  for  the  erection, alteration  or relocation of a sign shall be made to the Building Department upon a form provided by the Building Department and shall include the following information:

1.	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;


2.	Type of sign or sign structure as defined in this Chapter;


3.	A site elevation plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with the locations and square footage area of all existing signs on the lot or building(s);

4.	Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected;

5.	Position of the sign or advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings,
structures or other signs;


6.	Two-color elevation drawings, shown to scale, of the plans and/or specifications, materials, design, dimensions, structural support, methods of construction and attachment to the building, other structures or in  the ground ;

7.	If required by the  Building Department, a copy of  stress  sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for the dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter, City codes and ordinances;
 
8.	Name of person erecting the sign or other advertising structure, as defined herein;

9.	Name  and  address  and  written  consent  of  the  owners  of  the building, structure  or  land  to  which  or  on  which  the  sign  or  other  advertising structure is to be erected;

10.	Electrical specifications pertaining to the sign and wiring diagrams from the
building, structure of which will illuminate or power the sign; and

11.	Any other provisions the Building Department shall require showing full compliance with this Chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances in effect.

C. LANDSCAPING : All signs  affixed  to  the   ground  shall  be  landscaped  m accordance with this Chapter and Section 21.13 of the Marengo Municipal Code.

D.	MAINTENANCE: All signs and advertising devices shall be reasonably maintained in a clean, presentable and safe condition. All signs shall be inspected annually to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.

E.	WINDOWS : Signs displayed in windows, whether temporary or permanent , shall
cover no more than 30 percent of the square footage of the window pane surface.


F.	WINDOWS: In no case shall windows be covered with plastic sheeting, paper or any other material that would obstruct the view through the window and cause blight to the building. In the case of construction and remodeling, the applicant may request written approval by the Code Official prior to installing such window coverings. Pull down window shading and tinting are not subject to this Section 16.03-F.

G.	CLEARANCE: Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and non-interference with all  surface and underground facilities and conduits for water, sewer, gas, electricity or communication equipment of lines. Furthermore, sign placement shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainage of surface or underground water .

H.	EASEMENTS: New signs shall not be placed on or over any easement unless the
easement is designated for the placement of signs.


I.	SIGN CONTENT: The advertisement contained on any sign, except for temporary signs of a civic, political or religiou s nature, shall pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which said sign is located.

J.	GLASS: Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass. In the case the
glass area exceeds three square feet, wire glass shall be used .
 
L.	ILLUMINATION:  Illumination  of any sign shalJ not exceed 75 foot  candles and
shall comply with the City's electrical code.

M.	NEON SIGNS: Interior neon signs shall be restricted to one per window pane. Not more than 30 percent of window shall be covered. The outer dimensions of the sign will be used to calculate the area of the neon sign.

N.	SUPPORTS: New sign supports, such as posts, poles, pylons, uprights, braces, standard, etc., designed to raise the surface of the sign face above the ground, shall not be visible . They shall be enclosed in a material( s) which incorporates an architectural feature of the building and is similar in color to the building.

0.       OBSTRUCTIONS : No sign or other street graphics shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that it interferes with, obstructs the view of or is likely to be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no street graphic shall contain the words "stop," "go," "caution," "danger," "warning" or other similar words.

P.    LUMBER: Pressure treated lumber shall not be utilized as a finish product for any type of permitted sign.

16.4	REMOVAL OF CERTAIN SIGNS

A      Any sign which js located on any property or. a building or portion thereof within the City which becomes vacant and unoccupied shaJJ be removed within 30 days by the owner, agent or persons having the beneficial use of the property, building or structure upon which such sign may be found.

B.      Any sign and its associated  structure not used for a period of three months,  or if the business so advertised is closed or otherwise abandoned for a period of three months, shall be removed and may not be erected or re-established unless in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.

C. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management may be granted a 30-day extension by the Code Official after a written application has been submitted and reviewed .

D. Ifthe Code Official finds that any sign or other advertising structure is abandoned, unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been erected, or is being maintained in violation of this Chapter, he/she shall send written notice via certified mail to the permittee or owner thereof seeking compliance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter. Ifthe permittee or owner fails to repair, maintain, alter or remove the sign structure, so as to comply with the requirements herein set forth, within a specified one-day or no more than 20 days after receipt of such notice, such sign or advertising structure may be removed by the Code Official at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon wruch it is located . The Code Official may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or
 
property, to be removed summarily and without notice.  The cost of such removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of such sign. Payment shall be due within 30 days or a lien shall be made against the propert y.

16.5	NON-CONFORMING SIGNS

A Signs existing on the effective date of this Chapter (August 25, 2006) and not conforming to its provisions but which were constructed in compliance with previous City ordinances shall be regarded as non-conforming signs. A non-conforming sign shall not be:

1.	Changed to another non-confonning sign;

2.	Structurally altered as to prolong the life of the sign;


3 .	Expanded ;


4.	Re-established after its discontinuance for a period of 30 days;


5.	Removed  and replaced, or moved in whole or in part to another location, unless the sign and the use thereof, are in conformance with this Chapter;

6.	Re-faced or had the copy changed ;


7.	Re-established after damage or destruction by means, including an act of God, exceeding 50 percent of the estimated value of the sign. For the purpose of establishing a value, all signs will be deemed to have a cost vaJue of $1,000.00 unless a bill of sale, tax return or a written appraisal by a sign manufacture can prove the value; nor


8.	A continued use with a change of business ownership or business lessee for
more than 30 days.


B. No such repair, replacement  or alteration shall be made to a non-conforming sign unless such repair, replacement or alteration will create a sign that conforms to the provisions of this Chapter. Minor maintenance such as bulb replacement and painting is allowed .

16.6	PROHIBITED SIGNS


The following signs are strictly prohibited everywhere within the City Wlless the sign was previously permitted by the issuance of a City permit. If the sign was permitted under a previous permit and not currently in compliance with this Chapter, it must comply with the provisions set forth in Section 16.05 Non-Conforming Signs, and, if applicable, the provisions of Section 16. 11, Overlay District .

1.       Mobile, movable and portable signs not affixed to the ground (e.g. flashing arrow signs);
 

2.	Pennants, flags (other than those described in Section 16.07), streamers, ribbons, strings of lights (except as defined herein), spinners and other similar signs used as attention getters;

3.	Signs attached to trees, fences or public utility poles, other than warning signs used by public utilities and entities;

4.	Signs placed in any public right-of-way,  other than warning signs used by public utilities
and entities;

5.	Defunct signs, including the support structure(s) that advertise or identify an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted  on the premise where such sign is located;

6.	Roof-mounted  signs;


7.	Billboards;

8.	Pole signs;

9.	Off-premise business signs with the exception of recreational sporting areas;


10.	Off-premise real estate signs;

11.	Projecting signs (except as permitted herein);

12.	Abandoned signs;


13.	Animated signs;


14.	Signs placed or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked and visible from the public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business activity located on the same nearby property . However, this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed on, or affixed to, vehicles and trailers, such as permanent lettering on motor vehicles where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer;

15.	Signs which contain characters, cartoons, statements, works or pictures of an obscene, indecent, prurient or immoral character;

16.	Illuminated signs in residential zoning districts (excluding the R-3 Single Family Zoning District);

17.	Moving or rotating signs;
 

18.	Folding and collapsible sign (sandwich boards); and

19.	Portable signs.

16.7	PERMITTED  SIGNS ALLOWED  WITHOUT A PERMIT

The following signs may be erected within the City without obtaining a building permit , provided they comply with the provisions set forth herein. The area of said signs shall not be debited against the displaying establishments sign area allowance.

1.	Construction signs identifying the architect, engineers, developers, realtor, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction , and/or announcing the character or purpose of the building, but not advertising any product or continued leasing. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall be confined to the site of the construction and shall be removed once the first occupancy certificate is issued.

2.	Directional and informational signs erected for the convenience of the public and signs identifying entrances, exits, parking areas, no-parking areas, restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features or facilities. Such signs are limited to two and shall not exceed three square feet in area.

3.	Special event signs when approved by the City Council. Special event signs shall be subject to the provisions for temporary signs.

4.	Garage sale signs advertising a garage or yard sale on private residential property. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area, shall be confined to the premises on which the sale is conducted and shall not be posted more than three days.

5.	Governmental  public  signs,  such  as traffic  control  signs, railroad  crossing  signs, legal
notices, public safety signs and signs indicating the location of underground cables, etc.

6.	Holiday decorations such as Christmas lights and ornaments, or special events such as birthdays, provided such decorations are removed within a reasonable  time  after the special event or holiday.

7.	House  numbers  and/or  name  or  occupant  signs located  on  the  lot  to  which  the  sign pertains. Such signs shall not exceed three square feet in area for a single family dwelling nor six square feet for multiple family dwellings.

8.	Institutional signs for public, charitable or religious institutions . Such signs shall be located on the premises of the institution, shall not obstruct the vision of motorists and shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.

9.	Integral  signs carved  into stone or inlaid  so as to become part  of the building and
 
memoriaJ tributes.

10.	Signs  communicating  the  history  of  the  property  such  as historic  markers  or  plaques
affixed to buildings. Such signs shall not exceed five square feet.

11.	Interior signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of buildings , provided such signs are not visible from the exterior of the building.

12.	Property regulation  signs such as no trespassing, no hunting and no fishing. Such signs shall not exceed three square feet.

13.	Public interest signs publicizing a charitable or non-profit event of general public interest .
Such signs shall only be erected upon private property.  In any residential zoning district, such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area; elsewhere, such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Public interest signs shaJI be permitted only for 14 days before and seven days after such event.

14.	Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they are located. Such signs on residential property shaJl not exceed four square feet in area. On other property, such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area. Not more than one real estate sign per street front shall be erected on any one zoning lot. Such signs shaJJ be removed within 24 hours after the sale, rental or lease.

15.	Flags, consisting of not more than one each of the United States flag, state flag, municipal flag and/or corporate flag, provided that the flagpole for any such flag shall not exceed 30 feet in height, including the height of any such structure which it is mounted. The length of any such flag shall not exceed one-third of the height of the flag pole (including the height of any structure which it is mounted) to which it is attached.

16.	Door labeling with applicable logos.


16.8	CALCULATION OF SIGN AREA

A      CALCULATION  OF SIGN AREA: The calculation of sign area for every sign
shall be calculated as follows:

1.	If a sign is enclosed by a box or outline, the total area, including the background and including that outline, shall be deemed the sign area;

2.	If a sign consists of individual letters, parts or symbols, the area of the one imaginary square or rectangle that would completely enclose all letters, parts or symbols shall be deemed the sign area; and

3.	In calculating the sign area, only one side of any double-faced sign shall be
 
counted .

B.	SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE : Within the limitations and restnct1ons of this Chapter and an other applicable City codes, the total area of all signs which a particular establishment is permitted to display shall be computed according to the following provisions:

1.	One and one-half (1.5) square feet of sign per one foot of lineal street frontage for the first 100 feet of such frontage, plus one square foot of sign area per one foot of frontage in excess of 100 feet of frontage.

2.	No establishment shall display more than 300 square feet of signs.

3.	If an establishment  has frontage on two or more streets, each side having frontage shall be considered separately  for  the  purpose  of  determining compliance with the provisions of this  Chapter.  However, the  sign area allowances shall not be aggregated so as to allow any such establishment to display on any one frontage a greater area of signs than this Chapter would otherwise permit . No establishment shall have more than 300 square feet of stgns.

4.	The side of an establishment adjacent to an off-street parking area shall not
be deemed frontage unless the establishment has no other frontage.

5.	For strip centers that have no "street frontage," the calculation of sign area shall  be 1.5 square feet of sign area per one foot of width the occupancy (unit) has.  Comer occupancies (units) are allowed one sign per side not to exceed the 1.5  square feet  of signage  per  one  square  foot of width  the occupancy contains .

6.	Shopping center identification signs shall be calculated as follows; One and one-half (1.5) square feet of sign per one foot of lineal street frontage for the first 100 feet of such frontage, plus one square foot of sign area per one foot of frontage in excess of 100 feet of frontage and shall not be allowed signage in excess of 300 square feet.

16.9	TEMPORARY SIGNS (NOT INCLUDING MOBILE SIGNS)

The following temporary signs are permitted subject to the provisions set forth herein :

1.	BANNERS: Banners or inflatable signs and advertising devices are permitted in the business, ORI Office, Research & Light  Industrial and M Manufacturing districts for not more than 20 days in length consecutively and not more than five times a year. Banners or inflatable signs and advertising devices are subject to the following provisions:

a.	Banners shall not be greater than 50 square feet in area for a single or double sided
 
banner.

b.	The maximum quantity of banners allowed per establishment shaJI be two with a maximum 100 square foot of sign area combined.

c.	The owner of such establishment shall obtain written approval from the Building Department prior to installing any banner(s) or inflatable sign(s) and advertising device(s). All banners installed shall have the date of installation marked in one bottom comer for the enforcement officer to view. The marking shall be minimum one-inch numerals.

d.	Banners or inflatable signs and advertising devices shall be located on the structure of such establishment doing such advertisement and or located within the property of such establishment. No such signs advertising shall be allowed to be installed on or in any state,  federal or public right-of-way or on or in any easement public or private unless such easement is for the installation of signs.

e.	Charities, new business, grand opening and special events may be allowed  to portray attention getting signage, pennants and streamers for a period not  no exceed 30 days before and after the business grand opening, charity event  or special event. All installations are subject to  approval by the Code Official. To exceed 30 days, such organizations shall present their case to the Zoning Administer for approval.

2.	POLITICAL SIGNS: Political signs are permitted provided they are displayed no  more than 90 days prior to the election relating to the sign, or the first day of filing for the office, whichever is later, and must be removed within five days after the election. Such signs shall be limited to four square feet in any residential zoning district and not more than 32 square feet in all other zoning districts. No fee shall be required for the posting of temporary political signs. All political signs shall remain on private property.

3.	SUBDIVISION/RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL   OR INDUSTRJAL  DEVELOP.MENT
SITE(S): One temporary non-illuminated subdivision sign, not exceeding 32 square feet, located not less than 15 feet from any side lot line, is permitted for a period of one year. The applicable permit fee plus an approved permit from the Building Department is required. The permit may be allowed to be renewed at no cost providing construction is diligently pursued.

4.	SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS: All special event signs are subject to City Council approval.


16.l0              PERMITTED SIGNS

The provisions of this Section 16.10 allow signs on private property after obtaining sign permits, provided however said signs shall be subject to the provisions of this Section 16.10. The signs in this  Section  16.10 are  prohibited  in  any  residential  zoning  district  or  on  any  property  used
 
extensively for residential purposes.


1.	EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED  SIGNS: All exterior illuminated signs shall be subject to the
following provisions:


a.	Only white light shall be permitted .

b.	Beacon lights, strobe lights colored Lights and illumination by flame are prohibited.


c.	The light which casts upon any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded  or directed so as to avoid the creation or continuation of any nuisance  or traffic hazard and avoid excessive glare or illumination to adjacent property.

d.	No matter its height or width, in no case shall the lighting intensity of any sign exceed the limit of 75 foot candles measured with a standard light meter perpendicular to the face of the sign at a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign.

e.	No  sign  shall  be  either  directly  or  indirectly  illuminated  m  such  a manner  to
adversely affect the use and enjoyment of nearby buildings .


2.	WALL  SIGNS: In addition to the sign area allowance, wall signs shall be subject to the
following provisions :


a.	No wall  sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening or architectural feature, nor shall any wall sign project beyond the ends of the wall or beyond the top of the buildin g to which it is affixed.

b.	Wall signs must be affixed flat against the building wall. Any projection will be limited   to  the  necessary  mounting  frame  and  shall  not  extend  more  than  four inches.

c.	No wall sign shall be affixed to a wall at a height of less than four feet above the sidewalk or ground. Ifthere is an adjacent sidewalk, wall signs mounted less than eight feet above the ground shall not be permitted unless flush against the wall.

d.	A  wall  sign  shall  be  safely  and  securely  affixed  to  the  building  wall  to  the
satisfaction of the Building Department.


e.	Wall signs may be located either on the front of the building abutting a street or on either side wall perpendicula r to the street frontage. Buildings that have more than one entrance from public ways are allowed to have a wall sign affixed to the wall sharing the entrance.

f.	In no case shall a wall sign be allowed to be affixed to a portion of a wall without
 
street frontage that extends higher than its neighboring building .


g.	No more than one wall sign shall be allowed per business or use per building side.

h.	Multiple unit buildings are allowed a wall sign indicating tenants and individual units. The maximum square footage of the outline of signage containing the individual tenants shall not exceed 25 square feet.

3.	Freestanding Signs: In addition to the sign area allowance, freestanding signs are subject to the following provision s:

a.	Not  more than one freestanding sign shall be displayed  on any street front of any lot.

b.	Freestanding signs shall not exceed seven feet in height the any business, ORI Office, Research & Light Industrial or M Manufacturing zoning districts . Height is measured from the adjacent "normal" grade to the top of the sign.

c.	No freestanding sign shall be erected closer than 25 feet to any side, comer side or
rear lot line.

d.	.       Freestanding  signs  shall  not  portray  signs  in  excess  of  85  square   feet.  In determining sign area, the base of such free standing sign does not count as square footage, providing there are no signs attached to it.

e.	No part of a freestanding sign shall intrude or project over any public right-of-way.
All structural supports shall be situated at least 10 feet from any public right-of­
way .


f.	All freestanding signs shall be securely constructed and erected. At the discretion of the Building Department , construction pl ans may be required to be certified by a registered architect or engineer. Such plans will ensure compliance with applicable wind, seismic and snow loads.

g.	Unless the sign is mounted on a concrete base at least three feet in height, any freestanding sign within three feet of a driveway, parking area or maneuvering area shall be completely surrounded by curbing that is not less than three feet from the outermost perimeter  of the sign.

h.	All freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of 80 feet apart.


4.	MONUMENT  (GROUND)  SIGNS:  In addition  to  the  sign area allowance,  monument signs are subject to the following provisions:

a.	No part of any monument sign shall intrude into any public-right-of way.
 

b.	No monument sign shall be closer than 25 feet to any side, corner side or rear lot
line.


c.	No monument sign shall exceed 85 square feet and, if applicable, is subject to the dimensions listed in Section 16.11. If a base is constructed to raise the monument sign, the maximum surface area of the sign and base shall not exceed 100 square feet in area, based on constraints listed in Section 16.08.

d.	No monument sign shall exceed seven feet. Height is measured from the adjacent
"normal" grade to the top of the sign.


e.	All monument signs shall be located a minimum of 60 feet apart.


5.	AWNINGS   AND   AWNING   SIGNS:   Awning   signs  are   subject   to   the  following prov1s1ons:

a.	The total area of an awning sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the total area of the
awnmg.


b.	.	Awnings and awning signs shall be constructed so that the lowest portion thereof
is not less than eight feet above the sidewalk of parkway .


c.	Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the building . Posts or
columns beyond the building line shall not be permitted.


d.	No awning shall be permitted  to extend  beyond a point two feet inside the curb
line.

e.	Lettering incorporated as signage on an awning shaU not exceed 24 inches in
height.

f	Awning signs shall only portray the copy of the business name of the establishment doing business on such property.

g.	Awnings shall be limited to the street level story of every multiple story building .


h.	Every awning and awning sign shall be maintained in a neat and attractive condition by its owner. The awning materials and hardware shall be kept painted and/or treated to prevent rust and/or deterioration.

6.	CANOPIES AND CANOPY SIGNS: In addition to the sign area allowance, canopies and signs attached to canopies are subject to the following provisions:

a.	There shall be a limit of one canopy sign per canopy face and one canopy per street
 
frontage erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment and provided that no wall signs are directed to the same street frontage.

b.	Canopy signs may only be mounted to the face (vertical edges only) of the canopy proper.

c.	The sign area for a canopy sign shall not extend beyond the canopy face on which the sign is located . No sign or portion of a sign shall exceed the borderline of any outer edge of said canopy. No sign shall be placed on the roof of said canopy.

d.	The outline shape and silhouette of a copy sign shall be simple and compatible with the building it is mounted on.

e.	Canopy signs shall be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building they
are mounted to and with the architectural elements of the building .


f.	A canopy shall not extend beyond a point two feet inside the curb line.

g.		All canopy supports shall be designed so as not to obstruct the continuous flow of pedestrian traffic along any sidewalk and in conformance with any other reasonable requirements established by the Code Official.

h. No advertising shall be placed on any canopy except for the name of the owner and business, industry or pursuit conducted within the premises.

i.	Canopy signs shall not be illuminated.


7.	MARQUEES: Marquee signs are subject to the following provisions:

a.	The roof of all marquees shall be guttered and connected by downspouts to a drain
so water will not drip or flow directly onto public property.

b.	The roofs of all marquees shall be used for no other purpose than to form and constitute a roof

c.	No portion of a marquee shall be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. However, if the marquee extends beyond two-thirds of the distance between the building and the curb, it must be 12 feet above the sidewalk.

d.	No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond a point two feet inside the curb line.

e.	Marquees shall be supported solely by the building to which they are attached and no columns or posts shall be permitted as supports.
 

f	The roof of any marquee shall be designed and constructed to support a live load
of not less than 60 pounds per square foot.

g.	Marquees shall be designed to withstand wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour.

h.	There shall be a limit of one marquee sign (per marquee face) per building, erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment and provided that no wall signs are directed to the same street frontage.

1.	Marquee signs shaU be mounted on the face (vertical edges only) of the marquee
proper. Signs shall not be erected above the roof line of the marquee .


J.	The sign area for marquee signs shall not extend beyond the marquee  face on which the sign is located. No sign or portion of a sign shall exceed the borderline of any outer edge of said sign. No sign shall be placed on or over the roof of said marquee.

k.	The surface area of a marquee shall not exceed  40 percent  of the sign area of a marquee attached to the building front.

1.	The outlined shape and silhouette of a marquee sign shall be simple and compatible with the building it is mounted on. Shapes that disrupt the architectural order and composition of a building fa9ade are not acceptable.

m.	Marquee signs shaU be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building they are mounted to and with the architectural elements of the building. A marquee sign shall not visuaJly overpower those elements nor detract from the composition of a buildings fa9ade.

n.	Marquee signs shall be constructed of non-combustible materials.


o.	Marquees outside the designated area of Overlay District may only be internally illuminated or back-lit.

8.	MURALS: Murals are subject to the following provisions:


a.	All murals to be painted on any building within the City are required to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission for a recommendation to the City Council and finaJ approval from the City Council.

b.	Information should be submitted to the Zoning Administrator , to be placed on Plarming and Zoning Commission and City Council agendas. The following information shall be submitted for review:
 

I.	An 8-inch by 10-inch color photo of building face the mural is to be painted upon; and

II.		An  8-inch by  10-inch color sketch or painting  of the actual mural to be painted on the building face.

16.11	OVERLAY DISTRICT SIGNAGE

In addition to the applicable provisions set forth in this Chapter, all exterior fixed signs proposed within the following locations shall be subject to the following  provisions. Prior to granting a permit for the erection of a sign to be located anywhere within the Overlay District and/or a Historic District, as defined pursuant to the Historic Preservation Ordinance (Ordinance 00-11-3 and amended by Ordinance 05-11-2), the applicant shall make application to the Code Official, who will require the MHPC to review the application and submit its recommendations.

1.	OVERLAY  DISTRICT  AREA:  For  the  purposes  of  this  Section  16.11,  the  Overlay District incorporates all buildings located within the following locations:

a.	All buildings within the City that have frontage on the streets that are within two blocks north and south of the centerline of US Route 20 and;

b.	All buildings within the City that have frontage on the streets that are within two blocks east and west of the centerline of US Route 23.

2.	All  proposed  signs within the designated area of the Overlay District and a Historic District shall be subject to the following guidelines and stipulations:

a.	All signs shall are subject to the provisions of this Chapter.


b.	Sign materials shall be similar to those used historically . Substitute materials with the same appearance may be approved .

c.	All signs shall be subordinate to the overall character of the area and they should be subordinate to the individual building or buildings they are related.

d.	Neon signs may have achieved historic significance on building styles related to the modem  era and may be allowed to continue.

e.	Ground or freestanding signs shall be set back from the property line a minimum of
1O feet.


f.	Florescent , neon or other bright garish  colors shall not be approved. Historic
colors and earth tones are recommended.
 
g.	Monument  and freestanding  signs shall be low in scale and visually relate to the building. The maximum size shall be 32 square feet. They must also conform to the provisions set for in Section 16.10.

h.	Lettering style shall be compatible with the time the building was erected or to a period  the building currently reflects or compatible with the surrounding area, as determined by the MHPC.

i.	All three dimensional signs shall be of a style used at the time the building was erected or compatible with the surrounding area, as determined by the MHPC, and should pertain to the type of business conducted within.

J.		Signs affixed to buildings may only be externally illuminated by fixtures compatible with the period in which the building was erected, or to a period the building currently reflects or compatible  with the surrounding area, as determined by the MHPC.

k .	All signs shall be constructed or painted in a work.manlike manner and all lettering
shall be of uniform size and style.

l.		Signs of a period other than when the building was erected  may be  approved if they are of a special design merit, reflective of an era, consistent with the building fas;ade	having   undergone   significant   remodeling    or   compatible   with    the surrounding area, as defined by the MHPC.

m.	Any original sign that was used at the time the building was constructed or prior to the year 1900, or an authentic facsimile thereof, may be replaced on that building subject to the structural and maintenance guidelines of the City.

n.	.         Within the Overlay District area or a Historic District, signs shall identify  only the name of the business and the general type of goods, products or service(s) offered. In  addition  to  lettering,   graphics  may  include  a  trademark,   symbol   or  other representation  directly related to the use but not advertising specific brands within the building. A brand name or symbol may be included, however, if the business is a franchise and/or it is the major brand sold or service offered on the premises.

o.	The Code Official may forward any application to the MHPC for review  to confirm compliance with the provisions of this Section 16.11. All external permanent signage may require MHPC approval .

p.	Canopies attached to building are not permitted.


3.	ILLUMINATION : Signs shall not be illuminated in any manner between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless tied to the business ' hours of operation within the B-1 Central Business District and business districts with transitional yards, as provided in the zoning
 
regulations of this Chapter and Chapter 22, the Marengo Zoning Code.

16.12	STRUCTURAL AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS

The structural condition and general maintenance obligations of the owners of all signs within the City are subject to the following provisions :

1.	BRACING : In addition to the main attachment of a sign, any extra bracing, angle iron, guide wires, temporary supports or any other item that assist the sign to be affixed to any structure are  prohibited. All signs shall be structurally affixed to buildings using best building construction practices and shall comply with the City's current building code.

2.	MAINTENANCE:

a.	Every sign or other street graphic shall be maintained in a neat and attractive condition by its owner. Sign skins shall not be allowed to fade to a point the messages are unreadable. Sign supports shall be kept painted and/or treated to prevent rust or deterioration .

b. All electrical  components  of existing  signs shall be kept in  compliance with the City's current electrical code.

c.	The Code Official shall determine the time frame for compliance.


16.13	ADMINJSTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

A The Code Official is authorized and directed to administer and  enforce  the provisions of this Chapter. The responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to the following specific duties :

1.	Review  and  pass  upon  compliance  applications  for  street  graphics  and
signs;

2.	Inspect existing and newly constructed signs and street graphics to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Where violations are evident, to initiate the appropriate corrective action;

3.	Review and forward to the  MHPC   and/or  the  Planning  and  Zoning Commission all  applications  for  special  signs  or  street graphic  permits, variances, appeals or  request  recommendations  from  each  respective Commission to approve such application ;

4.	Maintain  up-to-date  records of applications and any official  actions taken
to pursuant thereto;
 
5.	Periodically review the provisions of this Chapter to determine whether revisions are needed, and to make recommendations on these matters to the Planning and Zoning Commission, .MHPC and City Council;

6. To provide information to the general  public  on  matters  relating  to this Chapter ; and

7.		To perform such other duties as the City Council may from time to time prescribe.

B. PENALTIES : Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined pursuant to Section 1.07 of the Marengo Municipal Code and shall be responsible for reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in the prosecution of such violations. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offence and shall be punishab le as such hereunder .

C.	APPEALS :


1.	Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Code Official or MHPC to the Planning and Zoning Commission . An application for appeal shall be based on the claim that the true intent of the regulations of this Chapter have been incorrectly interpreted , that the provi sions of this Chapter do not fully apply, or that an equivalent form of construction is to be used.

2.	The appeals procedures shall be those utilized by the City with respect to appeals of the Building Code Official or pursuant to the Historic Preservation Ordinance, whichever is applicable.
 
CHAPTER 17
PURCHASING STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES

 
17.01
17.02
17.03
17.04
17.05
17.06
17.07





17.01
 
Purpose Policies
Purchase Authority
Purchase  Orders
Open Purchase Orders Vendor Payment
Joint  Purchasing Check Request Form Quotations Form


PURPOSE
 

The purpose of this Chapter 17 is to establish uniform standards and procedures to be followed by all City departments, the City Council and commissions in the purchase of all commodities.

17.2	POLICIES

The purchasing standards and procedures set forth herein are designed to:

1.	Attain maximum economy in municipal operations to the ultimate advantage of local taxpayers and residents; and

2.	Provide equal opportunity for qualified vendors to serve City needs.

17.3	PURCHASE AUTHORITY

In general, all supplies, materials , equipment and contractual/professional services required for operational efficiency shall be included in the annual budget. Purchase of same as required during the fiscal year shall proceed in accordance with these procedures upon approval of the annual budget by the City Council. When approval of the Administrator is specified , this does not pertain to the Police Department. Approval for Police Department ex penditures is authorized in the manner prescribed by the Police Chief.

Although included in the annua l budget, certain equipment, projects or services may be placed in a contingency status by the City Council as  part of its approval process . When action on such contingency items is desired by the administrative staff, detailed justifi cation of each item must be presented to the Administrator for review and approval consistent with the City Council's budget/fiscal policies .

Department heads may authorize purchases, as identified in the operating budget, up to $2,000. The Administrator , or designee, must also approve all purchases between $2,000 and $9,999 .99 . Purchases in excess of $1 0,000 require City Council approval.

Each department head of the City shall be responsible for its own department's purchasing needs in strict compliance with the procedures set forth herein . No department may make charges against budget accounts of other departments .

The  Finance  Department  is responsible for  determining  if an item is budgeted, adequate  funds are
 
available and proper purchasing procedures are followed.

17.04              PURCHASE ORDERS

A purchase order must be prepared for the following purchases:

1.	Any purchase of goods or services in excess of $500.

2.	Any purchase from a source determined by a formal bid, bid waiver or formal quotation .

3.	Any ca pital outlay item .

4.	Any case where the vendor requires a purchase order.

Exclusive of the above requirements ,a department head may request that a purchase order be prepared at any time they feel it is best or prudent to do so . Department heads must approve all purchase orders . Purchase orders over $2,000 also require approval by the Adm inistrator before a purchase is initiated.

The purchase order is prepared in three parts with distribution as follows :

White Copy:    Mailed or delivered to vendor .

Yellow Copy:    Retained by requesting department.

Pink Copy:	Ultimately routed to the Finance Department for payment after receipt of goods/services and vendor invoice.

Purchase orders shall be  issued in numerical sequence by the Finance Department. The Finance Department shall keep a log of purchase order numbers that have been distributed on a department by department basis.

All purchase requisitions and purchase orders must have the price of the goods stated. If it is absolutely impossible to list the exact price, an estimated price may be used with the letters "EST" placed above the price. Freight charges should be included on a requisition if possible. If not known, the requisition must state "Plus Freight."

It must be remembered that a purchase order is actually a contract between a vendor and the City. The purchase order must be prepared with this in mind . All purchase orders must bear , as near as possible, delivered price to avoid any problems in billing. A purchase order with no price shown is actually not a purchase order.

17.5	OPEN PURCHASE ORDERS

In certain circumstances where vendors are used frequently, an open purchase order may be set up at the beginning of the year as approved by the Treasurer . A purchase order must be approved by the department head (and Administrator if over  $2,000) before initiating the purchase . The white copy of the purchase requisition is mailed or delivered to the vendor . The yellow copy is retained by the requesting department and the pink copy, or photocopy if purchase order amount is not satisfied, is ultimately forwarded to the Finance Department after receipt of the goods/services and vendor invoice.
 
17.6	VENDOR  PAYMENTS

The department ordering the goods or services is responsible for the accuracy of expense accounts used and that purchases fall within budget parameters.

Upon receipt of ordered items, the department must indicate the quantity received complete with the initials of the employee receiving the delivery and the date received. In the event of a back order or incomplete delivery, notation of the applicable situation will be entered on the purchase order . When such items are later received, a photocopy of the original purchase order showing the partial shipment detail will be completed.

Unless otherwise noted on receiving documents, it will be assumed by the Finance Department that the
ordering department is completely satisfied with the quality and condition of items received.

All applicable quotation forms, vendor invoices, purchase requisitions and purchase orders, approved for payment by the department head or designee, and the initialed receiving report must be forwarded to the Finance Department for payment processing. These documents must be accompanied by a check authorization request form. All other data, including material data sheets shall be kept by the ordering department.

A check authorization request form, found at the end of this Chapter 17, authorizes payment for completed purchases and should include the following information: name and address of vendor, purchase order number if applicable, invoice date, invoice number, total invoice amount, account number(s), amount charged to each account, indicated full or partial payment and signature of depart­ ment head. The Finance Department will assign the voucher number (if no purchase order is required) and vendor number and ensure an IRS Form W-9 is on file.

Check authorization request forms delineate the payment of bills as either interim (prior to City Council
approval) or City Council bills (semi-monthly , after City Council approval).

Generally, the only interim check request which will be approved are payments which take advantage of "early  payment" discounts or for other extenuating circumstances as may be described by the department head . The check authorization request form should distinguish between partial and full payment. Extra care should be given to insure that each expense has been properly coded to the appropriate  line item.

Check authorization requests will not be approved without an invoice and,if applicable, signed purchase
order except under extraordinary circumstances communicated to and approved by the Administrator.

17.7	PURCHASING PROCEDURES

A .   PURCHASE IN EXCESS OF $10,000 : City ordinance requires that all purchases made from one vendor for a particular item or like types of items exceeding a cost of $10,000 must be accomplished through formal bidding procedures or by a bid waiver approved by the City Council. If doubt exists as to whether formal bidding is required, the Treasurer shall be contacted before any purchase is initiated . The splitting of a purchase into two or more purchase orders for the purpose of avoiding the  bidding process  is prohibited.

In certain circumstances it may be felt by the department head or the Administrator the best interests of the City would be served by a purchase from one particular vendor despite the purchase amount being in excess of $10,000 . In such cases, a request to waive competitive bidding must be submitted to the City Council for its consideration and approval.
 
B.	PURCHASES  IN EXCESS  OF $2,000  BUT  LESS THAN  $10,000:	At   least  three
quotations and approval of the Administrator are required before such a purchase can be effectuated.

The department head shall secure at least three verbal or written quotations or proposals from perspective vendors for the item or service. As in the case of formal bidding, the purchase shall be made from the lowest responsible quotation. A Quotation Form (found at the end of this Chapter 17) on the results of a quotation and vendor award recommendation shall be forwarded to the Administrator for  approval.

In the event a department head feels that a purchase under this category should be made from one certain vendor rather than through quotations, a recommendation to do so is to be directed to the Administrator.  In effect, this is a quotation waiver.

If it is found that a dire emergency condition exists and a purchase in excess of $2,000 must be made to remedy the emergency, the department head may make such purchase if verbally authorized by the Administrator. The department head must report the purchase to the Administrator by memorandum as expeditiously as possible relating the full facts concerning the emergency and the costs incurred. An emergency condition is described as a condition where the health, safety and/or welfare of the City or its residents are affected.

C.	PURCHASES IN EXCESS OF $500 BUT LESS THAN $2,000 : Every effort should be taken to secure at  least three quotations before deciding on a suggested vendor. The requesting department should secure the quotations themselves. A Quotation Form should also be prepared for these purchases .

In the event that a department head feels that a purchase under this category should be made from one certain vendor rather than through quotations, s/he should submit a memorandum with the purchase order stating the reasons for the certain vendor preference .

D.	PURCHASES LESS THAN $500: Purchases in this category can best be described as those day-to-day purchases needed to perform a job or service.

Department heads are responsible for the purchases made by personnel within their department. They may delegate this purchasing authority to subordinates, but still bear responsibility that these procedures  are followed.

Although day-to-day, purchases under $500 may be done without a purchase order and without prior approval, the responsibility still exists for making the most economical purchases. Spot price checks and surveys must be made from time to time to ensure that the price being paid is the best price available and that the quality is the best that is required .

Day-to-day purchasing should be made through that vendor who offers the best usable product at the lowest price. Also, accepting de liveries should rate preference over picking up where no delivery/premium  charges are involved and there is no immediate need for the item.

When receiving an item purchased under informal buying, a receipt or packing slip should be obtained . This receipt is to be turned in to the department head who is to prepare a check authorization request (see Section 17.06, Vendor Payments).

E.	PETTY CASH: Petty cash funds are established to pay for infrequent purchases that are under $30 and require immediate payment. Tolls, parking, filing fees, etc., are traditional expenses that fall into this category.   Department heads must approve the petty cash reimbursement vouchers.
 
The Finance Department will conduct periodic audits of the petty cash fund .

F. PURCHASES OF A REPETITIVE NATURE: It is not always practical to  obtain compet1t1ve quotations for certain purchases that are repetitive in nature. The market must be periodically tested by the department head to determine if the current supplier is the most economical.

17.8	JOINT PURCHASING

A.	STATE PURCHASING : Certain items are annually let for bids by the Procurement Division of the State of Illinois. Any unit of government in the state may avail themselves of these bid prices. Purchasing through State Purchasing may satisfy the requirement for bidding even though the purchase may be in excess of  $10,000 .

When items are purchased through the State Purchasing vendor, the department head prepares a purchase order as normally prescribed, but also submits a copy to the State of Illinois Procurement Division. Typed on this purchase order must be the Vendor Number and Contract Order Number. These numbers appear on the State Purchasing contract for that item.

B.	COOPERATIVE PURCHASING : It may also be beneficial for the City to join with othe r units of local government in securing price quotations and in bid letting . Periodic checks of what other governmental units are paying can confirm whether the City is receiving a good price. If a neighboring municipality is contemplating the bidding of a particular item which is also to be bid by the City, the joining of the two municipalities may result in a lower price.
 
CITY OF MARENGO - - CHECK REQUEST FORM


TO: FINANCE DEPARTMENT	 


 
(Department)
REQUEST FOR : PAYMENT


 
CHECK IN THE AMOUNT OF $ -------FULL
 
PARTIAL
 


MAKE CHECK PAYABLE TO :
NAME:	__	_	_	_
ADDRESS :			_
 

CITY : -------- STATE:	_
 

ZIP:	INVOICE #:		_
 
INVOICE DATE: _	_
 
P.O .#: _	_
 
BUDGET ACCOUNT# : --------
 

ADDITIONAL COMMENTS:





REQUESTED BY: _	__	__		_

(Signature)
APPROVED  BY:   	
(Department  Head)

CITY  ADMINISTRA TOR  AUTHORIZATION:--------------
(If Requir ed)

Attach supporting documents: invoice, receipt, order form, etc.


FINANCE DEPARTMENT USE ONLY		ACCOUNT  DISTRIBUTION ACCOUNT  NUMBER	AMOUNT

 

Vendor No.	_ Check No.   		  Date:	 	  Amount:	     		
Paid From:	_
 
•	 	
•	 	
•	 	

..  	
 
QUOTATIONS



 
COMPANY NAME
 
CONTACT	PHONE	PRICE


ITEM 1 ITEM 2  ITEM 3 ITEM 4
 























DEPARTMENT HEAD-----------------
 
CHAPTER 18
BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES

 
18.01
18.02
18.03
18.04
18.05
18.06
18.07
18.08
18.09
18.10
18. 11
18. 12
18.13
18.14
18.15






18.01
 
Competitive Bidding Required Formal Contract Procedure Advertisements
Scope of Notice Bid Deposit
Bid Opening Procedure Rejection of Bids
Bidders in Default to City
Award of Contract Open Market Procedure
Officer and Employee Contracts
Emergency Purchases Cooperative Purchasing State and Federal Laws Penalty
Invitation to Bid Instructions to Bidders Proposal Form


COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED
 

Any work or other public improvement that  is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials and services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever possible on competitive bids.

18.2	FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE

All work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases, orders or contracts for supplies , materials , equipment or contractual services except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed
$10,000, shall be purchased for the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless
competitive bidding is waived by a vote of two-thirds of the Aldermen then holding office.

18.3	ADVERTISEMENTS  FOR BIDS

Unless waived by the City Council, a notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper with general circulation within the City. The City shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board in the City Hall. A sample notice, titled Invitation to Bid, can be found at the end of this Chapter 18.

18.4	SCOPE OF NOTICE

The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured and shall specify the time and place for opening bids. A sample Instruction s to Bidders can be found at the end of this Chap­ ter 18.
 
18.5	BID DEPOSITS

When deemed necessary by the City Council, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of their  bid deposits upon the award of the contract by the City Council. A successful bidder shall forfe it any bid deposit required by the City Council upon his failure to enter into a contract within  10 days after the bid is awarded.

Such bid deposit may be in the form of a bank cashier's check, bank draft, bid bond or certified check bond in an amount as specified in the advertisement for bids to ensure finalization of the contract and to indemnify the City against all loss, damages and claims that may accrue against the City as a consequence of the awarding  of the contract.

18.6	BID OPENING PROCEDURE

A.	SEALED BID: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City and s hall be identified as bids on the envelope. A sample proposal form can be found at the end of this Chapter 18.

8.  OPENING:  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. When any bidders are present all the bids shall be read aloud.

C.         TABULATION : A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the City Council or by a City employee, in which event a tabulation of the bids shall be furnished to the City Counc il at its next regular meeting .

18.7	REJECTION OF BIDS

The City, through the Mayor and City Council, shall have the authority to reject all bids or parts of all
bids or waive technicalities when the public interest will be served thereby.

18.8	BIDDERS IN DEFAULT TO THE CITY

The City shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other money due the City.

18.9	AWARD OF CONTRACT

A.	AUTHORITY OF CITY:  The City Council shall have the authority to award contracts
within the purview of this Chapter 1 8.

B.	LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER : Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interests of the City to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the City Council shall consider:

1.	The ability, capacity  and skill of the bidder to perform the contract and to provide the service required;

2.	.	Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;

3 .	The character,  integrity, reputation,judgment,  experience and efficiency  of the
bidder;
 
4.	The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services;

5.	The previous and existing compliance  by the bidder with laws and ordinances
relating to the contract or service;

6.	The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;

7.	The quality, availability and adaptability  of the supplies or contractual services
to the particular use requires;

8.	The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use
of the subject of the contract; and

9.	The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.

C. PERFORMANCE BONDS: The City Council shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City and to conform to the statutory requirements for such bonds.

18.10	OPEN  MARKET  PROCEDURE

All work and purchases of supplies, materials and services of less than the estimated value of $10,000 shall be made in an open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure prescribed by this Chapter 18 for the award of formal contracts in such a manner so as to ensure the best interests of the public after solicitation of bids on proposals  by  mail, telephone, facsimile transmission  or otherwise.

18.11	OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE CONTRACTS

Contracts with appo inted officers and/or employees shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter
18.

18.12	EMERGENCY  PROCEDURES

In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate work or purchase or supplies, materials or services, the City Council shall be empowered to secure by open market procedures as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or services regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A finding of such an emergency shall be made in an affirmative vote of at least two­ thirds of the City Council at the time of such emergency contract or no later than the first regular City Council meeting thereafter.

18.13	COOPERATIVE PURCHASING

The City shall have the authority to jo in with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans
when the best interests of the City would be served thereby.

18.14	STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS

Where applicable, all federal and state laws shall be observed including, but not limited to the Prevailing Wage Act (820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.I, the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/ 1- 101 et seq.L
 
Public Works Employment Discrimination Act {775 ILCS 10/0.01 et seq.} , the Illinois Blacklist Trade
Law {775 ILCS 15/1 et seq.Iand the Public Works Preference Act (30 ILCS 560/0.01 et seq.) .

18.15	PENALTY

A .     Any bid and/or contract in contravention which results from procedures in contravention or inconsistent with those set forth in this Chapter 18 shall be void.

B.   Any person violating any portion of this Chapter 18 shall be fined not Jess than $1 00 nor more than $500,for each offense and be responsible for the City's cost of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense .
 
INVITATION TO BID
City of Marengo


Invitation to Bid: The City of Marengo will receive bid quotations for-------------





Sealed bids will be received in the office of the City Clerk until	, Prevailing Time,
 	 and opened in the Council Room at that time.


The contractor shall observe ordinances adopted by the City regarding prevailing wage rates and such other laws and regulations regulating wage rates.

Each bidder shall certify evidence of an adopted written sexual harassment policy pursuant to 775 ILCS
5/1- 105 along with the bid.


The City reserves the right to modify or waive technicalities in specifications, reject any or all bids, to waive irregularities or accept the bid that in its opinion will serve its best interest. It is the successful bidder's responsibility to pay the prevailing wage for this type of work in accordance with Illinois law as well as comply with all other state and federal regulations imposed on the City pertaining contractual work. Detailed specifications and bid forms may be secured from the Marengo City Hall, 132 East Prairie Street, Marengo, IL 60152, during regular business hours.
 
INSTRUCTIONS TO BIDDERS


FOR THE CITY OF MARENGO, McHENRY  COUNTY, ILLINOIS

1.	Receipt of Bids:


2.	Basis of Bids: Sealed bids will be received until the above-noted time and date.


3.	Project  Description:






4.	Preparation and Submission of Bids:


A.	Each bid shall be submitted in duplicate on the exact form furnished. All blank spaces for bid prices, unit costs and alternatives must be filed in, in ink, in both words and figures. In case of any discrepancy in the amount of the bid, the prices expressed in written words shall govern.


B.	The proposal must be delivered to the office of the City Clerk, Marengo City Hall, 132 East  Prairie Street, Marengo, IL 60152, on or before                          , prevailing time,
 	, at which time they will be publicly opened.  Proposals received after this time will not be considered.

C.	The proposal shall be submitted in an opaque sealed envelope on or before the time stated and shall bear the name of the individual, firm or corporation submitting the bid and the title of the project.


D.	Bidders may attach separate sheets to the proposal form for the purpose of explanation, exception or alternate proposal and to cover unit prices required.


E.	By submitting a bid, the bidder understands and agrees that, if that proposal is accepted and the bidder fails to enter into a contract forthwith, the bidder shall be liable to the City for any damages the City may thereby suffer.


F.	Bids may not be modified after submittal. Bidders may withdraw proposals either personally or by written request at any time before the hour set for the bid opening, but may not resubmit them. No proposal may be withdrawn or modified after the bid openings except if the award of contract has been delayed for a period more than 45 days.
 
5.	Basis of Award:


A.	The City of Marengo reserves the right to waive any informality in or to reject any or all bids and to accept any bids deemed most favorable to the interest of the City after all bids have been examined and tabulated.

B. The City may award a contract on individual items within a particular group or upon the total group of items .

6.	Breakdown of Costs: Delivered and Installed: Include unit and total costs per item for the delivery of the item[sl {uncrated and blanket wrapped in padded vans and installation of the item[s] --- optionaU to their designated locations ready for use.


7.	Substitutions :


A.	Certain materials and equipment are specified by a manufacturer or trade name to establish standards or quality and performance and not for the purpose of limiting competition. Bidders are invited to submit bids not only on named items but also on items that they propose for substitution of named items. Products of other manufactur­ ers may be substituted if, in the opinion of the City, they are equal to those specified in quality, performance, design and s uitability for intended use. When two or more items are specified, the selection among those specified is the contractor's option, or contractor may submit a bid on all such items.


B.	Bids  shall  be  based  on  materials  and  equipment  included  in  the  specifica tions.
Substitutions for the purpose of evaluating bids will be considered only if proposed substitutions are set forth in a sealed bid and will only be accepted prior to the award of contract . The  offer of substitutions shall be an integral part of the proposal, appearing immediately after all requested bids and before the signature of the bidder for the entire proposal.

C.	Substitutions of materials other than those specified will not be considered in the base bid price. However , other substitutions may be listed in the specified place in the proposal form, with the indication of the change in the base bid price for the entire work.


D.	In addition to the requirements heretofore mentioned, in order for substitutions to qualify for consideration, the following shall accompany each proposal:


I.	Each proposed substitution shall be itemized showing manufacturer's name, catalog number, quantity, unit cost and total cost. The bidder shall prepare the necessary forms to list his substitutions in the manner outlined.
 
JI.		Each proposal offering substitutions shall be accompanied by descriptive literature, catalog date, complete technical specifications and reports of all pertinent tests concerning the bidder's proposed substitutions.


111.	Within five days after request by the City, each bidder offering substitutions shall deliver an assembled sa mple of each proposed substitution. Delivery charges shall be prepaid by the bidder.
 
CITY  OF MARENGO PROPOSAL  FORM
(To Be Submitted in Duplicate)


PROJECT IDENTIFICATION NAME: CONTRACTOR'S NAME: ADDRESS:
TELEPHONE NUMBER:


1.	Cost of Work:


The undersigned, having familiarized himself with the conditions affecting the cost of the work and its performance and having carefully examined and fully understood Instructions to Bidders, hereby affirms and agrees to enter into a contract with the City of Marengo, Marengo, Illinois.

TO PROVIDE, all supervision, labor, material, equipment and all other expense items to perform completely the Entire Work covered by all specifications for the Entire Work.

For the lump sum of:		_ Dollars ($	_


Unit Price	_	Total    Price-------------


2.	Costs:


The undersigned hereby affirms and states that the prices quoted herein constitute the total cost to the City for all work involved in the respective items and that this cost also includes all insurance, royalties, transportation charges, use of all tools and equipment, superintendence, overhead expense, all profits and all other work services and conditions necessarily involved in the work to be done and materials to be furnished in accordance with the requirements of the Contract Documents considered severally and collectively. All bids shall be held valid for a period of 45 days after the bid due date.

3.	Delivery Requirements:


The undersigned hereby affirms and states that the prices listed as "Delivered and Installed" are the unit and total costs for the delivery of item[s] (uncrated and blanket wrapped in padded vans and the installation of the item[s] ---optional) to their designated locations ready for use.


4.	Time of Completion:
 
The undersigned affirms and declares that if awarded the Contract he will completely perform said contract in strict accordance with its terms and conditions within	consecutive calendar days after notification of award of contract.

5.	Specifications :


Furnish all labor, material, equipment and services necessary for said Contract, in accordance
with the following specifications and drawings (if required) as attached.


6.	Conditions :


A.	I understand the City is exempt from Federal Excise Tax and the Illinois Retailer's Occupation Tax . I hereby certify that this Proposal does not include any amounts of money for these taxes.

B.	To be valid, bids shall be itemized so that selection for purchase may be made, there being included in the price of each item the cost of delivery, insurance, bonds, overhead and profit.

C.	The City reserves the right to add to or deduct from base bid and/or alternate bid any
item at the prices indicated in itemization of bid.


7.	Alternate Materials and Equipment:


A.	Whenever, in any section of the contract document, any article, material or equipment is defined by describing a proprietary product, by using the name of a manufacturer of vendor, the specific article, material or equipment mentioned shall be understood as indicating the type, function and equality desired and shall not be construed in such a manner as to exclude manufacturer's products or comparable quality, design and efficiency as approved by the City Engineer .

8.	A ll materials,construction procedures and methods within the contract documents set
for a minimum condition .


C.	.        All materials furnished on this proj ect shall bear the manufacturer's  guarantee that materials furnished follows specifications as herein enumerated . No such material shall be used on the project until such manufacturer's  or supplier's  guarantee shall be furnished in writing to the City Engineer.

D.	When requesting use of alternate materials or equipment, provide the following in writing to the City and City Engineer:


1.	Written request for approval.
 
2.	Cost benefits and savings for the City .


3.	Product description.


E.	Requests shall be made in a timely fashion to allow for adequate review.


F.		No  alternate  materials  or  equipment  shall  be  ordered  or  installed  without  written approval of the City.

 




(If a corporation) ATTEST:
 
Name	_ By (signed)	_ Office	_ Address	_


Telephone No.	_ Date 	
 



Secretary
 
CHAPTER 19 DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

 
19.01
19.02
19.03
19.04
19.05
19.06
19.07
 
Intent, Purpose and Scope Definitions
Fees
Land Development Considerations
Design Standards
Compliance with Subdivision Control Ordinance Penalties
 


19.01               INTENT, PURPOSE AND SCOPE Amended, 05-4-1

The purpose of Chapter 19 is to regulate the development of land and to control the potable water, sanitary sewer, grading, surface water  detention, proximity to public sanitary sewer and proximity to public water for all development projects other than individual single family residential units. In addition to the foregoing, the McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance, adopted by passage of Ordinance 04- 10-3 and incorporated  into this Code as Chapter 29, shall also govern regulations for development.

19.02           DEFINITIONS Amended, 05-4-1

In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code and Article 2 of the McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance, which was adopted by passage of Ordinance 03-10-3 and incorporated into this Code as Chapter 29, the following definitions shall be applicable to this Chapter 19:

Alley: A public way, not more than 30 feet wide , which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.

Block: A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, bulkhead lines, or shore lines of waterways or the corporate boundary lines of the City.
Datus USGS Sea Level Datum 1929 Adjusted: A reference point from which elevations are measured. Detention Basin: An area designed to hold an accumulation of storm water thereby reducing the peak
flow of a storm drainage system.

Street:  A public way other than an alley.

1.	Major thoroughfares which shall include all highways with the county, state and/or federal route marking and for which a right-of-way width of 100 feet shall be established. Illinois Routes 23 and 176 and U.S. Highway 20 are designated as major thoroughfares.

2.	Secondary thoroughfare is any thoroughfare so designated by the City on the official plan or by ordinance which shall involve intercommunion vehicular traffic.

3.	Major connecting street is any public right-of-way utilized primarily for intra-municipal travel, including the access to public and institutional facilities and business and recreational aspects of the City.
 
4.	Minor connecting street is any public right-of-way utilized primarily for access to abutting properties.

19.3	FEES Amended,  05-4-1

The following fees and charges shall prevail for compliance with this Chapter  19:

1.	The actual cost to the City for administration and services of the City Attorney, City Engineer, City Planner and any other professional persons as deemed necessary by the City with a deposit to be determined by the City Engineer at the time the application is made to proceed under this Chapter 19.

2.	The City Engineer shall determine if a irrevocable letter of credit or a performance bond is needed  due to the type or extent  of  improvement;  such  irrevocable  letter  of  credit  or performance  bond shall be approved by the City Attorney .

3.	See Section IV-E1 of Chapter 29 (McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance) for watershed development  permit fees.

19.4	LAND DEVELOPMENT CONSIDERATIONS Amended, 05-4-2, 05-4-1

A.	Drainage ways , wetlands,  floodplains  and  Soil  and  Water  Conservation  District requirements shall be pursuant to Chapter 29, McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance; Chapter  23, Subdivision  Control Regulations; Chapter  26,  Cross-Connection  Control Rules and Regulations; and Chapter 30, Groundwater Protection, of this Code.

B.	APPEALS:

1.	Any person aggrieved by a decision of a certified community's enforcement officer  may request review thereof  by the City Council.

2.	. Any person aggrieved by a decision, requirement,ruling or interpretation of this Chapter by the MCSC chief engineer, may appeal it to the MCSC by written notice filed with the MCSC chief engineer within 10 days of the determination.

3.	The applicant or any person or agency which receives notice of the filing of the application may appeal the decision of City staff as provided in Article IV-A in Exhibit A of Chapter 29 to the City Council within 45 days after denial of the permit or 45 days after the commencement of work. Upon receipt of an appeal the City Council shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving 15 days notice thereof . The City Council shall render a decision within 30 days after the hearing. Factors to consider in the review shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities on the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands; any comprehensive watershed management plans or the use of any retention fac ilities; possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainage ways;  natural and type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the proposed development activities, may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation.

19.5	DESIGN STANDARDS
 
A.	Detailed engineering documents shall be as described in the Subdivision Control Ordinance.

B.	Stormwater drainage system shall be as described inthe Subdivision Control Ordinance.

C.	Protecting buildings from flood damage shall be as described in the Subdivision Control Ordinance.

D.	Public potable water shall be provided for the land tract to be developed, including to the extremities of the property, provided that an existing public potable water distribution system is within 500 feet of the subject tract.

E.	Public sanitary sewer shall be provided for the land tract to be developed, including to the extremit ies of the property, provided that an existing public sanitary sewer system is within 500 feet of the subject tract .

F.	A grading plan shall be furnished ,including the topography and physical characteristics of surrounding land tracts, and to provide aesthetic elevation relating to the surrounding land tracts. A typical grading plan is on file in the office of the Clerk.

19.6	COMPLIANCE WITH SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE

Developers of  land within the  City  and within its planning jurisdiction  shall  comply  with all the provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, which are hereby incorporated herein by reference.

19.7	PENALTIES

A.	Any person who violates this Chapter 19  shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each violation. Each day a violation is determined to exist shall be considered a separate offense.

B.	Violation of this Chapter 19 is declared to be a public nuisance, which a court may abate in the manner provided by law including imposition of an injunction terminating any development on any property for which this Chapter 19 has not been complied with as determined by the City Engineer.

C.	The City shall have a lien for all fees owed under this Chapter 19 on all property subject to development  for which the fees are owed .




















Chapter 19, Page 3	4-25·05
 

CHAPTER20
PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES

 
20.01
20.02
Exhibit A Exhibit B
 
Planning, Zoning and Development Review Fees Reimbursement of Fees
Planning, Zoning and Development Review Fees Deposits Required for Reimbursement of Fees
 


20.1	PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT  REVIEW FEES

There are hereby established fees for the review of development proceedings by the City  of Marengo. The term "development proceedings" shall mean:

1.		Any petition or application filed to annex property to the City, or to process an annexation agreement or amendments to an annexation agreement;

2.	Any petition or application filed for relief from or review of parameters of the Zoning Code;

3.	Any petition or application to subdivide, resubdivide or otherwise plat property filed pursuant to the Marengo Subdivision Code;

4.	Any petition or application filed to address issues relating to rights-of-way or easements, including but not limited to plats of dedication, plats of vacation or easement documents; and

5.	Any other improvement or development of real property.

The term "review" shaJI include, but not be limited to: conducting hearings and meetings; processing, review, and preparation of documents ; evaluation of drawings for Code compliance; legal technical, and professional review and consultation ; and similar consideration and review of proposed actions which involve the earthmoving  of land, construction or aJteration of buildings, and uses and appearances of property.

Said fees are listed in Exhibit A of this Chapter 20 and shall be due and payable to the City at the time of filing an application or petition for the desired development proceeding . Said fees shall not be refundable. In the event the filing fee is paid by check and the check is returned to the City due to insufficient fwlds by the financial institution, the City shall suspend the review process. A cashier's check that includes the required fees, a $50 returned-check service charge and any other costs the City may incur thereby , shall be deposited with the City before the City resumes the review process .

Development proceedings initiated by the City (e.g. text amendments to the Zoning Code) are exempt from fees.
 

20.2	REIMBURSEMENT OF FEES

A.	DEPOSIT: In the event it is necessary for the City to obtain professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planners , architects, surveyors, traffic or drainage experts, or other consultants, in connection with any petitioner's request for the City to consider or otherwise take action upon any annexation, zoning change, subdivision development, planned development (PUD), dedication , vacation or easements or other improvement or development upon real property , then the petitioner and owner of the property shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of such professional fees plus a service fee for each billing by the City to cover the City 's administrative expenses as detennined by the City Council from time to time. At the time the petitioner requests action from the City, an initial deposit, pursuant to Exhibit B of this Chapter 20, shall be made with the City and will be credited against fees and costs incurred for the above described services . The petitioner is required to maintain the minimum deposit amount as stipulated herein at all times.

B.	PAYMENTS : The City shaJ 1 remove funds from the required deposit upon receipt of invoices for professional services or upon calculation of City Staff time as stipulated by this Chapter. Once funds have been removed from the petitioner's required deposit, the City shall, within five working days, send a Noti ce of Replenishment  and a copy of such invoice to the petitioner requiring an additional deposit to repleni sh the required deposit within 30 days of date of notice.

C.	LATE FEES: Replenishment payments shall be received in the office of the City Clerk within 30 days of the date the Notice to Replenishment is sent.  If the replenishment payment is not received by the City within 30 days, a $100 per day late fee shall be assessed to all notices. In addition, all work pertaining to the development shall cease and the Building Commissioner shall place a stop work order upon the subject property. No action on any request made by the owner or petitioner shall be undertaken by the City Council or any other official, quasi-official or deliberative individual or body thereunder. The stop work order will be released and requests will be considered only after the total late fee amount is paid in full, including the required minimum deposit.

D.	STOP WORK ORDERS: As applied to this Section 20.02, a stop work order shall cause all work bein g performed to immediately cease, including but not limited to, construction, plan reviews , inspections, issuance of certificates of occupancy, earth work and utility installation.

E.	WITHDRAWALS	AND	DENIALS	OF    PETITIONS:	A	petiti oner	who
withdraws a petition may apply in writing to the City for a refund of the initial deposit. The City CoWlcil , may , in its discreti on, approve the refWld less any actual fees and costs which the City has already incurred relative to the petition . In the event the City Council denies approval of any or all portions of a petition, a petitioner shall remain liable for all fees and costs which the City has incurred relative to the petition, and no refund of a deposit or deposit balance shall occur until such fees and costs have been paid.
 

E. PROFESSIONAL FEES: Any professional fees incurred as a direct or indirect result of the petitioner, owner or their agent requesting a professional opinion or otherwise requesting relief or assistance from the City, whether or not related to real property, shall be reimbursed in accordance with this Chapter 20 if,in the sole discretion of the City, a professional opinion is desired or necessary.

G.	DEFAULT: Upon the failure of the owner or petitioner to reimburse the City in accordance with this Chapter 20, the Building Commissioner shall place a stop work upon the subject property and no action on any request made by the owner or petitioner will be undertaken by the City Council or by any other official, quasi-official or deliberative individual or body thereunder; and such request shall remain in abeyance until all outstanding fees are paid in full. Upon any failure to reimburse the City in accordance with Chapter 20 of the Marengo Municipal Code, the City may, in its discretion, elect to place a lien against any real property associated with the petitioner's request. Interest in the amount of 1Y2 percent per month shall accrue on all sums outstanding for 30 days or more. Such lien shall be in an amoWlt equal to the outstanding amoW1t owed to the City.

H.	ASSIGNING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and City Council and  the designated City staff members are hereby authorized to assign requests for professional services to the City staff or to consultants as the City CoWlcil deems appropriate.

I.    IN-HOUSE STAFF: When services contemplated by this Chapter 20 are rendered by the City staff, then in such case the party making the request shall reimburse the City for its
)	cost  incurred  for  services  provided  that  go  above  and  beyond  normaJ	installation  of
improvements  and/or  duties  pertaining  to  the  development.  Example  of  billable  time  shall
include but not be limited to field changes, site characteristics that prohibit  design installation, recurring  failed  inspections  as  defined  per  Section  24.18-B 1-5,  recurring  repairs  of  failed
inspection  items  and  any  other  similar  matters  due to  site characteristics  and/or  unforeseen
circumstances. Said reimbursement shall be at the rate of $50 per hour.

J. REMEDIES : The remedies available to the City as set forth herein above are non- exclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to limit or waive the City 's right to proceed against any or all parties . Any action arising out of this Section 20.02 shall be filed in the 22nd Judicial Circuit, McHenry County, Illinois .

K.	AGREEMENT : At the time an owner or petitioner requests action from the City such person(s) shall be required to enter into a Reimbursement of Fees Agreement with the City that contains the parameters of this Section 20.02.

L.	REFUND: After all costs have been paid and upon written request by the owner or petitioner , any surplus funds in the account shall be returned after approval by the Administrator or City Attorney.

M.	PROFESSIONAL   FEES   INCURRED   FOR   INDIVIDUAL	RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY: In the event it is necessary for the City to obtain  professional  services  (such as
those listed in Section 20.02-A herein) in connection with any work proposed for or done on an
 

individual resident 's property, including but not limited to drainage, landscaping or structural issues, the owner of the property shaJ I be liable for the payment of such professional fees plus a service fee for each billing by the City to cover the City's administrative expenses, as determined by the City Council from time to time. Said professional fees shall include but, are not limited to, the costs of any consultation, review of drawings, field inspections and travel expenses.

N.	HIGHER DEPOSIT: Not\vithstanding any of the provisions in this Section 20.02, the City, through its Mayor, City C0tmcil or Administrator, may require a higher deposit and a Reimbursement of Fees Agreement containing additional requirements of the petitioner for development proceedings or reviews after taking into account the following factors: i) scope of the development; ii) the acreage of the development; and iii) the anticipated expense of professional consultants including, but not limited to, engineers, land planners and attorneys, reasonably necessary to review the proposed development request In addition, the City, through its Mayor, City Council, Administrator or attorneys, may negotiate other items relative to the review or development proceeding including, but not limited to, the use of specific consultants and/or attorneys, rates and budgets.
 

EXHIBIT A


Planning, Zoning and Development Review Fees

Proceeding	Fee

Annexation , payable at the time the property is annexed to	$500 per acre or portion thereof the City

Annexation petition	$200

Annexation or development agreement, annexation or	$300 development agreement amendment (includes hearing or
meeting)

Appeal	$500

Re-zoning , residential	$500

Re-zoning, non-residential	$750

Special use permit, residential	$750

SpeciaJ use permit, non-residential	$1000

Zoning text amendment	$500
)	Zoning variation, residential (1 lot)	$250 Zoning variation , residential (more than 1 lot)	$300 per lot
Zoning variation, non-residential	$500

Zoning upon annexation	$350

Subdivision s:

Development concept plan	$250 + $10/acre

Detailed plan	$250 + $1O/acre

Planned developments:

Preliminruy plan	$400 + $10/acre

Final plan	$400 + $10/acre

Amendment	$400 + $1O/acre

Site plan review:

FinaJ plan	$400 + $10/acre

Amendment	$400 + $1O/acre
Concept review	Time as billed (See Sect. 20.02)
 


Meeting, special	
$200
Street Opening Permit	$100 plus $10,000 bond

NOTE: Fees for mixed-use developments  are calculated  on the pro-rated acreage of each use
in  the  parcel.  Fees  for  multiple-item  proceedings  are  cumulative.  If a  proceeding  is consolidated (e.g., preliminary and final plat submitted simultaneously), the fee is the total of
the preliminary and the final action . The acreage fee is per acre or part thereof.
 

EXHIBITB



























)
 

CITY OF MARENGO REIMBURSEMENT OF FEES AGREEMENT

 

OWNER:
 
City of Marengo Account No. ----------
 

Name of Property  Owner:-------------------------

Owner's     Address:----------------------------



 
Telephone Number: ---------	Days  	
 
Evenings
 

PETITIONER:

Name   of  Petitioner:   ---------------------------
Petitioner's   Address : ---------------------------


 
Telephone Number : ---------	Days  	
 
Evenings
 

LOCATION OF PROPERlY:


General Location : ----------------------------




Total Acreage:----------	PIN:  -------------
Legal Description (attach as Exhibit A)



A DEPOSIT: In the event it is necessary for the City to obtain professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers , plarmers, architects, survey ors, traffic or drainage experts, or other consultants, in connection with any petitioner's request for the City to consider or otherwise take action upon any annexation, zoning change, subdivision development, planned development (PUD) or other improvement or development upon real property, then the petitioner and owner of the property shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of such professional fees plus five percent of the professional fees to cover the City 's administrative expenses. At the time the petitioner requests action from the City an initial deposit, pursuant to Exhibit B of this Chapter 20, shall be made with the City and will be credited against fees and costs incurred for the above described services.
 

B.	NOTICES and INVOICES: The City shall send a petitioner regular notices and/or invoices for the fees and costs removed from the required deposit thus far, and the petitioner shall replenish the required deposit within 30 days of said notice/invoice. At all times the petitioner shall maintain a balance equal to its deposit with the City.

C.	W1THDRAWAL OF PETITION: A petitioner who withdraws a petition may apply in writing to the City for a refW1d of the initial deposit. The City Council may, in its discretion, approve the refund application Jess any actual fees and costs which the City has already incurred relative to the petition .

D.	PROFESSIONAL FEES: Any professional fees incurred as a direct or indirect result of the petitioner, owner or their agent requesting a professional opinion or otherwise requesting relief or assistance from the City, whether or not related to real property , shall be reimbursed in accordance with Chapter 20 of the Marengo Municipal Code if, in the sole discretion of the City, a professional opinion is desired or necessary .

E.	STOP WORK ORDERS: A stop work order shall cause all work being performed to irrunediately cease, including but not limited to, construction , plan reviews , inspections, issuance of certificates of occupancy, earth work and utility installation.

F.	DEFAULT: Upon the failure of the owner or petitioner to reimburse the City in accordance with this Chapter 20, the Building Commissioner shall  place a stop work upon the subject property and no action on any request made by the owner or petitioner will be undertaken by the City Council or by any other official, quasi-official or deliberative individual or body thereunder ; and such request shall remain in abeyance W1til all outstanding fees are paid in full. Upon any failure to reimburse the City in accordance with Chapter 20 of the Marengo Municipal Code, the City may, in its discretion, elect to place a lien against any real property associated with the petitioner's request. Interest in the amount of 1Yi percent per month shall accrue on all sums outstanding for 30 days or more. Such lien shall be in an amount equal to the outstanding amount owed to the City.

G.	ASSIGNING AUTHORITY : The Mayor and City Council and the designated City staff members are hereby authorized to assign requests for professional services to the City staff or to consultants as the City Council deems appropriate.

H. IN-HOUSE STAFF: When  any  professional  services  contemplated  by  this Chapter 20 are rendered by the City staff, then in such case the party making the request shall reimburse the City for its cost incurred in providing said professional services. Said reimbursement shal 1 be at the rate of $50 per hour.

I.	REMEDIES: The remedies available to the City as set forth hereinabove are non- exclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to limit or waive the City's right to proceed against any or all parties in a court of law of competent jurisdiction . Any action arising out of Section 20.02 of the Marengo MW1icipal Code shall be filed in the 22"d Judicial Circuit CoW1ty, McHenry County, Illinois .
 

J.	AGREEMENT: At the time and owner or petitioner requests action from the City such person(s) shaJI be required to enter into a Reimbursement of Fees Agreement with the City that contains the parameters of Section 20.02 of the Marengo Municipal Code.

K.      REFUND : After all costs have been paid and upon Written request by the owner or petitioner, any surplus funds in the account shall be returned after approval by the Administrator or City Attorney.

L.    IDGHER DEPOSIT: Notwithstanding any of the provisions in Section 20.02 of the Marengo City Code, the City , through its Mayor, City Council or Administrator, may require a higher deposit and a Reimbursement of Fees Agreement containing adcLitionaJ requirements of the petitioner for development proceedings or reviews after talcing into accotmt the following factors: i) scope of the development ii) the acreage of the development ; and iii) the anticipated expense of professional consultants includ ing, but not limited to, engineers, land planners and attorneys, reasonably necessary to review the proposed development request. In addition, the City, through its Mayor, City Council, Administrator or attorneys, may negotiate other items relative to the review or development proceeding including, but not limited to, the use of specific consultants and/or attorneys, rates and budgets.

By signing this Agreement the petitioner and/or owner acknowledge that each of them has read the foregoing paragraphs and each of them fuJly understands and agrees to comply with the terms set forth herein. Further, by signing below, each signatory warrants that he/she/it possesses full authority to so sign.

The owner and/or petitioner agree that owner and petitioner shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of fees referred to in applicable sections of the ordinances of the City of Marengo, and as referred to hereinabove.

City of Marengo :                                                         Petitioner:



 
City Administrator



 

Owner
 
Date : -----------
 

CHAPTER 21
LANDSCAPING CODE 1

 
21.01
21.02
21.03
21.04
21.05
21.06
21.07
21.08
21.09
21.10
21 .11
21.12
21.13
21.14
21.15


21.01
 
Purpose Definitions
Scope of Regulations Approval Process Plan Preparation
Submittal Requirements Landscape Standards Plant Materials Standards
Maintenance and Replacement
Parking Lot Requirements Landscaping Required Transitional Yards
Freestanding, Ground and Monument Signs Tree Preservation
Prohibited Vegetation


PURPOSE
 

It is the intent of this Chapter 21 to establish regulations limiting the removal and ensuring the replacement of trees from property within the City and, in doing so, safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment of the community. These regulations are further intended to serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing and disturbing of land so as to preserve, insofar as practical, the existing natural vegetation with plant material indigenous to the region, and preserve existing landscape buffers to minimize the impact of adjoining differing land uses, enhance and protect the integrity of roadway corridors, and reduce the surface heat and negative visual impact of vehicular use areas.

21.02              DEFINITIONS

In addition to those terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, the following terms are applicable to this Chapter 21:

Annual: A plant which completes its life cycle in one year or less.
Berm: An earthen mound designed to provide screening of undesirable views, noise reduction, etc. Buffer: A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences or walls,
the purpose of which is to separate and screen conflicting land uses. Deciduous: A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
Evergreen : A plant with foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year.

Fence: A  structure used  as  a  boundary,  screen,  separation,  means  of  privacy,  protection  or confinement.

Fence, open: A open fence is one where visibility at right angles to any surface thereof is not reduced


1 Established by Ordinance 02-8-6, 8/26/02
 

by more than 50 percent.

Fence, solid: A fence including gates which conceals from view of adjoining properties open storage of materials and/or operations conducted behind fenced areas.

Ground cover: A plant that grows near the ground densely and spreads. Generally an herbaceous perennial, sometimes a woody shrub or vine.

Hedgerow: A row of shrubs and/or trees which occur in a row, like a hedge. Sometimes purposely planted for wind control in agricultural areas. More commonly an area along a road or field boundary which, left uncut, has grown up with various plants, seeded by wind, water, birds or other natural methods.

Landscape: An area of land including preserved natural vegetation on which has been located lawns, trees, shrubs, other plants, water areas and other features such as, but not limited to, walks, signs, lighting, parking lots, patios, decorative walls  and fences.

Landscape architect: A professional  who has graduated from an accredited university program in landscape architecture.

Landscape designer: An individual with experience in landscape design.

Landscape screen/buffer, full:. Maximum landscape buffer between two conflicting land uses.

Landscape screen/buffer,  partial. Selective landscape screening between similar land uses.

Landscape yard: A area of ground required to be landscaped for the purpose of screening and buffering a development site.

Native plant: A plant which is known to have originated in and is characteristic of Illinois.

Ornamental tree: A deciduous tree planted primarily for its ornamental value or for screening. May be any size at maturity but will tend to be smaller than a shade tree.
Parkway: The space between a sidewalk and the street generally planted with grass and street trees. Plant preservation credit: Credit given for the preservation of existing vegetation meeting the functional
requirements of this ordinance, in lieu of required new landscaping.

Prairie: A grassland or meadow, usually with native plant species; or a planting of grasses and wildflowers characteristic of the native Illinois prairie.

Screen: A method of reducing the impact of visual intrusions through the use of plant materials, berms, fences and/or walls or any combination thereof. Screening blocks that which is unsightly or offensive with a more harmonious element.

Shade tree: A deciduous (rarely, an evergreen) tree planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead  canopy.

Shrub: A woody plant, smaller than a tree, which consists of a number of small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground. May be deciduous or evergreen.

Shrub, low: Any shrub which attains a mature height of 4 feet or less when left un-pruned.
 

Shrub, tall: Any shrub which attains a mature height of 5 feet or more when left un-pruned.

Street tree: A tree planted in close proximity to a street in order to provide a canopy over the street, to give the street a sense of spacial definition and human scale, to provide shade and soften the street environment.

Tree: A large, woody plant having 1 or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches. May be deciduous or evergreen.

Turf grass: Grasses planted, by seeding or sodding, to establish a lawn, which is usually maintained by  moving.

Wetlands: Those areas periodically inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration under normal circumstances sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, wet meadows, ponds and similar areas as defined by the Corps of Engineers.

21.3	SCOPE OF REGULATIONS

The provisions of this Chapter 21 shall apply to the following:

1.	New construction (multiple-family, business and manufacturing districts only).
2.	Parking Lots
3.	Transitional
4.	Free standing and monument signs

21.4	APPROVAL PROCESS

When a landscape plan is required, the plan shall be submitted to the City with the application for a building permit.

21.5	PLAN PREPARATION

All landscape plans required by this Chapter 21 shall be prepared and signed by a professional landscape architect or landscape designer.

21.6	SUBMITTAL  REQUIREMENTS

The submittal package for a landscape plan shall include planting and site information. The landscape plan may be submitted on a separate sheet or superimposed on a single sheet with the site plan. The submittal  package must  include the following  information:

1.	Site elements: Title block including the name of the project, designer's name, scale of the plan (no smaller than 1" = 50' for plans with trees only; and no smaller than 1" = 20' for plans with
shrubs and smaller plants), north arrow and date of the plan; Property lines;
Name, location, right-of-way and paving widths of all abutting streets; Note zoning and use of all abutting properties;
Natural features  such as ponds,  lakes and  streams;  delineation  of  100-year  floodplain  and
 

wetland boundaries;

Existing and proposed storm water management ponds and areas; Required landscape yard width;
Location, height, dimensions and use of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures, including parking lots, sidewalks and other paved areas; fences and walls; and recreational equipment;

Approved grading plan at one-foot contour interval, with slopes of 4:1 labeled.

2.		Planting elements. Location, general type and quality of existing vegetation, specimen trees and natural areas.

For plant preservation credits: vegetation areas to be saved, including accurate locations noted and a list of typical species. Note methods and details for protection of  existing vegetation during construction. Location and keyed labels of all proposed plants.

Location of all proposed areas to be seeded and/or sodded.
Plant list or schedule to include key symbols, quantity, correct botanical and common names, size and condition of all proposed plants.
Plant names used shall be identified in accordance with Hortus Third, by L. H. Bailey, 1976. All plant sizes and conditions listed shall conform to the American Standards For Nursery Stock
as published by the American Association of Nurserymen, latest edition.                                   ·

Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, foundations,  street furniture, signs, lighting and paved areas.

Planting installation details as necessary to ensure conformance with American Association of Nurserymen's Standards, latest edition; and standards as specified in this Chapter 21.

General and specific notes to indicate or explain the design and construction procedures to be used.

3.		Cost estimate and notification to permitting body. Upon approval of the landscape plan, a cost estimate prepared by a recognized landscape contractor shall be submitted.

A conditional occupancy permit will be issued when the project's buildings may be occupied but landscaping has not been installed due to weather conditions. A final occupancy permit will be issued upon completion of all landscaping

21.7	LANDSCAPE STANDARDS

Appropriateness: The landscape plan should consider the type of use the development will receive and use plants which will integrate the development site into the surrounding area. Adjacent existing uses will determine the type and extent of screening and buffering required.

Screening: Materials may consist of evergreen trees and shrubs; ornamental trees and deciduous shrubs with dense branching; shade trees; and fences, walls and berms. Planted screens shall be arranged in clusters of plants to create optimum screening according to site conditions  and as the designer sees
 

fit. Excepting limited space for full screening, plants should not be spaced out equally in a line within the required landscape yard length.

Fences and Walls: Screening fences and walls should be built of materials compatible with that of the main building. The use of corrugated metal, corrugated fiberglass, sheet metal, chain link or wire mesh shall not be counted as a screen in landscape yard calculations.

Berms: Screening may be accomplished with the use of earth berms in combination with plants. The minimum height required shall be 2.5 feet, with a minimum width of 12 feet. Taller berms require more width so slopes do not become too steep. Slopes shall not exceed 4: 1. Berms should be designed with gently curving slopes so they are not susceptible to erosion. Staggering berms allow for drainage and provide visual variety.  Ground cover plants may be used to reduce mowing on berms.

21.8	PLANT MATERIALS STANDARDS Amended, Ord.  04-3-1

Plant material standards shall be as follows:

1.	All plants shall conform to the American Standards for Nursery Stock, latest edition, and shall be installed according to the current standards of the American Association  of Nurserymen.

2.	Plant availability and hardiness: All plants used in landscape plans shall be readily available and shall be proven to be reliably hardy in USDA Zone 5. Plants shall have a vigorous root system and shall be free from defects, insects and diseases. Substandard plant material will be rejected .

3.	Deciduous trees shall be fully branched, have a minimum caliper of 3 inches for nonresidential and 2 % inches for residential development measured 6 inches above ground level. Specimens shall be properly pruned to maintain a natural form.

4.	Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height and fully branched to the ground.

5.	Shrubs shall be supplied in 1 gallon or larger containers or balled and burlapped and at least 18 inches in height or spread, whichever  applies.

6.	Ground cover plants shall be planted so that an effective covering is obtained within two growing seasons.

7.	At the intersection of all streets and/or the intersection of any service entrance drive from a street to a zoning lot, line of sight easements shall be established within the triangular area formed: at the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines; and/or the intersection of any street right-of-way line with any service entrance drive (both sides of such drive), by a line drawn between such right-of-way lines, and/or such right-of-way line and service entrance drive line, at a distance along such line of 25 feet from the point of intersection thereof.

8.	Plant materials, including deciduous and evergreen trees, shall not cause a hazard. Landscape plant material overhanging walks, pedestrian or bicycle paths and seating areas shall be pruned to a minimum height of  12 feet above parking lot aisles and spaces.

9.	Landscape plant materials shall be selected which do not generally interfere with utilities above or below ground level at maturity.

10.	Parking Lot Clearance:  No shrub or tree shall be planted closer than 2 feet from any curb face.

11.	Planting Space Required: Trees planted in cutouts, in walks or in pedestrian areas shall have a
 

minimum of 4-foot by 4-foot or a 5-foot diameter circle of open soil, and shall be protected by
the use of tree grates of edging which does not pose a hazard to pedestrians.

12.	Landscape plant materials shall be properly guyed and staked in accordance with current industry standards, where necessary. Stakes and guy wires shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

13.	Landscape plant materials shall be protected from damage due to foot or vehicular traffic by protective tree grates, pavers, curbs or other suitable methods which prevent soil compaction.

14.	Appropriate methods of care and maintenance of the landscape shall be provided by the owner of the property.

15. Additional  landscape screening/buffering  may be required when an incompatible  use occurs which may have a high impact on adjacent development, as determined by the City. A high impact use is one which is expected to have a strong effect on adjacent properties, due to one or  more of the following:

Noise;

Outdoor loading spaces;

Exterior storage, attractive nuisances and objectionable views; Dust, fumes,  odors and vibration;
Litter;

Bright lighting during the evening or at night or headlights from vehicles using the development at night;

Height of structures above the normally allowed  height for the specific  zone; or adjacent to development  of a different zone or zones with a lower building height limit; or

Barrier screening/buffering required for safety and liability reasons.

21.09	MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT

The owner, occupant, tenant and agent of each property shall be individually and collectively responsible for the maintenance, repair and  replacement of all landscaping, screening and curbing whether or not required by these regulations so as to preserve at least the same quantity, quality and screening effectiveness  as initially installed.

21.10	PARKING LOT REQUIREMENTS

The following requirements apply to all parking lot landscaping:

1.	.     Parking lot interior landscaping shall be provided for lots with 10,000 square feet or  more of total parkway.

2.	Planting islands shall be placed in the following areas of all parking lots:

A.	End islands shall be provided at each end of all parking bays, except where corner
 

islands are provided.

 
B.	Intermediate islands shall be provided after every 12th space, or after every 81
 
parking
 
space for single-aisle parking lots.

C.	Center islands shall be provided between head-in parking for the full length of every other parking bay unless there are 3 or fewer parallel aisles of parking.

D.	Corner islands shall be provided at the end of 2 perpendicular parking bays when these bays are at the edge of the parking lot.

In the event that the site geometry of the proposed parking lot does not allow strict adherence to the above requirements, alternate schemes will be reQuired to provide at least 10 percent of the parking lot area in landscaped islands.

3.	Minimum dimensions of planting islands, including a six-inch curb:

A.	End islands shall be a minimum width of 9 feet and a minimum length of 36 feet, 45 feet with a center island, for a double bay of parking.

B.	Intermediate and half end islands shall be a minimum width of 9 feet and a minimum length of 18 feet, except in single aisle parking lots, where the minimum width shall be 13 feet. In the case of angle parking, the perpendicular length from the center line of the parking bay to the aisle shall be the minimum length.

C.	Corner islands shall be a minimum of 18 feet sQuare, except in the case of angle parking, where the perpendicular length of the stall from the center line of the parking bay shall be the minimum dimension.

D.	Center islands between head-in parking shall be a minimum width of 9 feet, and the same length as the parking bay.

4.	A  curb shall be provided for  all parking  spaces  adjacent  to  planting or  pedestrian areas to  prevent vehicle overhang, except in the case of handicapped access ramps.

21 .11	LANDSCAPING REQUIRED

A predetermined number of plants are required to provide overhead and low screening of motor vehicles in parking lots. Shade trees and low shrubs or ground cover plants are specified for each type of landscape island. Turf grass may be used but will not be counted as part of the required plants. Ground cover plants may be substituted for any or all of the low shrubs at a ratio of 14:1 when perimeter landscape yards also provide off-site screening for the parking area . Required plantings are:

9 feet wide intermediate and half-end islands: 1 shade tree and 9 low shrubs or 126 ground cover plants (excluding turf grass} or some combination .

13 feet wide intermediate and half-end islands: 1 shade tree and 12 low shrubs or 168 ground cover plants (excluding turf grass) or some combination.

•	9 feet wide end islands:  2 shade trees and  15 low shrubs  or  21 0 ground cover  plants (excluding turf grass) or some combination.

18 feet corner islands: 1 shade tree and 21 low shrubs or 294 ground cover plants (excluding
 

turf grass) or some combination.

9 feet  wide  center  islands:  3 shade trees and 36 low  shrubs  or  504 ground  cover  plants (excluding turf grass) or some combination; all per 100 linear feet of island.

21.12	TRANSITIONAL  YARDS

A.	APPLICABILITY: All non-residential and multiple-family residential developments shall provide lot perimeter landscaping in accordance with the provision of this Chapter 21 .

B.	NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY ABUTTING NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Where non-
residential  property abuts property zoned for  non-residential  use, landscaping  shall be provided  as follows:

1.	Width: A landscaped area a minimum of  10 feet in width shall be provided.

2.	Planting Materials. A minimum of 50 percent of the required landscape setback shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of 25 percent evergreen trees a minimum of 6 feet tall, 25 percent shade trees a minimum of 3 inches in caliper, and ornamental trees a minimum of 6 feet tall and 50 percent evergreen and deciduous shrubs a minimum of 3 feet tall. Whenever possible, berms should be used in conjunction with the landscaping.

C.	GROUND COVER: Except where occupied by planting beds, all perimeter landscaping areas shall be sodded or seeded.

D.	NON-RESIDENTIAL  PROPERTY  ABUTTING  RESIDENTIAL  PROPERTY:  Where  non-
residential property abuts property zoned for residential use, landscaping shall be provided as follows:

1.	Width: A landscaped area a minimum of  15 feet in width shall be provided.

2.	Screening: Solid landscape screening to a minimum of 6 feet in height above the grade of the subject property and in a design satisfactory to the Administra­ tor shall be provided along the length of the abutting  property line. If deter­ mined necessary by the City, due to topographical changes between the abutting commercial and residential property, the minimum height of the required screening may be increased to 8 feet. Any landscape materials used shall be made up of 25 percent evergreen trees a minimum of 6 feet tall, 25 ornamental trees a minimum of 3 inches in caliper or clumps 6 feet tall and 50 percent evergreen and deciduous shrubs achieving a minimum height of screening 6 feet at the time of planting. Whenever possible, berms should be used in conjunction  with the landscaping.

3.	Shade Trees: Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent of not more than 30 feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees may be clustered or spaced linearly.

4.	Ground  Cover:  Except  where  occupied   by  planting   beds,   all perimeter landscaping areas shall be sodded or seeded.

E.	MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Multiple-family residential property shall be landscaped as follows:
 

1.	Width: A landscaped area a minimum of 10 feet in width shall be provided.

2.	.         Landscaping: A minimum of 50 percent of the required landscape setback shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall be made up of 50  percent evergreen trees and ornamental trees a minimum of 6 feet tall and 50 percent evergreen and  deciduous  shrubs a  minimum of  3 feet  tall.  Whenever  possible,  berms should be used in conjunction with the landscaping.

3.	Shade Trees. Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent of not more than 30 feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees may be clustered or spaced linearly.

4.	Ground Cover: Except where occupied by planting beds, all landscaping areas shall be sodded or seeded.

5.	Building Perimeter Landscaping: Building perimeter landscaping in a minimum planting bed with a width of 8 feet shall be provided along 100 percent of all building facades except where sidewalks and driveways are located. Fifty percent of the landscape requirements shall be made up of evergreen trees and shrubs and 50 percent deciduous trees, ornamental trees and shrubs.

21.13	FREESTANDING,  GROUND AND  MONUMENT SIGNS

Every permit application for  a freestanding,  ground or  monument  sign shall  be accompanied  by a landscape plan meeting the standards hereinafter specified:

1.	For every square foot of sign surface area, there shall be provided 1 Y2 square feet of landscape area.

2.	Any freestanding, ground or monument sign constructed or erected to a height in excess of 8 feet above the average surrounding grade shall be required to be improved with an additional 1% square feet of landscaped area for each foot of height or portion thereof that said sign is constructed or  erected above said 8 feet in height. As all such freestanding, ground or monument signs may not exceed a height of 12 feet above the average surrounding grade, the additional landscaping requirements set forth herein shall not exceed 6 square feet.

3.	Sodded or seeded areas shall not qualify as such a landscaped area.

4.	The required landscaped areas shalt be improved with such plantings as hedges, conifers, flowering plants, evergreens, etc., of a size and in quantity proportionate to the size and height of the sign as judged by the Administrator.

5.	In addition to the plantings herein described, the landscaped area shall also include ground protection such as, but not limited to, ground cover plants, landscaping bar, decorative stone or landscape timbers.

6.	It shall be the duty of each party owning any lot or parcel improved or to be improved with the landscaping required herein to maintain said landscaping including, but not by way of limitation, the replacement of any dead or diseased vegetation, the trimming of any overgrown vegetation and the maintenance of any groundcover or protection provided in accordance with the terms hereof.

21 .14	TREE PRESERVATION
 

Tree preservation is addressed in Section 6.24 of this Code.

21.15	PROHIBITED VEGETATION

The following vegetation is prohibited in the City: TREES:

BOTANICAL NAME	COMMON NAME	REMARKS
Acer negundo	Box Elder	Weak wood; invasive
Ailanthus  altissima	Tree-of-Heaven	Weak wood; invasive
Betula oendula	European Birch	Borers; disease
Catalpa  species	Catalpa	Weak wood; litter; invasive
Ginkgo biloba (Female) seeds	Female Ginkgo	Offensive fruit; seeds
Gleditsia triacanthos	Torny Honeylocust	Thorns; seed pods; thornless varieties acceptable
Maclura pomifera	Osage-orange	Large fruit; thorns
Morus species	Mulberry	Weak wood; fruit; invasive
Rhamnus frangula	Buckthorn	Weak wood; fruit; invasive
Robinia species	Locust	Weak wood; litter; invasive
Serbus aucuoaria	European Mountainash	Borers; disease
Ulmus American	American  Elm	Disease; insects
Ulmus pumila	..Chinese .. (Siberian)	Weak wood; disease; insects invasive
	Elm	
Disease resistant varieties are acceptable upon prior approval.

SHRUBS AND HERBACEOUS PLANTS:

I Coronilla varia	I Crownvetch	Invasive; intolerant of other plants Highway/large  embankments only

Lonicera japonica	Japanese Honeysuckle	Very invasive; crowds out; native understory vegetation
Lythrum salicaria	Purple Loosestrife	Very invasive; replaces native vegeta- tion in wetlands
Rosa multiflora oints	Multiflora Rose	Very invasive; thorns
 




CHAPTER 22 MARENGO ZONING CODE
Ordinance 02-8-2, passed 8/26/2002


Section 1	Title and Authority
Section 2	Intent and Purpose
Section 3	Definitions
Section 4	Use Districts
Section 5	General Provisions
Section 6	Non-Conforming Building and Uses
Section 7	Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
Section 8	Off-Street Parking and Loading
Section 9	Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas Section 10	Residential/Agricultural Districts
Section 11	Business Districts
Section 12	ORI Office, Research & Light Industrial Districts Section 13	Manufacturing District
Section 14	Performance Standards
Section 15	Special Uses
Section 16	Planned Developments
Section 17	Administration
Section 18	Interpretation: Purpose and Conflict
Section 19	Fees
Section 20	Violations: Penalty
Section 21	Validity
Section 22	When Effective
 
SECTION 1  TITLE AND AUTHORITY

1.1	Title
1.2	Authority

SECTION 2  INTENT AND PURPOSE

SECTION 3  DEFINITIONS

SECTION 4  USE DISTRICTS
 
5.15	Outside Display, Sales and Storage Special Permit
5.16	Use of Commercial Truck Trailers and Railroad Cars for Storage
5.17	Refuse Containers
5.18	Determination of Similar and Compatible Uses

SECTION 6  NONCONFORMING
BUILDINGS AND USES
 

 
4.1	Zoning Districts
4.2	Zoning Maps
4.3	New and Annexed Land
4.4	Zoning of Streets, Alleys, Public Ways, Waterways and Railroad Rights-of- Ways
4.5	Boundary Lines
4.6	General Provisions
4.7	Meeting Minimum Zoning Requirements
4.8	Access Required
4.9	Front Setbacks- Corner/Through Lots
4.10	Intrusion In To Yards
4.11	Private Garages
4.12	Lot Coverage

SECTION 5  GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
6.1	Purpose
6.2	Nonconforming Lots
6.3	Residential Districts
6.4	Business, ORI, and Manufacturing Districts
6.5	Two or More Lots in Common Ownership
6.6	Nonconforming Structures
6.7	Nonconforming Uses Occupying a Structure
6.8	Nonconforming Use of Land

SECTION 7  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES, AND USES

7.01	Uses Permitted as Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses
 
	7.02	Location of Accessory Buildings, Structures,
5.01	Scope of Regulations		and Uses
5.02	Permits	7.03	Construction of Accessory Buildings and
5.03	Building Height, Bulk and Lot		Structures
	Coverage	7.04	Number, Height and Size of Accessory
5.04	Lot Area and Dimension		Buildings and Structures
5.05	Location of Buildings	7.05	Distance Between Buildings or Structures
5.06	Buildings Under Construction	7.06	Regulations for Specific Accessory
5.07	Buildings on a Zoning Lot		Buildings, Structures and Uses
5.08	Rezoning of Public and Semi-Public	7.07	Wireless Telecommunications Towers and
	Areas		Antenna Regulations
5.09	Vision Clearance, Corner Lots	7.08	Antennas in Residential Zoning Districts
5.10	Regulation of Space and Density of	7.09	Antennas in Business and Manufacturing
	Residential Dwelling Units		Districts
5.11	Home Occupations- Regulations	7.10	Amateur Radio Facilities With Surface
5.12	Fences, Shrubs, Hedges and Decorative		Area Exceeding 10 Square Feet
	Structures	7.11	Additional Regulations for Antennas
5.13	Yard and Building Setback Exceptions		and Antenna Support Structures in All
5.14	Travel Trailers and Recreational		Zoning Districts
	Vehicles		
 
7.12	Nonconforming Accessory Buildings, and Uses
 
11.2	B-1 Central Business District
11.3	B-2 General Business District
11.4	B-3 Regional Shopping District
 
SECTION 8  OFF-STREET PARKING AND 11.05	BP Business Park District
LOADING
 

8.1	Purpose
8.2	General Provisions, Parking, and Loading
8.3	Additional Regulations, Parking
8.4	Location of Parking Areas
8.5	Off-Street Loading and Unloading
8.6	Formulas for Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements
8.7	Number of Parking and Loading Spaces Required
8.8	Additional Parking Regulations

SECTION 9  WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS

9.1	Purpose
9.2	Definitions
9.3	Applicability
9.4	General Requirements
9.5	Permitted Uses
9.6	Administratively Approved Uses
9.7	Special Use Permits
9.8	Buildings or Other Equipment Storage
9.9	Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers
9.10	Nonconforming Uses

SECTION 10 RESIDENTIAL/
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT

10.1	Purpose
10.2	ER Estate Residential District
10.3	R-1 One-Family District
10.4	R-2 One-Family District
10.5	R-3 One-Family District
10.6	R-5 Multiple Family District
10.7	AT Agricultural Transition District

SECTION 11 BUSINESS DISTRICTS

11.01	Purpose
 
SECTION 12 ORI OFFICE, RESEARCH
& LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

12.1	Purpose
12.2	Use Restrictions
12.3	Lot and Building Requirements
12.4	Permitted Uses
12.5	Special Uses

SECTION 13 MANUFACTURING
DISTRICT

13.1	Purpose
13.2	Use Restrictions
13.3	Lot and Building Requirements
13.4	Permitted Uses
13.5	Special Uses

SECTION 14 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

14.1	Purpose
14.2	Noise
14.3	Air Pollution
14.4	Water Pollution
14.5	Open Burning
14.6	Toxic or Noxious Matter
14.7	Odors
14.8	Fire and Explosive Hazards
14.9	Vibration
14.10	Glare or Heat

SECTION 15 SPECIAL USES

15.1	Purpose
15.2	General Requirements
15.3	Standards for Special Uses
15.4	Motor Vehicle Special Uses
15.5	Motor Vehicle Service Stations
15.6	Kennels
15.7	Rest Homes, Nursing Homes
15.8	Group Homes
15.9	Earth Material Extraction,
 
Processing, Site Reclamation and Related Operations
15.10	Adult Businesses
15.11	Bed and Breakfast Establishments
15.12	Adult Use Cannabis Business Establishments
15.13	Conditions of Approval

SECTION 16 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT

16.1	Purpose
16.2	Where Permitted
16.3	Minimum Area
16.4	Required Sewer and Water
16.5	Procedure, Application, and Referral
16.6	Preliminary Application for Development Plan
16.7	Planned Development Final Approval
16.8	General Standards
16.9	Bulk Regulations
16.10	Approval
16.11	Time Limit
16.12	Minor Modification of Plans
16.13	Performance

SECTION 17 ADMINISTRATION
 
17.15	Public Hearing Requirements
17.16	Written Protests
17.17	Hearing Officer Alternative Process

SECTION 18 INTERPRETATION: PURPOSE AND CONFLICT

SECTION 19 FEES

SECTION 20 VIOLATIONS: PENALTY

SECTION 21 VALIDITY SECTION 22 WHEN EFFECTIVE
 

17.1	Zoning Administrator
17.2	Certificate of Zoning Compliance
17.3	Certificate of Appropriateness
17.4	Continuance of Existing Uses
17.5	Planning and Zoning Commission
17.6	Variations and Standards for Variations
17.7	Special Uses and Standards for Special Uses
17.8	Text Amendments and Standards for Text Amendments
17.9	Re-zonings (Map Amendments) and Standards for Re-zonings
17.10	Conditions
17.11	City Council Action
17.12	Change of Zoning
17.13	Implementation of Variations/Special Uses
17.14	Revocation of Variations/Special Uses
 
CHAPTER 22 ZONING CODE






SECTION 1
TITLE AND AUTHORITY

This Chapter 22 shall be known and may be cited as the" Zoning Code" of the City of Marengo, McHenry County, Illinois. For the purposes of this Chapter 22, alternate terms and titles such as "Marengo Zoning Code," "Marengo Zoning Regulations," "Chapter 22 of the Marengo Municipal Code," the formerly-used term" Marengo Zoning Ordinance," and similar designations shall be deemed synonymous. Within Chapter 22, the terms "Code" and "Chapter" are used to refer to this "Zoning Code" unless otherwise defined. The" Zoning Code" and any subsequent amendments thereto may be published separately from the Marengo Municipal Code, and any such publication shall be deemed to be incorporated into the Marengo Municipal Code by reference and to be deemed in full force and effect.

1.2	AUTHORITY
This Chapter 22 is adopted under authority vested in the City of Marengo under the provisions of
the Illinois Municipal Code (Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et. seq., as amended).
 



SECTION 2
INTENT AND PURPOSE

This Zoning Code is adopted for the following purposes:

1.	To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort , and general welfare of the people;

2.	To divide the City of Marengo into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construct ion, reconstruction, alteration and use of the buildings, structures and land for residences, business, manufacturing and other specified uses;

3.	To protect the character and the stability of the residential business and manufacturing areas within the City of Marengo and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas;

4.	To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to property;

5.	To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light and air and to protect the public health;

6.	To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, business, manufacturing, or other uses within such areas;
7.	To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein;

8.	To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning district;

9.	To prevent additions to, or alterations or remodeling of , existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder;

10.	To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;

11.	To protect against f ire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare;

12.	To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them;
 
13.	To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City.

14.	To provide for the elimination of non-conforming uses of land, buildings, and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district;

15.	To clearly and concisely explain the procedures for obtaining variances, special use permits, amendments and other zoning processes;

16.	And to define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein.
 



SECTION 3
DEFINITIONS

In the construction of this Zoning Code, the rules and definitions contained in this Section 3 shall be observed and applied, except when repugnant to the context of any provision.
Words, whether capitalized or not, used in the present tense shall include the past and future tenses, and words used in the future tense shall include the present tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders; the word "building" shall include the word "structure" and the word "lot" shall include the word "plot"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, while the word "may" is permissive; and the words "zone," "district" or "zoning district" may be used interchangeably. Definitions in Appendix A of the Marengo Municipal Code are applicable to this Zoning Code. Unless indicated otherwise, definitions are not case sensitive.

Abandoned: To give up one's right or interest in property. Abutting: Having a common lot line or district line.
Accessory Building, Structure or Use:  A subordinate building, structure, or use which is located on the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated or occurs, and which is customary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or the primary use on the lot, when permitted by district regulations.

Access: The ability to ingress and/or egress from a public roadway.

Access Way: A curb cut, ramp, driveway or other means for providing vehicular access to an off street parking or loading area.

Acreage: Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or more which has not been subdivided by metes and bounds or platted.

Addition: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure including but not limited to the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure.

Adult Business: As defined in Chapter 44, Adult Business Licenses, of the Marengo Municipal Code.

Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishment:  An adult-use cannabis cultivation center, craft grower, processing organization or processor, infuser organization or infuser, dispensing organization or transporting organization or transporter.

Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower: A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis
 
and perform other necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing organization or processor, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.

Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center: A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.

Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization:  A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.

Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser:  A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.

Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor: A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.

Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter: An organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.

Airport or Aircraft Landing Field: Any landing area, runway or other facility (including heliports), designed, used or intended to be used either publicly or privately by any person or persons for the landing and taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.

Aisle:  A vehicular traffic way within an off-street parking area, used as a means of access/egress from parking spaces.
Alley: A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. Alter: To change the size, shape or use of a structure.
 
Alteration: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior features of a structure including but not limited to the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure.

Amendment: A change in the provisions of this Zoning Code (including those portions incorporated by reference), properly effected in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein.

Antenna: An arrangement of wires, metal rods or similar materials used for the transmission and or reception of electromagnetic waves to include satellite dishes and communication towers. Antenna Support Structure: Any structure utilized for the principal purpose of supporting a satellite dish antenna.

Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment.

Arcade: Any establishment displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation four or more amusement devices including, but not limited to, pool tables, foosball tables, air hockey tables, mechanical rides for children, electronic games and shooting gallery type games.

Asphalt: A mixture of petroleum by-products and gravel used for paving to form a smooth, permanent surface, "Asphaltic concrete" does not mean "oil and chip."
Attached: As applied to buildings, "attached" means having a common wall and/or a common roof.

Automobile Car Wash / Laundry: A building or portion thereof where automobiles are washed by mechanical device.

Automobile Repair, Major: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.

Automobile Repair, Minor: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service automobiles, but not including any operation specified under "Automobile Repair, Major."

Automobile Sales Lot: A lot arranged, designed or used for the storage and display for sale of any motor vehicle including trucks or any type of trailer, provided that the trailer is unoccupied and where repair work as an accessory use is done to automobiles or trailers.

Automobile Service Station: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public on the premises and including minor accessories and services for automobiles; but not including major

Automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where a mechanical device is employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the
 
conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations shall not include sale or storage of junkers or junk yards as defined herein.

Automobile Wrecking Yard: Any place where one or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicle or parts thereof, and including any used farm vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.

Awning: A roof like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the public way.

Basement: A story partly underground. Where more than one-half of its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of the adjoining ground where curb level has not been established, a basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.

Bed and Breakfast: As defined in 50 ILCS 820/2. An owner-occupied dwelling unit having not more than five guest rooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided to the public for compensation.

Bedroom: Any room which may be used for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, 10ft or extra room located on any floor in a dwelling unit which is not clearly identified for some specific purpose such as a kitchen (one per unit), dining room (one per unit), living room (one per unit), bathroom(s) and family room (one per unit). Amended, 03-1-8

Billboard: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any bulletin boards used to announce church services, or to display court or other public office notices or signs offering the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is located.

Block: A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore lines of waterways or a corporate boundary line of the City.

Boarding House: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals are provided for compensation to four or more persons, but not more than 12, who are not members of the keeper's family.

Board of Appeals: The Planning and Zoning Commission, and may also be referred to as the Zoning Board of Appeals.

Buffer Strip: An area of land, undeveloped except for landscaping, fences, etc., used to protect a use.

situated on one lot from the deleterious effects of the use on the adjacent lot.

Buildable Area: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open space requirements of this Zoning Code have been complied with.
 
Building: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows, or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers and other similar structures, are not considered as buildings. Building, Completely Enclosed: A "completely enclosed building" is a building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal exit or entrance doors.

Building Front: That portion of a building where the primary building entrance is located. Where more than one primary building entrance is provided, the building front shall be that portion of the building facing toward the street to which the legal address has been assigned. Comer lots shall have only one building front. The legal address of a building on a comer lot shall be determined by factors including, but not limited to: orientation of building, location of driveway, and placement of mailbox.

Building Height: The vertical distance measured at the established grade on the front side of the building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building. Amended, 03-1-8

Building, Non-Conforming: Any building which does not conform to the regulations of this Zoning Code prescribing the maximum floor area ratio, required yards, coverage, height and setbacks, minimum required spacing between buildings on a single lot, and minimum required usable open space for the district in which such building is located.

Building, Principal: A building within which the principal use of the zoning lot is conducted.
Amended, 03-1-8

Building Line or Building Setback Line: A line or lines on the horizontal surface of a lot, parallel or nearly parallel to the front, side, and rear lot lines, and located at a distance prescribed by the yard regulations and beyond which no portion of a building or structure may extend as provided for in this Zoning Code.

Bulk: The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of buildings and other structures, as to size, height, coverage, shape, location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the center line of streets, to other walls of the same building and to other buildings or structures, and to all open spaces relating to the building or structure.

Business Park: A collection of lots and/or buildings wherein the principal land use is commercial in nature.

Bus Lot: Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger buses or motor coaches.
 
Canopy: A roof-like structure similar to an awning, except that it cannot be raised or retracted to a position against the building.

Cartage, Local: Pick-up and delivery of parcels, packages and freight by motor truck within and not exceeding 15 miles of the City.

Cellar: A cellar is a story having more than one-half of its height below the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.

Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the animal or human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes.

Centerline:
1.	The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width;

2.	The original centerline where a right-of-way has been widened irregularly;

3.	The new centerline whenever a road has been relocated.

Certificate of Appropriateness: A certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission authorizing plans for alterations, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or site within a designated historic preservation district.

Changeable Copy Sign: A sign which has provision for changing the message thereon either manually or electronically.

Church: A building primarily used for religious worship. The word "church" shall include, but not be limited to, chapel, temple, synagogue and mosque.

Clinic or Medical Health Center: An establishment where patients are admitted for special study and treatment by one or more licensed physicians and their professional associates, practicing medicine together.

Club or Lodge, Private: A "private club or lodge" is a nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion thereof.

Commercial Use Establishment: Any use or establishment wherein goods are purchased or sold whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other businesses (wholesale).

Commercial Vehicle: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a vehicle used in a ride sharing arrangement when being used for that purpose or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. In any event, any vehicle that is licensed for a gross weight, including vehicle and cargo, of 8,001 pounds or more, or any vehicle used in a commercial enterprise and containing lettering or logo on the vehicle body advertising that commercial enterprise, shall be considered a commercial vehicle.

Commission: The Building and Zoning Commission of the City.
 
Comprehensive Plan: The adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City, and as amended from time to time.

Conforming: In compliance with the applicable provisions of this Zoning Code.

Corner Side Yard: The side yard adjacent to a street or private road extending from the front yard building setback line to the rear lot line. 08-1-4

Corrective Action Order: A legally binding order issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the procedures set forth herein to effect compliance with this Zoning Code.

Curb Level: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street, the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building shall be considered the "curb level."

Day Care Center: Any child care facility operated for profit or not-for-profit, which regularly provides day care for minor children and which must be licensed to render such day care by the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services.

Deck: An exterior floor system supported on at least two opposing sides by an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers or other independent supports.

Decorative Structure: Any embellishment or ornamental object that is built or placed in a yard, such as a planter, lighting fixture or fountain, which is less than eight feet in height, is accessory to the principal structure on the lot, and is associated with the landscaping on the lot.

Design Guideline: A standard of appropriate alteration or construction activity that will preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or area.

Detached: As applied to buildings, "detached" means surrounded by yards on the same lot as the building.

Develop: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.

Dimensions: Refers to lot depth, lot width and total lot area.

Doghouse: An exterior shelter that does not exceed four feet in height and 25 square feet in floor area or lot coverage for the exclusive use of domesticated canine animals containing walls, roof, floor and one opening for ingress and egress of the canine animals.

Door: Full, complete, non-transparent closure device that obscures the view or activity taking place within the enclosure.

Drive-in (through) Restaurant: Any food service establishment or restaurant or similar place in which food or drink is for sale on the premises or elsewhere in which service is received in an
 
automobile or at central service windows. The term "drive-in" shall apply to any food service establishment other than cafeterias, in which service is made to a customer at a location other than tables on the premises intended for use by the customer for eating.

Drive-in Theater: A tract of land developed with facilities for projecting motion pictures on an outdoor screen for viewing by patrons in automobiles parked on the premises.

Driveway: A paved area on private property that intersects with the roadway ofa public street and is intended to provide vehicle access from the public roadway to a private property. 08-1-4

Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.

Dwelling Unit: A unit within a dwelling, entirely separated from any other unit within said dwelling, designed for occupancy by one family.

Dwelling, One-Family: A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy by one family, and entirely separated from any other dwelling by space.

Dwelling, Two-Family: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units for occupancy by two families.

Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building or portion thereof, designed or altered for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other.

Dwelling, Row-Party Wall: A row of two to eight attached, one-family, party-wall dwellings, not more than 21/2 stories in height, nor more than two rooms in depth measured from the building line.

Easement: Land that has been designated by lawful agreement between the owner of such land and another person or entity for a specified use only by such person or entity.

Eave: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. Enclosed: See "building, completely enclosed" herein.
Enlarge: To increase the size (floor area, height, etc.) of an existing principal structure or accessory
use, or to devote more land to an existing use. Erect: To build, construct.
Establishment: Either of the following:
1.	An institutional, business, commercial or industrial activity that is the sole occupant of one (1) or more buildings~ or

2.	An institutional, business, commercial or industrial activity that occupies a portion of a building such that:
 
a.	The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other activities within the building and not a department of the whole; and

b.	The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of the building or a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entryway that has direct access to the exterior of the building.

Existing: Actually constructed or in operation on the effective date of this Zoning Code.

Exterior Architectural Appearance: The architectural and general composition of the exterior of a structure including but not limited to the composition, color and texture of the building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.

Family: One of the following, except as otherwise provided herein:

1.	Two or more individuals related by blood, marriage or legal adoption (including foster children), together with domestic servants and not more than two gratuitous guests, living as a single, not-for-profit housekeeping unit occupying a dwelling unit.

2.	Three or fewer individuals not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption (including foster children), living as a single, not-for-profit housekeeping unit occupying a dwelling unit.
Servants or guests residing with said family shall be included in the unrelated person attained by this definition, and shall not be in addition thereto.

3.	No more than two individuals who are not necessarily related to each other by blood, and their dependents, together with domestic servants and not more than two gratuitous guests, living as a single, not-for-profit housekeeping unit occupying a dwelling unit.

FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.

Fence: A free-standing structure of metal, masonry, wood or other solid durable material composed of natural, manufactured or processed materials, or any combination thereof, not part of any building, which rests on a raised platform or is supported by posts on or partially buried in the ground, and is used to confine, screen, partition, enclose, visually define or otherwise create a form of barrier for an area. A fence is a structure forming a barrier above a raised platform or at grade level between lots, between a lot and a street or other public right-of-way, or between portions of a lot or lots. A fence may be solid or partially permeable to light and air, and therefore a wall shall be deemed to constitute a fence. A hedge or series of shrubs densely planted in such a fashion so as to create a barrier sharing similar characteristics of a fence shall also be deemed to constitute a fence.

Fence, Decorative: Any fence installed only as an ornamental embellishment at a lot comer or adjacent to a street which may include associated plantings and/or other landscape features.

Fence, Marketing: Any fence installed only as an ornamental embellishment at a lot comer or adjacent to a street which may include associated plantings and/or other landscape features, which has been installed by a developer of a subdivision with the consent of the City as a temporary structure for purposes of assisting in marketing the development.
 
Floor Area, Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center of the common walls of attached buildings. Gross floor area includes living areas; halls, closets, stairwells; space devoted to mechanical equipment and enclosed porches.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The gross floor area of the building or buildings on the zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot; or in the case of a planned development, by the net site area.

Frontage: The lineal extent of the front (street-side) of a lot.

Foundation, Permanent: A closed perimeter formation consisting of materials such as concrete or concrete block which extends into the ground below the frost line.

Game Area: Any building or portion thereof, where three or more amusement devices are located in an area or areas under the leasehold or ownership control of one person. For purposes of this definition, an area includes all common walkways, malls and pedestrian thoroughfares in any building or series of buildings connected by party walls. The presence of less than three such devices shall not be included in this definition if such devices are located wholly within an establishment and are accessory to the principal use.

Garage, Bus or Truck: Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of three or more passenger motor buses, or motor coaches used in public transportation, including school buses, or a building which is used or intended to be used for the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles exceeding 1 1/2 ton capacity.

Garage, Private: A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premise.

Garage, Public: A building, other than a private garage, used for the care, incidental servicing, and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure, but not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers and commercial vehicles exceeding 1 1/2 ton capacity.

Group Home: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by unrelated persons with disabilities. Paid professional support staff, provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis, or present whenever residents are present at the dwelling, shall be required, unless a special use permit is issued.

Guest House: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the principal building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.

Historic Preservation District: An area designated by an ordinance of the City Council and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries one or more designated landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such
 
historic and/or architectural significance to be designated landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the designated Historic Preservation District.

Home Occupation: Any business, professional or commercial activity that is conducted in whole or in part in a dwelling unit, is clearly incidental, secondary, and subordinate to the principal residential use of the dwelling unit, and does not change the essential residential character of such dwelling unit.

Hospital or Sanitarium: An institution open to the public in which patients or injured persons are given medical or surgical care, or for the care of contagious diseases or incurable patients.

Hotel or Motel: A building in which more than five rooms or suites are reserved to provide living and sleeping accommodations for temporary guests, with no provisions in said rooms for cooking in any individual room or suite.

Householder: The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or lessee thereof. Impervious Surfaces: AU buildings, structures, parking lots and facilities, sidewalks, driveways and service drives, graveled areas, paved recreational areas and other elements that do not readily absorb or retain rainwater.

Intensity: To increase the level or degree of use.

Intersection: The point at which two or more public rights-of-way (generally streets) meet.

Junk Yard: The use of more than 200 square feet of any lot where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags or similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building.

Kennel, Commercial: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than five dogs, cats or other household domestic animals over four months of age are kept or on which more than two such animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale.

Laboratory, Commercial: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not included within this definition.

Landmark: Any building, structure or site which has been designated as a "Landmark" by an ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural significance.

Line of Building (for measuring yards): A line parallel to the nearest lot line drawn through the point of a building or group of buildings nearest to such lot line, exclusive of such features specified as being permitted to extend into a yard.

Loading and Unloading Space, Off-Street: An open, hard surfaced area of land other than a street or public way, the principle use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractor trailers to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. Such
 
space shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 50 feet in length and 15 feet in vertical clearance, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space. Amended, 08-1-4

Lodging or Rooming House: A building with not more than five guest rooms where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not open to the public or to overnight guests.

Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Zoning Code, including one or more principal buildings and accessory buildings or structures as permitted by the City, yards, and open spaces required in this Zoning Code for off-street parking or loading facilities, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place. Such parcel of land shall be established by a plat of subdivision approved by the City and recorded with the County Recorder's Office. The word "lot" when used alone shall mean a "zoning lot" unless the context of this Zoning Code clearly indicates otherwise.
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lines of a lot.

Lot, Corner: A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two or more streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.

Lot Coverage: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings.

Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.

Lot Frontage: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public or private street. For a corner lot the owner may elect either street line as a front lot line for the purposes of orientation of a dwelling or building thereon, except if the front of the lot is designated on the plat of subdivision. Notwithstanding the choice of such orientation, a corner lot shall be deemed to have two front yards for the purposes of establishing setback requirements. See also Building Front.

Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot, through lot, or reversed corner lot.

Lot Line, Front: The front property line of a zoning lot. See Lot Frontage for additional requirements.

Lot Line, Interior: A side lot line common with another lot.

Lot Line or Property Line: A line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or right-of-way, or from any public place.

Lot Line, Rear: The lot line or lines most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front lot line.

Lot Line, Side: The lot line or lines other than front or rear lot lines, except for comer lots, where the side lot line adjacent to a street shall be deemed a front lot line for the purposes of establishing setback requirements.

Lot of Record: A lot properly platted and recorded in the office of the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds.
 
Lot, Reversed Corner: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.

Lot, Through: A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.

Lot, Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the building setback line. However, for lots where the side lot lines are not parallel, the established lot width shall be the average of the front and rear lot widths, where the lot width is the length of a straight line between the points at which the required building setback line intersects the side lot lines.

Lot, Zoning: See "Zoning Lot."

Manufacture: The making of anything by an agency or process.

Marquee or Canopy: A roof like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way.

Mean Water Line: The line at which the water usually stands when free from disturbing causes, including but not limited to, snow melt and rainfall.

Medical Office: An establishment where human patients, not animals or pets, are admitted for diagnosis and treatment by licensed physicians, medical practitioners and professional associates, who may utilize jointly the same reception area, medical supply, laboratory, auto parking and other physical accommodations.

Motor Freight Terminal, Private: A building in which freight, brought to said building by motor truck, is assembled and sorted for routing in intrastate and interstate shipment by motor truck.
Municipal Code: The Marengo Municipal Code of which the Zoning Code is Chapter 22. Municipal Facilities: Any building, structure or appurtenance thereto, open space or parcel of
property owned or leased by the City.

NOAA: National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration.

Non-Conforming Use: Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or lawfully established at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Code or amendments hereto, which does not conform after the passage of this Zoning Code or amendments hereto with the use regulations of this Zoning Code.

Noxious Matter: Matter which is capable of causing injury or illness to living organisms or is capable of causing detrimental effects to the health of the psychological, social or economic well being of humans.

Nursing Home or Rest Home: A private home for the care of children or the aged or inform, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness injuries or for surgical care.
 
Nursery, Day: See "day care center" herein.

Nursery School: An institution providing day care service for children from four to six years of age.

Octave Band: An "octave band" is a means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.

Open Space: Open space shall include all public and private areas set aside from development in order to provide for recreational or conservation purposes, which may be either passive or active uses, and which are designated due to factors including, but not limited to, natural features worthy of protection or preservation, site significance or recreational opportunities.
Ordinance: Reference to "ordinance" herein shall be construed as the Zoning Code. Outdoor Storage: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, material, merchandise or
vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.

Parcel Delivery Station: A building in which commodities, sold at retail within the area and packaged by the retailer, are assembled and routed for delivery to retail customers located within the area.

Park: An open space area with recreational facilities and related accessory structures, including, but not limited to, playground equipment, picnic shelters, paths/trails, benches, tennis or basketball courts, playing fields, fences and parking lots.

Parking: The stationary placement of any vehicle or equipment for a continuous period of less than 48 hours.

Parking Area, Private: An open hard-surfaced area of land, other than a street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the parking of private passenger vehicles only of occupants and their guests of the building or buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.

Parking Area, Public: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the temporary storage of passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles under 1'l'1 ton capacity, and available to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or customers. Amended, 08-1-4

Parking Space, Automobile: Space within a public or private parking area of not less than 162 square feet 8 1/2 feet by 19 feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicles under 1Y2 ton capacity. Paved Surface: Includes concrete, bituminous, brick pavers, or other impervious or pervious material commonly used for a finish surface material of a parking or driveway area. 08- 1-4

Performance Standard: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare to be moved or removed.
 
Planned Development: A "planned development" is a tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or control which includes two or more principal buildings, and which may not completely conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. The development of a "planned development" shall be according to regulations as hereinafter set forth.

Planning and Zoning Commission: The City Planning and Zoning Commission. Any reference to Commission in this Zoning Code shall also mean the Planning and Zoning Commission.

Play Equipment: A free-standing accessory structure, exclusively for the use of children, including but not limited to swing sets, "jungle gyms" and similar recreational structures.

Playhouse: A free-standing accessory building, whether permanent or portable, fully or mostly enclosed with walls, roof, window(s) and a door, exclusively for the use of children. For the purposes of this definition, a treehouse shall be deemed to be equivalent to a playhouse.

Plot: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is described by reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.

Porch: A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.

Premises: A lot and all the structures and uses thereon.

Principal Building/Structure/Use: The main structure erected on or the main use occupying a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate) structure or use.

Public Utility: Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department, duly authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water.

Railroad Right-or-Way: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations, train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops or water towers.

Reconstruct: As applied to non-conforming structures, "reconstruct" means to rebuild after partial or total destruction.

Recreational Vehicle: A term encompassing any type of vehicle used primarily for recreational pleasure. Examples are, but not limited to, travel trailers, motor homes, boats, etc.

1.	Travel trailer is a structure designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by a motor vehicle, not to exceed eight feet in width and a body length of 35 feet.

2.	Camper trailer (pop up) is a structure designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile
 
and/or towable by a motor vehicle, not to exceed 24 feet in length and five feet six inches in height in a collapsed position.

3.	Motor home is a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle not to exceed 40 feet in length and 12 feet in height.

4.	Pickup camper is a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use.

5.	Watercraft is any unit that is used for water travel or pleasure, 35 feet or less in length, but not to exceed 12 feet in height, either mounted on a boat trailer or unmounted; also boat trailer without boat mounted.

6.	Snowmobiles are considered recreational vehicles.

Redevelopment: The removal of the principal buildings or structures from land and/or the construction or erection of other principal buildings or structures thereon, or the development of vacant properties.

Right-or-Way, Public: A strip of land which the owner/sub-divider has dedicated to the City or to another unit of government for streets and alleys.

Ringelmann Number: The "Ringelmann Number" is the number of the area of the Ringelmann Chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission.

Satellite Dish Antenna: Any parabolic, dish-type, circular, rectangular, concave, convex, or similarly-shaped structure, which is solid or open-web in construction, designed for receiving communications, radio, television, data, or other signals from a satellite or other sources, or for transmitting such signals to a receiving station, or both. For the purposes of this definition, a "miniature satellite dish antenna" shall mean any satellite dish antenna that has a diameter or width of one meter (approximately 39 inches) or less, and a "regular satellite dish antenna" shall mean any satellite dish antenna that has a diameter or width of more than one meter.
Screening: Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences, etc. used as a means of visual and noise control. Self-Storage, Mini Warehouse: A building or buildings in a controlled access area that contain
varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of a customer's goods or wares.

Sell: Includes to solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.

Setback: The horizontal distance between the building or structure and the lot line. Setback Line, Building: See "Building Setback Line."
Shed: A fully or mostly enclosed accessory building or structure, also known as a "storage shed,"
 
utility shed or "tool room," that is used for sheltered storage of personal property pertaining to the principal building to which the shed is accessory.

Smoke Units: "Smoke Units" represent the number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this chart, Ringe1mann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation; each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; and the various products are added together to give the total number of "smoke units" observed during the total period under observation.

Solar Farm: A solar energy system or systems consisting of one or more solar panels which is or are ground mounted, but which is or are not attached to another structure or building, and which shall operate for a term not to exceed 40 years.

Special Use: A use, either public or private, of land or buildings or both, which because of its unique characteristics, cannot properly be classified as a permitted use in any particular zoning district or districts, and which, in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.3 herein, after due consideration in each case of the impact of such use upon adjoining properties and of the need or appropriateness for the particular use at the particular location, such special use mayor may not be granted, and if granted, may be subject to conditions or restrictions.

Stop Order: A type of corrective action order used by the Administrator to halt work in progress that is in violation of this or other ordinances.

Storage: The stationary placement of any vehicle or equipment for a continuous period of48 hours or more, and/or for which further evidence of storage intent may include, but is not limited to, covering said vehicle or equipment with a tarp or other type of cover, failure to keep tires inflated, removal of tires and allowing said vehicle or equipment to be in or fall into a state of disrepair by any means that renders it incapable of being driven, operated or moved.

Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each 14 feet or fraction thereof.

Story, Half: A half story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than 4lh feet above the finished floor of such story.

Street: A public way other than an alley.

Street Line: A line separating an abutting lot, piece or parcel, from a street.

Structural Alterations: Any change other than incidental repairs which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

Structure: Anything constructed or erected which required location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
 
Tanning Salon: A room or booth which houses ultraviolet lamps or products containing such lamps intended to induce skin tanning through the irradiation of any part of the human body for cosmetic or non-medical related purposes.

Tavern: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises.

Temporary Use Permit: A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and valid for not more than one year, which allows the occupation of a temporary structure or the operation of a temporary enterprise

Terrace, Open: A level and rather narrow plane or platform, which for the purpose of this Zoning Code, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal structure and which is constructed not more than four feet in height above the average level of the adjoining ground.

Topography: The relief features or surface configuration of an area.
Tourist Home: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests. Trailer, Trailer House or Mobile Home: A vehicle without motored power, designed to be drawn
by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons and property, including a trailer coach or house trailer or mobile homes.

Truck Parking Area, or Yard: Any land used or intended to be used for the storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers and including commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading, and which exceed 1 1/2 tons in capacity.

Use: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.

Used Car Lot: A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are displayed for sale or trade.

Utility Substation: A secondary utility facility such as an electrical substation, gas regulator station, telephone exchange facility, sewage treatment plant, etc.

Variation: A divergence from bulk, setback, height, parking and loading, or other regulatory elements of this Zoning Code.

Vehicle, Non-Passenger: A motor vehicle eight feet or more in overall height or 22 feet or more in overall length and any vehicle or trailer except recreational vehicles and equipment not customary or incidental to the use of occupancy of residential properties, such as, but not limited to: dump trucks step vans; cargo trucks~ tow trucks; semi-trailer tractors; fire trucks; boom trucks; tank trucks; hearses; livery vehicles, such as taxis and limousines; and the like. 08-1-4

Vehicle, Passenger: Any motor vehicle licensed for on-street use measuring less than eight feet in overall height and less than 22 feet in overall length designed and commonly used for personal or work related day-to-day transportation purposes carrying not more than 15 persons, including the driver. A passenger vehicle includes automobiles, sport utility vehicles (SUVs), vans and
 
pick-up trucks with a manufacture's nominal rating carrying capacity of one ton or less and commonly known as a pick-up truck, and a van designed with no barrier separation between the operator area and the remainder of the cargo carrying area with a manufacture's nominal rating carrying capacity of one ton or less. Passenger vehicles shall not include buses, motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motorized foot scooters, as well as non-passenger vehicles, school buses, trailers, recreational equipment or recreational vehicles as defined by the Section. A handicap equipment van used for personal purposes shall be deemed a passenger vehicle regardless of the height. 08-1-4

Yard: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as otherwise permitted by this Zoning Code, and which extends along a lot line and at a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the depth of a front yard, the width of a side yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the principal building shall be used.

Yard, Front: A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of a building.

Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.

Yard, Side: That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the principal building and a side lot line, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or situated in between the front yard and the rear yard.

Zoning Administrator: The officer designated by the City as the person responsible for administering and enforcing the requirements of the Zoning Code. (See Section 17.01 herein.) Zoning Code: The City of Marengo Zoning Code, which is Chapter 22 of the Marengo Municipal Code.

Zoning District: A division of the geographic area of the City, as shown on the Zoning Map, wherein the character and intensity of land use is regulated by the terms of this Zoning Code. Also, a geographical area for which the regulations governing uses, setback and bulk requirements, and other conditions of uses are uniform as provided for in this Zoning Code. The terms "district," "use district" and "zone" are deemed synonymous.

Zoning Lot: A plot of ground, made up of one or more parcels, which is or may be occupied by a use, building or buildings including the open spaces required by this Zoning Code.

Zoning Map: The map or maps incorporated into this Zoning Code as a part hereof, designating zoning districts.
 
SECTION 4
USE DISTRICTS

4.1	Zoning Districts
4.2	Zoning Maps
4.3	New and Annexed Land
4.4	Zoning of Streets, Alleys, Public Ways, Waterways and Railroad Rights-of-Way
4.5	Boundary Lines
4.6	General Provisions
4.7	Meeting Minimum Zoning Requirements
4.8	Access Required
4.9	Front Setbacks-Corner/Through Lots
4.10	Private Garages
4.11	Lot Coverage

4.01 ZONING DISTRICTS Amended, 06-12-3

In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Zoning Code the City is hereby divided into the following districts:

	ER	Estate Residential District
	R-1	Single Family District
	R-2	Single Family District
	R-3	Single Family District
	R-5	Multiple Family District
	B-1	Central Business District
	B-2	General Business District
	B-3	Regional Shopping District
	BP	Business Park District
	ORI	Office, Research & Light Industrial District



4.02	M	Manufacturing District

ZONING MAPS

The location and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown upon the zoning map which is hereby incorporated into this Zoning Code. The zoning map together with all notations references and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto shall be a part of this Zoning Code and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map together with all notations references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein.

4.3	NEW OR ANNEXED LAND

Submerged land heretofore reclaimed or which may be reclaimed hereafter and land heretofore annexed or which may be annexed to the City hereafter and which is not shown on the zoning map made a part of this Zoning Code which has been zoned as agricultural land pursuant to the McHenry
 
County Zoning Ordinance shall be classified in the AT Agricultural Transition District until such time as the City Council designates the permitted use of the land in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code. Land which may be annexed to the City that is not zoned agricultural under the McHenry County Zoning Ordinance shall be classified ER Estate Residential District until such time as the City Council designates the permitted use of the land in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.

4.4	ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS, WATERWAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY

All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street alley public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary the zoning of such areas unless otherwise specifically designated shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line.

4.5	BOUNDARY LINES

Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown on the zoning maps incorporated herein the following rules shall apply:

1.	Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets alleys or similar rights- of way they shall be construed as following the center lines thereof.

2.	Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

3.	Where a lot held in one ownership and of record at the effective date of this Zoning Code is divided by a district boundary line the entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted district; provided that this construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less restricted portion of the lot by more than 20 percent.

4.6	GENERAL PROHIBITIONS

No structure or part thereof shall be erected, used, occupied, enlarged, altered, relocated or reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Code. Similarly, no lot or part thereof shall be used, occupied or developed except in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Code.

4.7	MEETING MINIMUM ZONING REQUIREMENTS

Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this Zoning Code, every lot must meet the minimum dimensions and minimum setback requirements of the district in which it is located independent of counting any portion of an abutting lot.
 
4.8	ACCESS REQUIRED

No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has permanent easement of access to a public street or a private street that conforms to the standards set forth in the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the City.

4.9	FRONT SETBACKS-CORNER/THROUGH LOTS

Every lot with multiple frontages (such as corner or through lots) shall meet the front setback requirements of the district in which it is located on every side having frontage.

4.10	PRIVATE GARAGES Amended, 04-2-1

Private garages or carports are not to exceed 15 feet, 6 inches in height, nor to exceed the following capacities or size:

1.	For single-family residence: Three car garage maximum with 700 square feet in area for a detached or free-standing garage, and either the width or length is limited to 32 lineal feet.

2.	For multiple-family residence: Two car garage per dwelling unit, maximum five 550 square feet.

3.	Hold no more than three cars.

4.11	LOT COVERAGE

A.	The maintenance of yards, courts and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or the property on which it is located as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason be used to satisfy yard, court, open space or minimum lot area requirement for any other building.

B.	Division of Zoning Lots: No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting from each such division conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.

C.	Location of Required Open Space: All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.

D.	Required Yards for Existing Buildings: No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of this Section 4 shall subsequently be reduced below or further reduced below if already less than the minimum yard requirements of this Zoning Code for equivalent new construction without a variance.
 

SECTION 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS

5.1	Scope of Regulations
5.2	Permits
5.3	Building Height, Bulk and Lot Coverage
5.4	Lot Area and Dimension
5.5	Location of Buildings
5.6	Buildings Under Construction
5.7	Buildings on a Zoning Lot
5.8	Rezoning of Public and Semi Public Areas
5.9	Vision Clearance, Comer Lots
5.10	Regulation of Space and Density of Residential Dwelling Units
5.11	Home Occupations - Regulations
5.12	Fences, Shrubs, Hedges and Decorative Structures
5.13	Yard and Building Setback Exceptions
5.14	Travel Trailers and Recreational Vehicles
5.15	Outside Display, Sales and Storage Special Permit
5.16	Use of Commercial Truck Trailers and Railroad Cars for Storage
5.17	Refuse Containers
5.18	Determination of Similar and Compatible Uses

5.1	SCOPE OF REGULATIONS

All buildings and structures erected hereafter, all uses of land, structures or buildings established hereafter, all structural alterations, conversions, reconstructions or relocations of existing structures or buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of, additions to, or intensifications of existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Zoning Code which are applicable to the districts in which such buildings, structures, uses or land shall be located, and no building, structure, use or land may be used other than that which is permitted in the district in which the building, structure, use or land is located.

5.2	PERMITS

No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or for a certificate of occupancy, shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator and no permit or license shall be issued by any other City department which would authorize the use or change in use of any land or building contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code, or the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building designed or intended to be used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code.

5.3	BUILDING HEIGHT, BULK AND LOT COVERAGE

A.	No building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated or structurally altered so as to have a greater height, a higher ratio of lot coverage or smaller open space about it than permissible under the limitations set forth herein for the district in which such building is located, except that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks, stage
 
towers or scenery lofts and necessary mechanical appurtenances, shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with all other ordinances of the City. For the purposes of establishing height of a building, the measurement shall begin at the established grade on the front side of the building.

B.	No space allocated to a building or dwelling group for the purpose of complying with the side, rear or front yard, or court or other open space or lot area requirements of this Zoning Code, shall thereafter, by reason of change in ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy the yard, court, open space or lot area requirements of any other building or dwelling group.

C.	No usable open space or off-street parking space or loading space existing or provided hereafter for any building be reduced below the minimum requirements hereinafter set forth for usable open space, parking space or loading space, nor further reduced if already less than minimum requirements.

5.4	LOT AREA AND DIMENSION

When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.

5.5	LOCATION OF BUILDINGS

Except as otherwise provided for in this Zoning Code, every building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public street or permanent easement of access to a public street, which easement shall have a minimum width of 25 feet, unless an easement of lesser width was of record prior to the adoption of this Zoning Code.

5.6	BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION

Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building or structure upon which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this Zoning Code, or any subsequent amendment thereto that would affect said plans, construction or use, provided, however, that construction is begun or the use is begun to be established within one year from such effective date of adoption or amendment, and said construction or establishment of use has been diligently carried on to completion in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which a building permit or other permit has been issued, and furthermore, may upon completion be occupied or put into use under a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of use and compliance for the use for which it was originally designated. However, such building or establishment of use shall be completed within one year from the issuance of the building permit or other permit unless otherwise provided for in the Marengo Municipal Code. Furthermore, such a building, structure or use shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of Section 6, Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses, of this Zoning Code.

5.7	BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT

Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling units shall be located on a zoning lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one such building on one zoning lot.
 
5.8	REZONING OF PUBLIC and SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS

An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area, public school site, cemetery or other similar open space, shall not be used for any other purpose than that designated and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted adjoining  district until such time as the Mayor and City Council designate a different classification in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.



5.9	VISION CLEARANCE, CORNER LOTS Amended, 08-1-4

On corner lots no building hereafter erected and no planting or other obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor vehicles shall exceed a height of three feet above the grade within 25 feet of lot lines which are adjacent to streets.

5.10	REGULATION OF SPACE AND DENSITY OF RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS

No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, unless there is compliance with the requirements of this Section 5.10.

1.	The maximum occupancy for any dwelling unit shall not exceed the lesser value of the following requirements:

a.	For the first occupant, there shall be at least 1,000 square feet of habitable floor space. There shall be at least 200 square feet of habitable floor space for every additional occupant.

b.	The total number of persons shall be no more than two times the number of habitable bedrooms within the dwelling unit.

2.	Habitable floor space shall be permitted in a basement only when the floor is not more than four feet below finished grade level at all exterior walls containing openings required for natural light and ventilation.

3.	No space located more than four feet below grade shall be considered habitable space, except that a basement recreation or family room, where a separate living room is provided elsewhere in the dwelling unit, may have a floor level more than four feet below finished grade level.

4.	Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 100 square feet of habitable floor space.

5.	Within every dwelling unit there shall be a bathroom with a flush water closet in good working condition for each six persons or fraction thereof living within that dwelling unit.
 
6.	Habitable space shall include a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage space and workshops.

5.11	HOME OCCUPATIONS - REGULATIONS

The conduct of business or commercial activity in dwelling units in residential zoning districts may be permitted under the provisions of this Section 5.11. Home occupations shall be regulated as follows:

1.	A home occupation is an accessory use by the occupant(s) of a dwelling unit in which goods are produced or traded, or services are rendered as an economic enterprise. Such use shall be clearly incidental or subordinate to the residential use of a dwelling. Beauty shops, barber shops and massage services are not considered home occupations.

2.	Home occupations do not include garage or yard sales.

3.	Home occupations are permitted as an accessory use to a residence only when all of the following criteria are met:

a.	Area of use: Home occupations shall be entirely contained within the interior of a residence or located in garages or accessory structures on the site. No visible evidence of the business shall be apparent from the street nor surrounding area. A home occupation shall use no more than 20 percent of the total dwelling unit floor area. Those home occupations which require occasional meetings using more than 20 percent of the floor space may be permitted providing such meetings do not occur more frequently than once a month.

b.	Employees: The home occupation shall be conducted by family members residing on the premises with no assistance from other individuals or groups.

c.	Sales, repairs and leasing:

i.	Sales: The commercial exchange of tangible goods or other items constituting a sale between the proprietor of a home occupation and members of the general public shall not be permitted on the premises of a home occupation. Members of the general public shall not include persons in the home by prior individualized invitation

ii.	Leasing: The exchange of items in a lease agreement between the proprietor of the home occupation or an assistant and a customer shall not occur on the
premises of a home occupation.

d.	Traffic and parking: No parking in the public right-of-way shall occur as a result of this home occupation except for occasional meetings. If parking for a home occupation occurs in a manner of frequency causing
 
disturbance to the normal traffic flow for the neighborhood, the occupation shall be considered a business best handled in a commercial district rather than as a home occupation. Changes to exterior: The appearance of a dwelling as a residence shall not be altered to the extent that attention is drawn to the structure as a commercial or business operation. Alterations of building material, size or color, lighting fixtures or intensity, parking area or any other exterior change should not cause the structure to lose its residential character nor should it detract from the residential character of the neighborhood.

e.	Nuisance controls: A home occupation shall not create excessive noise, dust or dirt, heat, smoke, odors, vibration and glare or bright lighting which would be over and above that created by a single-family residential dwelling. The production, dumping or storage of combustible or toxic substances shall not be permitted on site.
Additionally, a home occupation shall not create interference or fluctuations of radio or television reception.

f.	Visitation: A home occupation may attract patrons, students or any business related individuals only between the hours of6:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. At any time during the day or evening, the parking standards in this Zoning Code shall apply to the activity generated by the home occupation, excluding family day-care homes. A home occupation shall not generate more than six arrivals and six departures per day by vehicles. Family day- car operations shall not generate more than 12 arrivals and 12 departures per day by vehicles. These standards shall not be construed so as to prohibit occasional group gatherings, recitals or demonstrations. However, such gatherings shall not occur more frequently than once per month and must be held within the visitation hours specified herein.

g.	Signage: Signage or other forms of advertising pertaining to the home occupation may be placed or painted onto the exterior of the residence or in the yard of a residence. These signs may not exceed two square feet in area.

5.12	FENCES, SHRUBS, HEDGES AND DECORATIVE STRUCTURES

In order to provide for the maximum safety of persons using the streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks  and other public ways of the City, and to provide for the maximum enjoyment of the use of property, the following regulations shall apply to all fences, hedges and similar structures or elements located in the City.

1.	For purposes of minimizing traffic hazards at street intersections by improving visibility for converging vehicles, obstructions higher than three feet shall not be permitted to be planted, placed or erected on any comer lot within the triangular portion of land designated as "restricted area." This triangular area shall consist of a portion of land extended from the comer of the lot 25 feet in either direction.

2.	No barbed wire or other sharp pointed fence and no electrically charged fence shall be erected or maintained except in the industrial district. In the industrial district barbed wire
 
cannot be lower than six feet from ground level. This requirement does not apply to agricultural zoned property.

3.	No permanent fence or retaining wall shall be constructed or erected within any public street or alley right-of-way unless authorized by the City Council. Fences erected on public easements or across ditches shall be so constructed that drainage shall not be obstructed. Fences erected in any overland drainage easement shall be constructed to be at least 50 percent open to facilitate the passage of storm water/drainage. For every one unit of horizontal, vertical and diagonal fencing aforementioned, 50 percent requirement may be reduced if an adequate opening is provided at the base of the fencing to allow for the free passage of water in sufficient amounts as deemed appropriate by the City Administrator, Building Commissioner or the City Engineer. In the event of necessity for removal of such fence for maintenance or other purpose, removal and/or replacement of such fence or other improvement shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

4.	Fences, walls and hedges in all residential districts shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet and may be located up to lot lines.

5.	Fences, walls and hedges in the industrial district shall not exceed a maximum of eight feet and may be located up to lot lines.

6.	With the exception of comer lots (see paragraph I herein), fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed four feet in height when located in the front and comer side yards. Chain link fencing is prohibited in front and comer side yards.

7.	On a through lot both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines, but in the case of two or more contiguous through lots there shall be a common front.

8.	All of the framing on any fence shall be on the interior side of the fence.

9.	A wall of a private swimming pool shall not be located less than 10 feet from any rear or side property line or 10 feet from the side lot line abutting a street or 10 feet from any principal structure.

5.13	YARD AND BUILDING SETBACK EXCEPTIONS Amended, 08-1-4

The following structures or structural elements shall be allowed to project into or to be constructed in any required yard, or beyond the building setback line, except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, and except that in no case shall such structure, structural element, or component part thereof extend beyond the property line:

1.	Accessory buildings or structures as provided for in Section 7 of this Zoning Code.

2.	Air conditioner (window); central air conditioner, provided that the unit is placed next to the dwelling if for residential use, and placed as designated on an approved site plan and the hot air is baffled in an upward direction if for non-residential use. Central air conditioners shall be prohibited in front yards.

3.	Awnings and canopies as governed by Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code.

4.	Balconies, unenclosed, not to exceed three feet in depth.
 
5.	Bay or bow windows, one or two stories, not to exceed three feet in depth.

6.	Driveways and curbs.

7.	Fences, walls, hedges and decorative structures as provided for in Section 5.12 of this Zoning Code.

8.	Fireplace chimneys, not to exceed three feet in depth, so long as the chimney chase does not exceed six feet in width.

9.	Landscape features and plant materials, such as trees, shrubs and flowers. Planter boxes attached to a building shall not exceed two feet in depth.

10.	Overhanging or projecting roofs, eaves, cornices or other similar architectural features, not to exceed two feet in depth (including any gutters attached thereto). For any portion of such features in excess of two feet in depth, only the portion in excess shall count towards any setback or yard requirements.

11.	Parking spaces as governed by Section 8 of this Zoning Code.

12.	Public or municipal utility equipment and supporting structures.

13.	Sidewalks and ramps.

14.	Signs as governed by Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code.

15.	Steps. stairs and porches, all unenclosed, attached to and projecting from a principal building or to give access to a principal building, not to exceed four feet in height or depth.

16.	Yard lights and parking lot lighting poles and fixtures.

17.	Fire escapes not to exceed four feet into required yard.

18.	Patios, no limit of intrusion.

19.	The United States flag, a state flag, a municipal flag or a corporate flag are exempt from this restriction. One flag of each type shall be allowed on each zoning lot. Flags shall hang no greater than one third the length of the pole that it is on. Flagpoles shall be no higher than 30 feet.

5.14	TRAVEL TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL

The requirements of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 herein do not apply to travel trailers or other recreational vehicles parked on a permitted recreational vehicle sales lot.

1.	Not more than one travel trailer or other recreational vehicle shall be parked on anyone lot.
 
2.	No travel trailer or other recreational vehicle shall be used as a dwelling.

3.	No travel trailer or other recreational vehicle shall be used as an office or for any other commercial purpose except for approved construction offices.

4.	If no City sidewalk is present, the parking of a travel trailer, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle shall only be permitted behind the front property line between the dates of April 15 and October 15. The parking area must be paved in accordance with Chapter 8, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Zoning Code. After October 15 and prior to April 15, the parking of a travel trailer, utility trailer and/or other recreational vehicles shall only be permitted behind the building setback line.

5.	All travel trailers and recreational vehicles shall conform to and not exceed regulations for height and weight restrictions when used within City boundaries. No vehicle shall be parked or stored in a manner that inhibits or impedes travel on City throughways.
6.	Storage or parking of travel trailers and recreational vehicles must not violate any existing Marengo Fire Protection District code.

7.	In rear yards and side yards, parking of only the following types of vehicles shall be permitted in addition to private passenger vehicles:

a.	Travel trailer, 35 feet or less in length and not to exceed eight feet in width.

b.	Camper trailer (pop-up) shall be stored in a collapsed position

c.	Pop-up camper, 24 feet or less in length and not to exceed 66 inches in height.

d.	Watercraft, 35 feet or less in length, but not to exceed 12 feet in height, either mounted on a boat trailer or unmounted; also boat trailer without boat mounted.

e.	Trailers used as sales offices and/or construction offices or construction storage may remain on a construction site during the period in which the building and/or subdivision is under construction. Upon issuance of the final occupancy permit for a single building project, or the occupancy permit for the final building in a subdivision, all construction trailers must be removed.

5.15	OUTSIDE DISPLAY, SALES AND STORAGE SPECIAL PERMIT

No outside display, sale or storage of materials (raw, semi-finished, or finished in nature), vehicles (including tractor trailers), equipment, merchandise and other similar goods or containers, shall be permitted except by issuance of a special permit unless specifically allowed in the use restrictions section in the specific zoning district. Consideration for the issuance of an Outside Display, Sales and Storage Special Permit shall be based upon the following criteria:

1.	A site plan, site lighting plan, site design plan, landscape plan, engineering plan and building elevations shall be provided, as applicable, to demonstrate that the proposed special use will not have a negative effect upon the surroundings or adjacent properties. An engineering plan that addresses storm water management in accordance with Chapter
 
28 of the Marengo Municipal Code shall be required where paving of display, sales or storage areas occurs, since such paving will contribute to or increase on-site run-off.

2.	An on-site circulation plan for both pedestrians and vehicles, illustrating the location of the outdoor display, sales or storage area, shall be provided that demonstrates that no adverse effect on circulation, parking or general functioning of the site will occur.

3.	All outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed by a screening fence, wall or densely planted evergreen hedge and associated appropriate landscaping treatment, of a height sufficient to screen such containers, storage areas or products from view of adjoining properties of public and private streets. The primary requirement shall be for landscaping screening. The substitution of walls or fencing shall be deemed a secondary solution subject to proof of hardship. Stored materials shall not exceed the height of the screening, and no materials, goods, vehicles and the like shall be displayed, sold or stored outside of the screened area. Solid latch able doors or gates thereto shall be required. Walls or fencing shall be of the same material as the principal building or shall be of a compatible material. The City shall reserve the right to regulate the nature, height and location of the screening and to impose any other terms and conditions as is deemed in the best interests of the City as part of the review of the special use.

4.	Written evidence shall be provided that standards and requirements for health, safety and environmental protection by the City, as well as those required by jurisdictions other than the City, have been met.

5.	All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, cleaning, servicing and testing of materials, products, vehicles and goods shall be deemed ineligible for an Outside Display, Sales and Storage Special Permit and shall be conducted solely within completely enclosed buildings.

6.	All display, sales and storage areas shall be confined to locations in the rear of the building erected on the premises, or at the side of said building and behind the front line of said building as extended, but not both, unless the petitioner can demonstrate that no adverse impact is created.

7.	Anything displayed, sold or stored outdoors that has a tendency to be windblown shall be effectively covered so it does not become windblown.

8.	All areas to be used for outside display, sales or storage shall be covered with a hard surface, such as two inches of asphalt or four inches of concrete, or as the City shall otherwise require.

9.	Existing outside display, sales or storage uses that are rendered nonconforming by virtue of enactment of these regulations shall be made conforming with the issuance of an Outside Display, Sales and Storage Special Permit by the City or shall be removed.
 
5.16	USE OF COMMERCIAL TRUCK TRAILERS AND RAILROAD CARS FOR STORAGE

Under no circumstances may commercial truck trailers and/or railroad cars be placed on any lot for the purpose of serving as a place for storage.



5.17	REFUSE CONTAINERS

Multifamily residential dwellings with four or more dwelling units shall place all refuse containers in visually screened areas. All multifamily units that have refuse containers which are one or more cubic yards in volume shall be in visually screened areas.

5.18	DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR AND COMPATABLE USES

It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to review and determine whether uses that are not specifically enumerated in any zoning district are similar and compatible to those use/uses that are specifically enumerated within a particular district. The Zoning Administrator may approve any such use/uses within a particular district, upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that such use/uses are similar and compatible to those use/uses enumerated within the particular district for which the use is being requested. The approval or denial of such use/uses within a particular district by the Zoning Administrator shall be in writing, stating the reasons therefor, and the determination of the Zoning Administrator shall be appealable to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any appeals from the determination of the Zoning Administrator must be in writing, specifying the grounds for appeal, and filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator within 30 days of the written determination of the Zoning Administrator. Any appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator pursuant to this Section 5.14 shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 13 of this Zoning Code.
 



SECTION 6
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES

6.1	Purpose
6.2	Nonconforming Lots
6.3	Residential Districts
6.4	Business, ORI and Manufacturing Districts
6.5	Two or More Lots in Common Ownership
6.6	Nonconforming Structures
6.7	Nonconforming Uses Occupying a Structure
6.8	Nonconforming Use of Land

6.1	PURPOSE

The requirements imposed by this Zoning Code are designed to guide the use of land by encouraging the development of structures and uses that are compatible with the predominant character of each of the various district s. Lots, structures and uses of land or structures that do not conform to the requirements of the district in which they are located impede appropriate development. The regulations of this Section 6 are intended to alleviate such existing/potential problems by encouraging the gradual elimination of nonconformities.

6.2	NONCONFORMING LOTS

Any vacant lot that does not conform to 1 or more of the lot size (area, dimensions) requirements of the district in which it is located, may be used in the manner indicated in this Zoning Code if such vacant lot:

1.	Is lot of record on the date of the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code; and

2.	Has continuously remained in separate ownership from abutting tracts of land throughout the entire period during which the creation of such lot was prohibited by any applicable zoning or other ordinance; and

3.	Is at least 50 feet wide.

6.3	RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

In any residential district, 1 principal building and related accessory structures, but no other use, may be erected on any vacant nonconforming lot of the type described above provided all other bulk and yard regulations of the particular district are observed.

6.4	BUSINESS, ORI AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS

In the manufacturing district, ORI and in any business district, any structure permit ted in the particular district may be erected on any vacant nonconforming lot of the type described above if all other bulk and yard requirement s of that district are met.
 

6.5	TWO OR MORE LOTS IN COMMON OWNERSHIP

If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage were in common ownership on the effective date of this Zoning Code, and if 1 or more of those lots does not meet the minimum lot width, depth and area requirements of the district in which it is located, the land involved shall be considered an undivided parcel. No portion of any such parcel shall be developed except in compliance w it h this Zoning Code, nor shall any such parcel be divided so as to create a lot that does not meet the requirement s of this Zoning Code.

6.6	NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES

Any lawful structure which exists on the effective date of this Zoning Code but which could not be erected under the terms of this Zoning Code because of restrictions on lot size, height, setbacks or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot may lawfully remain subject to the following provisions:

1.	Relocation: No such structure shall be relocated unless it will conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is relocated.

2.	Reconstruction: No such structure which is destroyed or damaged by any means shall be reconstructed if the Zoning Administrator determines that the cost of such reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the structure’s market value at the time of loss, unless after reconstruction the structure will conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event the administrator determines the estimated cost of reconstruction is less than 50 percent of the structure’s market value at the time of loss, repairs or reconstruction shall be permitted provided such work starts within 6 months from the date the damage occurred and is diligently prosecuted to completion. The Zoning Administrator may require that the reconstruction cost estimate be made by a bonafide construction contractor and that the structure’s market value at the time of loss be determined by a licensed real  estate appraiser. The owner of the damaged structure shall be responsible for obtaining these estimates for the Zoning Administrator.

3.	Repairs, Maintenance and Alterations: Ordinary repairs, normal maintenance and nonstructural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building, structure or building containing a nonconforming use, provided that the repairs, maintenance work or nonstructural alterations do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
Structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building, structure or building containing a nonconforming use only in the following situations:

a.	When the alteration is required by law.

b.	When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the nonconforming use.

c.	When the alteration is made to improve livability in a residential nonconforming structure, provided that no structural alteration shall be made which would  increase the number of dwelling units, or the number of bedrooms or the
height, or bulk of the buildings.
 
4.	Additions and Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure, or use within a nonconforming building or structure, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming building or structure and use thereof, including all additions and enlargements thereto, is made to conform to all the regulations of the zoning  district in which it is located.

6.7	NONCONFORMING USES OCCUPYING A STRUCTURE

If any lawful use occupying a structure exists on the effective date of this Zoning Code but would not be allowed under the terms of this Zoning Code, such use may lawfully continue subject to the following provisions:

1.	Maintenance: Any structure housing a nonconforming use may be maintained through ordinary repairs.

2.	Enlargement, Alteration, Reconstruction, Relocation: No structure housing a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, structurally altered, reconstructed or relocated unless the use of the structure is changed to a permit ted use.

3.	Extension of Use: No nonconforming use may be extended to any part(s) of the structure not intended or designed for such use, nor shall the nonconforming use be extended to occupy any land outside such structure.

4.	Yard and Bulk: A building which is nonconforming with respect to yards, floor area ratio or any other element of bulk regulated by this Zoning Code shall not be altered or expanded in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk regulations for the district in which it is located.

5.	Change of Use: A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be changed except to a use permitted under the applicable district regulations.

6.	Discontinuance of Use: When a nonconforming use of a structure or of a structure and premises in combination is discontinued for 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any 3-year period, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.

6.8	NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND

Any lawful use of land existing on the effective date of this Zoning Code that would not be permitted under the terms of this Zoning Code may lawfully continue subject to the following provisions:

1.	Intensification or Extension of Use: A nonconforming use of land shall not be intensified or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied by such use on the effective date of this Zoning Code.

2.	Relocation: No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part unless such use upon relocation will conform to all pertinent regulations of the district in which it is proposed to be located.

3.	Change of Use: A nonconforming use of land shall not be changed except to a use that is permit ted under the applicable district regulations.
 
4.	Discontinuance: When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be resumed. Any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the applicable district regulations.

SECTION 7
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES

7.1	Uses Permit ted as Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
7.2	Location of Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
7.3	Construction of Accessory Buildings and Structures
7.4	Number, Height and Size of Accessory Buildings and Structures
7.5	Distance Between Buildings or Structures
7.6	Regulations for Specific Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
7.7	Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antenna Regulations
7.8	Antennas in Residential Zoning Districts
7.9	Antennas in Business and Manufacturing Districts
7.10	Amateur Radio Facilities With Surface Area Exceeding 10 Square Feet
7.11	Additional Regulations f or Antennas and Antenna Support Structures in all Zoning Districts
7.12	Non-conforming Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses

7.1	USES PERMITTED AS ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES

The term “accessory building,” “ accessory structure” or “ accessory use” includes, but is not limited to the following permitted accessory buildings, structures or uses; subject, however, to the limitations of this Section 7:

1.	For residential uses: private garden house or greenhouse; detached garage; shed or building used for domestic storage; swimming pool; spa/hot tub; yard light s; attached or detached deck, platform or terrace open to the sky; gazebo; dog run; tennis court; and similar structures and buildings f or accessory use.

2.	For business/commercial uses: storage building f or merchandise or materials normally carried in stock as part of a principal use on the same lot and placed as designated on an approved site plan; of f-street parking and loading facilities; garages; exterior swimming pools as part of a hotel/motel; pump islands and attached or detached canopies for automobile service stations.

3.	For institutional and office uses: storage buildings for materials relating to the principal use on the same lot and placed as designated on an approved sit e plan; guardhouses and gatehouses; off-street parking and loading facilities; garages.

4.	For industrial/manufacturing uses: process or maintenance facilities and storage buildings, clearly subordinate and incident al t o t he principal use on the same lot and placed as designated on an approved site plan; guardhouses and gatehouses; off-street parking and loading facilities; garages.
 
7.2	LOCATION OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES

A.	Where a substantial part of the w all of an accessory building or structure is part of the wall of the principal building, or where an accessory building is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such accessory building or structure shall be deemed to be part of the principal building and shall conform to all regulations applicable thereto.

B.	No accessory building, structure, or use may be located in a front yard in any zoning district, and on a corner lot, no accessory building, structure or use may be located in any yard adjacent to a street in any zoning district, except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code and except that a single basketball pole may be located at the side of a driveway for private recreational use.

C.	An accessory building, structure, or use may be located in a required rear or side yard setback in any zoning district, as follows:

1.	Unless specified within a specific zoning classification, an accessory building, structure or use in a residential zoning area may be located to within 10 feet of the rear lot line and to within seven feet of a side lot line, provided that such building, structure or use is not located on a recorded utility or drainage easement (except for equipment pertaining to said easement), and provided that the wall of an accessory building facing the rear lot line shall contain no openings.

2.	No accessory building, structure, or use shall be located within 10 feet of a principal building. Decks, patios, platforms and terraces open to the sky may be attached to the principal building but shall be subject to setback requirements for accessory structures.

3.	Storage, process and maintenance buildings in non-residential zoning districts shall be as governed by the applicable district regulations.

D.	Prohibited accessory buildings, structures and uses:

1.	Above-ground or ground storage tanks for oil, gas, fuel or any other material on residential lots;

2.	Servants’ quarters or similar dwelling units.

7.3	CONSTRUCTION OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES

A.	An accessory building or structure shall not be erected prior to the establishment or construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.

B.	All provisions of Chapter 24, Building Code, of the Marengo Municipal Code, are to be followed as they pertain to accessory buildings, structures or uses.
 
7.4	NUMBER, HEIGHT AND SIZE OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES

A.	No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed one story, with a maximum height of 15 feet, six inches unless otherwise provided in this Section 7.04.

B.	Storage sheds shall not exceed 12 feet in height and 120 square feet in size.


C.	Detached garages shall not exceed 700 square feet in size.

D.	The sum total square footage of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 50 percent of a rear or side yard of a lot unless specified within a specific zoning classification.

7.5	DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES

The required distance between the principal building and the accessory building or structure shall be as follows, unless otherwise provided in this Section 7. Between the principal building and the accessory building or structure on the same lot: 10 feet.  However, in the case of a deck which is not attached to the principal structure, the required distance from the principal structure to the deck shall not apply.

7.6	REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES

A.	Swimming Pools:

1.	In addition to the provisions in Section 24.21 of the Municipal Code, pools for swimming or bathing shall be in compliance with the requirements of this Section 7.06-

A.	However, these regulations shall not be applicable to any such pool less than 24 inches deep or having a surface area less than 250 square feet except when such pools are permanently equipped with a water recirculating system.

2.	A wall of a private swimming pool shall not be located less than 10 feet from any rear or side property line or 10 feet from side lot line abutting a street or 10 feet from any principal structure. A swimming pool shall not be located in any front yard.

3.	For the purposes of establishing setbacks, the outer edge of pools and spas/hot tubs shall include all associated decking, walk areas, required fence enclosures and pump equipment. Pump and filter equipment may be located adjacent to a principal structure.

B.	Tents and Recreational Vehicles: No tents, recreational vehicles or camping trailers shall be used, erected or maintained as living quarters. No tents shall be used for the storage of personal property, goods, materials, vehicles or equipment. Tents, however, shall not be prohibited w hen used for weddings, festivals and other special events subject to conditions placed on other accessory buildings and structures.

C.	Mobile Homes and Modular Units: A house trailer, mobile home/office or modular unit, as defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall not be considered to be permissible as an accessory building, structure or use, or as a principal building, structure or use, and no person shall park, store, occupy or otherwise use a trailer, mobile home/office or modular unit without
 
obtaining a temporary use permit from the City Council.

D.	Parking Facilities: Accessory off-street parking facilities may be permitted to be located elsewhere than on the same lot as the building or use to be served by said parking; subject, however, to approval of the City in conjunction with a site plan review of the principal and the accessory buildings or uses.



7.7	WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS REGULATIONS

See Section 9 of this Zoning Code.

7.8	ANTENNAS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS

No antenna shall be erected, constructed, maintained or operated in any residential zoning district except in conformance with the following regulations:

1.	Antennas with Surface Areas of 10 Square Feet or Less: Antennas and antenna support structures having a combined surface area not greater than 10 square feet, and no single dimension exceeding 12 feet, shall be permit ted as an accessory use.

2.	Antennas, Other Than Amateur Radio Facilities, With Surface Areas Exceeding 10 Square Feet: Antennas and antenna support structures having a combined surface area greater than 10 square feet, or having any single dimension exceeding 12 feet, shall be permit ted as an accessory use only in compliance with the following regulations:

a.	Number Limited: No more than one such antenna and antenna support structure may be located on any zoning lot.

b.	Height Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed 12 feet in height unless such antenna and antenna support structure is attached to a building pursuant to paragraph 2d of this Section 7.08.

c.	Diameter Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed 10 feet in diameter.

d.	Attachment to Buildings Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:

i.	Size: The antenna and its support structure shall not exceed 15 square feet in area or 12 feet in any dimension.

ii.	Height: The antenna and its support structure shall not extend more than 3 feet above the highest point of the building on which it is mounted or the maximum permissible building height , whichever is less.

iii.	Mounting: The antenna and its support structure shall not be attached or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any
 
principal building or to the side of any building facing a street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 miles per hour on its own and without the support of guy wires.

iv.	olor: The antenna and its support structure shall be a color that blends with the roof or building side on which it is mounted.

v.	Grounding: The antenna and its support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.

vi.	Other Standards: The antenna and its support structure shall satisfy such other design and construct ion standards as the Building Commissioner determines are necessary to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the antenna and its support structure.

vii.	Screening: The antenna and its support structure shall be located so as to provide the maximum, reasonably achievable screening, as determined by the Building Commissioner, of such antenna and antenna support structure from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets.

viii.	Setback from Street: No such antenna or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the w all of the principal building to which it is accessory that is nearest to such street.

ix.	Guy Wires Restricted: No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such antenna or its support structure except when used to anchor the antenna or support structure to an existing building to which such antenna or support structure is attached.

x.	Screening: When any such antenna and antenna support structure is ground mounted, appropriate landscaping or fencing shall be located and maintained between such ground-mounted antenna and antenna support structure and each lot line of the property on which it is located so as to provide the maximum, reasonably achievable screening as determine by the Building Commissioner, of such antenna and antenna support structure from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than 10 feet in height.

7.9	ANTENNAS IN BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS

No antenna shall be erected, constructed, maintained or operated in any business or industry zoning district except in conformance with the following regulations:

1.	Antennas with Surface Areas of 10 Square Feet or Less: Antennas and antenna support structures having a combined surface area not greater than 10 square feet, and no single dimension exceeding 12 feet, shall be permit ted as an accessory use.

2.	Antennas, Other Than Amateur Radio Facilities, With Surface Areas Exceeding 10 Square Feet: Antennas and antenna support structures having a combined surface area greater than 10 square feet, or having any single dimension exceeding 12 feet, shall be permit ted as an
 
accessory use only in compliance with the following regulations:

a.	Number Limited: No more than one such antenna and antenna support structure may be located on any zoning lot.

b.	Height Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed 12 feet in height unless such antenna and antenna support structure is attached to a building pursuant to paragraph 2d of this Section 7.08.

c.	Diameter Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed 10 feet in diameter.

d.	Attachment to Buildings Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:

i.	Height: The antenna and its support structure shall not extend more than feet above the highest point of the building on which it is mounted or the maximum permissible building height , whichever is less.

ii.	Mounting: The antenna and its support structure shall not be attached or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 miles per hour on its own and without the support of guy wires.

iii.	Color: The antenna and its support structure shall be a color that blends with the roof or building side on which it is mounted.

iv.	Grounding: The antenna and its support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.

(1)	Other Standards: The antenna and its support structure shall satisfy such other design and construct ion standards as the Building Commissioner determines are necessary to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the antenna and its support structure.

(2)	Screening: The antenna and its support structure shall be located so as to provide the maximum, reasonably achievable screening, as determined by the Building Commissioner, of such antenna and antenna support structure from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets.

v.	Setback from Street: No such antenna or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the w all of the principal building to which it is accessory that is nearest to such street.

vi.	Guy Wires Restricted: No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such antenna or its support structure except when used to
 
anchor the antenna or support structure to an existing building to which such antenna or support structure is attached.
e.	Screening: When any such antenna and antenna support structure is ground
mounted, appropriate landscaping or fencing shall be located and maintained between such ground-mounted antenna and antenna support structure and each lot line of the property on which it is located so as to provide the maximum, reasonably achievable screening as determine by the Building Commissioner, of such antenna and antenna support structure from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than ten feet in height.

7.10	AMATEUR RADIO FACILITIES WITH SURFACE AREA EXCEEDING 10 SQUARE FEET

In any zoning district, any antenna and antenna support structure having a combined surface area greater than 10 square feet or having any single dimension exceeding 12 feet that is capable of transmitting as well as receiving signals and is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission as an amateur radio facility must satisfy each of the following conditions:

1.	Number Limited: No more than one such antenna support structure with a surface area greater than 10 square feet or any single dimension exceeding 12 feet may be located on any zoning lot.

2.	Height Limited: No such antenna support structure shall, if ground mounted, exceed 75 feet in height of, if attached to a building pursuant to this Section 7.10, the height herein specified.

3.	Attachment to Buildings Limited: No such antenna or its support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:

a.	Height: The antenna and its support structure shall not extend more than 20 feet above the highest point of the building on which it is mounted.

b.	Mounting: The antenna and its support structure shall not be attached to or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 miles per hour on its ow n and without the support of guy wires.

c.	Grounding: The antenna and its support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.

d.	Other Standards: The antenna support structure shall satisfy such other design and construction standards as the Building Commissioner reasonably determines are necessary to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the antenna and its support structure.
 
4.	Setback from Street: No such antenna or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the wall of the principal building to which it is accessory that is nearest to such street.

5.	Setbacks from Adjacent Buildings: No such antenna or its support structure shall be located in any required sideyard or nearer than one-half the height of the antenna and support structure to any habitable building on any adjacent property.

7.11	ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
A.	Certificate of Compliance: In addition to any other provisions, no such antenna or antenna
support structure permit ted under Sections 7.08-B, 7.09-B and 7.10 shall hereafter be constructed, altered or enlarged in the City unless a certificate of zoning compliance therefor
has been issued by the Building Commissioner. An application for such certificate shall be accompanied by two sets of plans, two plats of survey, and electrical, construct ion and design specifications drawn to scale and showing locations, heights, structural design, and
any other pertinent information or certifications deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner to demonstrate compliance with all provisions of the City' s Zoning Code and
Building Code. When applicable, an application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall include landscaping plans demonstrating that the screening requirements of Sections 7.08-B- 7 and 7.09-B-7 will be satisfied within 8 months after the date of the issuance of such certificate. A refundable cash deposit in an amount estimated by the Building Commissioner as necessary to cover the cost of implementing the proposed landscaping and screening must
accompany each application for a certificate of zoning compliance for the antenna and antenna support structure. The deposit shall be returned when, but only when, a final inspection by the Building Commissioner confirms that all required landscaping and screening is in place.

B.	Unless specifically provided to the contrary, when the regulations of Sections 7.08, 7.09,
7.10 or 7.16 are more restrictive than any other regulations generally applicable within the zoning districts, the provision of Sections 7.08, 7.09, 7.10 and 7.16 shall apply.

C.	For purposes of Sections 7.08, 7.09 and 7.10, the surface area of an antenna and its support structure shall be determined by adding together the actual surface area of each solid element or part of the antenna or its support structure, w here "solid" is defined to include all air spaces that are fully bounded by solid elements.

D.	Except as otherwise expressly provided in Sections 7.08, 7.09 and 7.10, all such antennae and antennae support structures shall be subject to all the provisions of this ordinance applicable to accessory uses and structures.

E.	The foregoing special regulations shall not apply to antennae and antennae support structures owned or maintained by the City.

7.12	NON-CONFORMING ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES

All accessory buildings, structures and uses heretofore lawfully constructed and not conforming to the provisions hereof are declared legal nonconforming uses and may be permit ted to continue to exist, but shall not be reconstructed or altered, and if rebuilt, must conform to existing codes as of the passage of this Section 7, which is August 26, 2002.
 


SECTION 8
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES

8.1	Purpose
8.2	General Provisions, Parking and Loading
8.3	Additional Regulations, Parking
8.4	Location of Parking Areas
8.5	Off-Street Loading and Unloading
8.6	Formulas for Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements
8.7	Number of Parking and Loading Spaces Required
8.8	Additional Parking Regulations

8.01	PURPOSE

The purpose of this Section 8 of this Zoning Code is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the property use.

8.2	GENERAL PROVISIONS, PARKING AND LOADING

A.	Procedure: An application for a site plan review, zoning action or building permit for a new or enlarged building, structure or use shall include a plot plan, drawn to scale, and fully dimensioned, showing any parking and/or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this Zoning Code.

B.	Extent of Control: The off-street parking and loading requirements of this Zoning Code shall apply as follows:

1.	When a building or structure erected prior to or after the effective date of this Zoning Code shall undergo any decrease in number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or other unit of measurement specified hereinafter for the required parking or loading facilities, and further, when said decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this Zoning Code thereto, parking and loading facilities may be reduced accordingly, provided that existing parking or loading facilities remaining would at least equal or exceed the parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this Zoning Code to the entire building or structure as modified.

2.	When a building or structure undergoes any increase in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or other unit of measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities, and further, when said increase would result in a requirement for additional total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this Zoning Code thereto, parking and loading facilities shall be increased accordingly,
 
provided that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so increased that the facilities would at least equal or exceed the parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this Zoning Code to the entire building or structure as modified.

3.	When any building or structure is hereafter erected, or any use of land hereafter established upon previously vacated land.

4.	When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises is increased.

5.	When any existing use of a building, structure or the premises is changed or converted to a new use.

C.	Existing Parking and Loading Spaces: Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this Zoning Code may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the requirements of this Section 8 for equivalent new construction; in which event said spaces shall not be reduced below the number required herein for such equivalent new construction.

D.	Permitted Parking and Loading Spaces. Nothing in this Section 8 shall prevent the establishment of off-street automobile parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject to full compliance with the provisions of this Section 8.

E.	Damage or Destruction: Any building, structure or use which is in existence and is a conforming use on the effective date of this Zoning Code and which subsequently shall be damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause may be reconstructed, reestablished or repaired without meeting current standards for off-street parking or loading facilities, except that parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, it shall not be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this Zoning Code for equivalent new construction.

F.	Submission of Plot Plan: Any application for a building permit or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include a plot plan drawn to scale and fully dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this Zoning Code.

G.	Use of Parking Facilities: Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of this Section 8 shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwellings to which such facilities are accessory or by guests of such occupants.

H.	Surfacing: All open off-street parking areas in any zoning district shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick or brick pavers and pursuant to Section 24.11 of the Marengo Municipal Code.

I.	Required Parking and Loading Facilities:

1.	Tables for Required Parking and Loading: Requirements governing the number and location of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities in relation to the
 
use of property are established hereinafter in subsections of this Zoning Code. The parking and loading requirements for any use not specified herein shall be the same as for a similar specified use, as determined by Section 8.03 herein.

2.	Floor Area: The term "floor area" as employed in this Section 8, in the case of office, merchandising or service types of use, shall mean the gross floor area of a building or structure used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients, tenants and employees, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. All calculations shall be prorated when floor areas are used as the standard. "Floor areas" for the purposes of this Section 8 shall not include any area used for:

(a)	torage accessory to the principal use of a building.

(b)	Incidental repairs.

(c)	rocessing or packaging of merchandise.

(d)	Show windows or offices incidental to the management or maintenance of a store or a building.

(e)	Rest rooms.

(f)	Utilities/utility rooms.

(g)	Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.

8.3	ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, PARKING

A.	Use of Parking Facilities: Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential uses and developed in any residential zoning district in accordance with the requirements of this Section 8.03 shall be used solely for the parking of motor vehicles owned by occupants of the dwelling units to which such facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the parking, repair or storage of commercial vehicles of over one- ton capacity including trucks, trailers, vans and other such vehicles, except when parked temporarily in making delivery, loading, unloading or service calls.

B.	Control of Off-Site Facilities: When required accessory off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use served is located, they shall be in the same possession, either by deed or long-term lease, as the property occupied by such principal use, and the owner shall be bound by covenants filed of record in the office of the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds requiring the owner and his or her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking spaces during the existence of said principal use. However, no parking facilities accessory to a non-residential use shall be located in a residential zoning district.
 
C.	Design and Maintenance:

1.	Parking Space Description: A required off-street parking space shall be an area of not less than 171 square feet nor less than nine feet wide by 19 feet long, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, or columns or exclusive of private non-residential driveways or aisles leading to streets. Where parking spaces overhang landscaped
areas, spaces may be reduced in length by one foot.

2.	Measurement of Space: When determination of the number of required off-street parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall be interpreted as one parking space.

3.	Open and Enclosed Spaces: Parking areas may be open or enclosed and the parking facilities provided shall be as approved by the City upon review of the site plan and use.

4.	Access: Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in such a manner as will least interfere with the movement of traffic. The design of parking areas shall also minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular movements. Driveway accesses or curb cuts in any zoning district shall be governed by Chapter 24 of the Marengo Municipal Code.

5.	Signs: No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any residential zoning district, except such as may be necessary for the orderly use of the parking facilities as provided in Section 9, Signs, of this Zoning Code.

6.	Required Setbacks: No parking space nor portion thereof established on a zoning lot without a building shall be located closer to any right-of-way than the front yard setback required for the zoning district in which the parking space is located. Further, any wall, fence or hedge developed around any parking area shall be subject to the front yard setback requirements of this Zoning Code in the same manner as a
building or structure. No parking space shall be designed in such a way so as to cause a vehicle to block a sidewalk.

7.	Surfacing: All open off-street parking areas, including driveways, aisles, service drives and aprons, shall be improved with a compacted crushed stone or gravel base, and surfaced with asphaltic or bituminous concrete (also known as "asphalt" and "blacktop"), Portland cement concrete, brick or pavers, pursuant to Section 24.11 of the Marengo Municipal Code.

8.	Screening: All open off-street parking areas for eight or more motor vehicles shall be effectively screened by a wall, a solid fence or a densely planted compact hedge
along any side which adjoins or is directly across a street from a property in a residential zoning district or an institutional property. Such wall, fence or hedge shall be at least three feet, but not more than five feet, in height and shall be maintained in good condition.

9.	In order to reduce heat and glare, to minimize blowing of dust and trash and to reduce the oppressive visual effects of large open parking areas, landscaping shall be
 
provided and maintained with every parking lot that contains eight or more parking spaces.

a.	A landscaping plan (either a separate document or an element of a more inclusive development plan) shall accompany every application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance to develop any parking lot that will contain eight or more spaces.

b.	The landscaping plan shall include the following information:
(1)	Proposed type, amount, size and spacing of plantings, including trees, shrubbery and ground cover;

(2)	Proposed size, construction materials, drainage and scheduled maintenance of landscaped islands or planting beds; and

(3)	Sketch indicating proposed spatial relationships of landscaped areas, parking spaces, automobile circulation and pedestrian movement.

10.	Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining properties. Maximum horizontal foot candles
as given off by the neighboring property as measured in the following districts shall not exceed:

Zoning District	Foot Candles	Lux
Single Family	.1	1.0
Multiple Family	.2	2.0
Business	2.0	21.5
Manufacturing	5.0	53.8
Municipal	5.0	53.8

All lighting fixtures erected 20 to 40 feet above ground level shall:

a.	Be flat bottom optically controlled sharp cut-offs, approved by the City Engineer;

b.	Not be installed with diffusing refractors; and

c.	Maintain a ratio of 3: 1 or less of lighting fixture spacing to lighting fixture mounting heights.

All lighting fixtures erect from zero to 20 feet above ground level shall:

a.	Be of translucent materials and not transparent material, approved by the City Engineer;

b.	Not be installed with diffusing refractors; and

c.	Lighting fixtures shall not be erected higher than 40 feet above ground level.
 
Upon the obsolescence or replacement of existing non-conforming lighting in off street lighting parking areas, lighting shall conform to this Section 8.

D.	Special Use Public Parking Areas: Any parking area developed for transient trade, and not accessory to specific principal uses or groups of uses for which parking is required by this
Zoning Code, shall be treated as a "special use" as defined in Section 3 herein and as allowed in accordance with the provisions of Section 15 by the City Council.

E.	Accessible Parking Spaces:

1.	Accessible parking spaces for mobility impaired persons shall be at least 16 feet wide including an eight-foot wide access aisle, and adjacent parking spaces shall not share a common access aisle. All access aisles shall be diagonally striped and shall be provided with a gradual transition to an accessible route to the on-site destination. Such spaces shall also measure 19 feet in length. Where such spaces overhang landscaped areas, spaces may be reduced in length by one foot.

2.	The number of spaces required, and their placement within the parking facility, shall be in accordance with State of Illinois accessibility standards. For some uses, a certain number of spaces in any self-park facility shall be set aside for wheelchair access as summarized in the following table:



Total Spaces	Minimum Accessible Spaces
1 to 25	1
26 to 50	2
51 to 75	3
76 to 100	4
101 to 150	5
151 to 200	6
201 to 300	7
301 to 400	8
401 to 500	9
501 to 1,000	2% of total
1,001 and over	20 plus 1 per 100 over 1,000 spaces

Some flexibility in the placement of such spaces may be considered if interpretation of such standards permits.

F.	Service Area Parking Spaces: Parking spaces located in the rear area of project sites or the service area of a project shall be discouraged. Where permitted, such spaces shall be limited to employee and service parking only.

G.	Off-street Guest Parking (Residential Areas): Off-street parking areas intended for residential guest parking shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any adjacent right-of way, and shall not be placed in the required minimum side or rear yard areas of any residential zoning lot.
 
H.	Aisle Widths, Lengths: The width and length of all aisles providing direct access to individual parking spaces shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in the table below.

I.	Joint Parking Facilities: Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted or required, provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.

J.	Shared Parking Facilities: Cumulative parking requirements for mixed use occupancies may be reduced by the City Council where it can be determined that the peak requirement of the several occupancies occurs at different times (either daily or seasonally). The Shared Parking report published by the Urban Land Institute may be used as a guideline in the estimation of parking demand for mixed use buildings and sites.

8.4	LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS

A.	Extent of Control: Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified: where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest entrance of the building that said parking area is required to serve.

1.	Residential Districts: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings located in any residential zoning district shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling. Such parking spaces shall not be located in any front yard or side yard with the exception of a paved area not to exceed 22 feet in width at the property line and 33 feet in width overall. Such parking spaces shall not be located any further into the front yard toward the principal structure than the garage and shall be set hack from the side property line a minimum of 5 feet. Each parking space accessory to a multi-family dwelling shall be unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow another vehicle to enter/exit the parking area. Parking areas constructed after the adoption of this Zoning Code shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete.

2.	Non-Residential Uses: All parking spaces accessory to permitted non-dwelling uses located in any residential district generally shall be located on the same lot as the use serviced. However, the Zoning Administrator may allow such parking facilities to be located on another parcel within 200 feet of the use served if the "same lot" requirement is not feasible.

3.	Business and Manufacturing Districts:

a.	Parking spaces accessory to any building or use located in any business district shall either be located on the same lot as the principal building or on another parcel within 200 feet of the premises. Parking lots accessory to any business or manufacturing use located in any business district or in a manufacturing district shall be located within 500 feet of the use serviced; provided that no portion of any such parking lot shall extend into any residential district except by special use permit.
 
b.	In any business or manufacturing district, off-street parking facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided collectively; but only if the total number of spaces located together is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use and if all regulations governing location or parking

8.5	OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING

All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the minimum standards indicated below:

1.	Size of Space: Every required off-street loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide and 50 feet long, exclusive of aisle and maneuver space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least 15 feet. In no case shall a vehicle being loaded or unloaded overhang into the public right-of way.

2.	Access Way: Every off-street loading space shall have a safe means of vehicular access to a street or alley. Such access way shall be at least 12 feet wide.

3.	Surfacing: Every off-street loading area shall be improved with a compacted stone base at least 7 inches thick and surfaced with at least 2 inches of asphaltic concrete.

4.	Buffer Strips: No loading space or area for vehicles over 2-ton cargo capacity shall be developed closer than 50 feet to the lot line of any residential district unless space/area is completely enclosed by walls, a solid fence or closely planted shrubbery of sufficient density to block the view from the residential property and in conformity with landscape regulations.

5.	Location: Every off-street loading space that is required or provided shall be located on the same parcel of land as the use served and not closer than 50 feet to the intersection of the rights-of-way of 2 or more streets or in required front yards.

8.6	FORMULAS FOR REQUIRED PARKING AND LOADING SPACES

In computing the number of parking spaces required by this Zoning Code, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the following rules:

1.	In computing parking space requirements based on the number of employees, the maximum number of employees on the premises at any period of the day shall be used. "Employee parking" means "one parking space shall be required per 1.5 employees," unless otherwise stated.

2.	In computing parking or loading space requirements on the basis of building floor area, the gross floor area shall be used.

3.	Whenever it is necessary to translate gross parking lot area into number of parking spaces; 350 square feet of gross area shall be deemed one parking space.
 
4.	If computation of the number of parking or loading spaces required by this Zoning Code	results in a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one space.

5.	No space or portion thereof needed to satisfy the minimum applicable requirement for number of off-street parking or loading spaces shall be counted as part of the off-street parking or loading spaces required for another structure or use.

8.7	NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES REQUIRED

Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as provided in the following table. For any use that is not listed in the table, the same amount of parking and loading space shall be provided as is required for the most similar listed use. The Zoning Administrator shall make the determination of similarity.

Use	Parking Spaces Required	Loading Spaces Required (if any)
Automobile car wash/laundry	3 spaces per wash lane	Not applicable
Bank, savings & loan, walk-in	1 space per 300 square feet of
floor area plus employee parking	Not applicable
Bank drive-in or automated
teller	5 spaces per teller window	Not applicable
Beauty, barber shop	2 spaces per chair plus
employee parking	Not applicable
Bowling alley	4 spaces per bowling lane plus
additional spaces as require herein for affiliated uses such
as restaurants and taverns	Not applicable except as
required for affiliated uses
College, business,
professional, trade school	1 space for every 3 students
that the building is designed to accommodate plus employee
parking	On review by the Zoning
Administrator
Commercial, office, service	4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of floor area	Not applicable up to 10,000
square feet of floor area; 1 space if more than 10,000
square feet; 1 space plus 1
additional space per 50,000 square feet of floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet
Educational, institutional,
church, auditorium	1 space per 4 seats in the
largest seating area	Not applicable
Furniture, appliance store	1 space per 600 square feet of
floor area	To 25,000 square feet of floor
area; more than 25,000 square feet of floor area 2 spaces plus square feet of floor area in excess of 25,000 feet
Hospital	1 space per 2 beds plus
employee parking	1 space if floor area is 50,001 –
100,000 square feet; 2 spaces if
floor area is 100,001 – 200,000
 

		square feet; over 200 square
feet the number of spaces is determined by the Zoning
Administrator
Hotel, motel, boarding house	1 space per unit plus employee
parking and additional spaces as required herein for affiliated
uses such as restaurants and
taverns	Not applicable
Laundromat	1 space per washer plus 1
space per employee	Not applicable
Manufacturing, any
manufacturing, other industrial use	1 space for each up to 100,000
square feet; 1 space for each 2,000 square feet in excess of 100,000 square feet	To 20,000 square feet, 1 space;
20,001-50,000 square feet, 2
spaces; 50,001 to 90,000
square feet, 3 spaces plus 2 additional spaces per 50,000
square feet of area in excess of 90,000 square feet
Mortuary	1 space per 5 seats plus 1 space
per funeral vehicle but not less than 20 spaces per chapel or state room	1 space per 10,000 square feet
or more of floor area
Multiple family dwelling	2 spaces per dwelling unit	Not applicable
Municipal or privately owned
recreation building or community center	1 for each 2 employees plus
spaces adequate in number to the visiting public as determined by the Zoning
Administrator	Not applicable
Nursing home	1 space per 5 beds plus
employee parking area	To 50,000 square feet of floor
area, 1 space; 50,001 -100,000
square feet, 2 spaces; 100,001-
200,000 square feet, 3 spaces
Office, generally	4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of floor area	To 30,000 square feet of floor
area, none required; 30,000- 100,000 square feet, 1 space plus 1 additional space per
100,000 square feet of floor area in excess of 100,000 square feet
Refreshment stand, drive-
in/drive-through restaurant	1 space per 25 square feet of
floor are.  5 stacking spaces per service window	1 space per structure having
10,000 square feet or more of floor area
Restaurant, sit down	1 space per 4 seats or 1 space
per 50 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater	1 space per 10,000 square feet
or more of floor space
Service station	2 spaces per service staff plus
employee parking	Not applicable
Single family and 2 family
dwellings	2 spaces per dwelling unit	Not applicable
 

Tavern	1 space per 4 seats or 1 space
per 50 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater	1 space per structure having
10,000 square feet or more of floor area
Theatre, drive-in	On review by Zoning
Administrator	Not applicable
Theatre, indoor	1 space per 4 seats	Not applicable
Vehicle sales (auto, boats,
trailers, etc)	1 space per 300 square feet of
enclosed floor are and up to 10,000 square feet of open lot area	As determined by the Zoning
Administrator

8.8	ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS

A.	In any R-5 Residential District the following parking regulations are also applicable:

1.	Except as follows, parking spaces shall not be located in any required front yard:

a.	A single family dwelling may have a driveway not to exceed 33 feet in width.

b.	A two-family dwelling may have a driveway for each dwelling unit. Each driveway shall not exceed 22 feet in width and shall be separated from the other driveway by a minimum 24 inches of landscaping that has a minimum height of two feet. Grass and/or sod are not classified as landscaping.

2.	Each parking space accessory to a multiple family dwelling shall be unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow another vehicle to enter/exit the
parking area.

3.	All parking areas in this district shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete.

4.	Parking shall not be permitted in the required rear yard.

B.	In any B-3 Regional Shopping District the following parking regulations are also applicable:

1.	Parking:

a.	Parking is not allowed in required yards.

b.	Parking spaces shall be based on the following:
(1)	Office use: four spaces per 1,000 feet of building space.
(2)	Retail use: five spaces per 1,000 square feet of building space and outdoor retail space.

2.	Loading: Pursuant to Section 8.05 herein.
 
3.	Access Control Requirements:

a.	Driveways: All projects are restricted to one driveway for each 250 feet from the nearest driveway (including adjacent properties which intersect with a major roadway)

b.	Whenever possible, access to a project shall be provided from cross streets, in place of an additional driveway from major roadway.

c.	Driveways shall be located and designed to minimize interference with the operation of left-turn lanes at street intersections.

d.	Whenever possible, access between properties should be provided in order to minimize the number of driveways from a property.
 
Section 9
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS

9.1	Purpose
9.2	Definitions
9.3	Applicability
9.4	General Requirements
9.5	Permitted Uses
9.6	Administratively Approved Uses
9.7	Special Use Permits
9.8	Buildings or Other Equipment Storage
9.9	Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers
9.10	Nonconforming Uses

9.1	PURPOSE

A.	The purpose of this Section 9 is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction and modification of personal wireless service facilities. The provisions of this Section 9 are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this Section 9 be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. To the extent that any provision or provisions of this Section 9 are inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provision of this Zoning Code, the Municipal Code or any ordinance of the City, the provisions of this Section 9 shall be deemed to control.

NOTE: Notwithstanding any provisions of this code to the contrary, pursuant to Illinois Public Act 100-0585, the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, effective June 1, 2018, small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted used if they are collocated in right of way in any zone or outside of rights of way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. By state law, such uses shall not be subject to zoning review or approval.  The regulation for such facilities is now contained in the Municipal Code at Section 38.17- Small Cell Ordinance. All other qualifying facilities continue to be subject to the code provisions that follow.



B.	In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under this Section 9 made by an applicant to provide personal wireless services or to install personal wireless service facilities, the Commission or the City Council, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the City, taking into account the nature and scope of the request. Any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.

C.	The purpose of this Section 9 is to also establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this Section 9 are to:

1.	Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and
 
antennas;

2.	Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas;

3.	Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;

4.	Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;

5.	Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;

6.	Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;

7.	Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;

8.	Consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and

9.	Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful sitting of tower structures.

In furtherance of these goals, the City shall give due consideration to the City's comprehensive Land use plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.

9.2	DEFINITIONS

As used in this Section 9 the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: Alternative tower structure: Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.

Antenna: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.

Backhaul network: The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.

FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.

FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
 
Height: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.

Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas: Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this Section 9, including permit ted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.

Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self- supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto.

9.3	APPLICABILITY

A.	New Towers and Antennas: All new towers or antennas in the City shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in Sections 9.03-B through 9.03-D, inclusive.

B.	Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This Section 9 shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. Said antennas are governed by Section 7.10 of this Zoning Code.

C.	Preexisting Towers or Antennas: Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Section 9 other than the requirements of Sections 9.04-F and 9.04-G.

D.	AM Array: For purposes of implementing this Section 9, an AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.

9.4	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

A.	Principal or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.

B.	Lot Size: For purposes of determining w het her the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
 
C.	Inventory of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Zoning Administrator an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the City or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The Zoning Administrator may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this Section 9 or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the City, provided, however that the Zoning Administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any w ay representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.

D.	Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:

1.	Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.

2.	At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.

3.	If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.

4.	Barbed or razor wire shall not be permitted.

E.	Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.

F.	State or Federal Requirement s: All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Section 9 shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds f or the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.

G.	Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
 
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.

H.	Measurement: For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the City irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.

I.	Not Essential Services: Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this Section 9 and shall not be regulated or permit ted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.

J.	Franchises: Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the City have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Zoning Administrator.

K.	Public Notice: For purposes of this Section 9, any special use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or special use shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding separation distance listed in Section 9.07-B-5-b, Table 2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by Section 17 of this Zoning Code.

L.	Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.

M.	Buildings and Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment associated w it h antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of Section 9.08.

N.	Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The City encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.

9.5	PERMITTED USES

A.	General: The uses listed in this Section 9.05 are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special use permit.

B.	Permitted Uses: The following uses are specifically permitted: Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the City.

9.6	ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES

A.	General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas.

1.	The Zoning Administrator may administratively approve the uses listed in this Section 9.06.
 
2.	Each applicant f or administrative approval shall apply to the Zoning Administrator providing the information set forth in Sections 9.07-B-1 and 9.07-B-3 herein and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for the costs of reviewing the application.

3.	The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with Sections 9.04, 9.07-B-4 and 9.07-B-5 herein.

4.	The Zoning Administrator shall respond to each such application within 60 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. If the Zoning Administrator fails to respond to the applicant within said 60 days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved.

5.	In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning Administrator may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements in Section 9.07-B-4 or separation distances between towers in Section
9.07-B-5 by up to 50 percent.

6.	In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning Administrator may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of
an existing tower to monopole construction.

7.	If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an application for a special use permit pursuant to Section 9.07 herein prior to filing any appeal that may be available under this Zoning Code.

B.	List of Administratively Approved Uses: The following uses may be approved by the Zoning Administrator after conducting an administrative review:

1.	Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in any
M-Manufacturing District.

2.	Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of Sections 9.06-B-2a and 9.06-B-2b herein.

a.	Antennas on Existing Structures: Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the Zoning Administrator as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional or multi-family structure of 8 or more dwelling units, provided:

(1)	The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure;

(2)	The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and

(3)	The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
 
b.	Antennas on Existing Towers: An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the Zoning Administrator and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:

(1)	A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the Zoning Administrator allows reconstruction as a monopole.

(2)	Height:

(a)	An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower’s existing height, to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna.

(b)	The height change referred to in Section 9.06-B2b(2)(a) may only occur one time per communication tower.

(c)	The additional height referred to in Section 9.06-B2b(2)(a) shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth in Section 9.07. The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations.

(3)	Onsite location:

(a)	tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of
its existing location.

(b)	After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one remain on the site.

(c)	relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to Section 9.07- B5. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of Section 9.07-B5.

(d)	The onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as established in Section 9 .07-B5 shall only be permit ted when approved by the Zoning Administrator.

3.	New Towers in Manufacturing Districts: Locating any new tower in a manufacturing district, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the Zoning Administrator concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in Section
 
9.1	and the requirements of Section 9.04; the tower meets the setback requirements in Section 9.07-B4 and separation distances in Section 9.07-B5; and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria:

a.	for a single user, up to 90 feet in height;
b.	for two users, up to 120 feet in height; and
c.	for three or more users, up to 150 feet in height.

4.	Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low -powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers.

9.7	SPECIAL USE PERMITS

A.	General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas by the Commission.

1.	If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Section 9.05 herein or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to Section 9.06 herein, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.

2.	Applications for special use permits under this Section 9.07 shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of Section 15 of this Zoning Code, except as modified in this Section 9.07.

3.	In granting a special use permit, the Commission may impose conditions to the extent the Commission conclude such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.

4.	Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.

5.	An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information described in this Section 9.07 and a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for the costs of reviewing the application.

B.	Towers:

1.	Information Required: In addition to any information required for applications for special use permits pursuant to Section 15 of this Zoning Code, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following information:

a.	A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), comprehensive land use plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in Section 9.07-B5, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower
 
and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary to assess compliance with this Section 9.

b.	Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).

c.	The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.

d.	The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submit ted pursuant to Section 9 .04-C shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.

e.	A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.

f.	Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.

g.	A notarized statement signed by the applicant describing their compliance with Sections 9.04-C, D, E, F, G, J, L and M, Section 9.07-B4, Section 9.07-B5 and all applicable federal, state or local laws.

h.	A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users.

i.	Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the City.

j.	A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower.

k.	A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas within the City based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.

2.	Factors Considered in Granting Special Use Permits for Towers: In addition to any standards for consideration of special use permit applications pursuant to Section 15
of this Zoning Code, the Commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the Commission may waive or reduce
the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Commission conclude that the goals of this Section 9 are better served thereby:

a.	Height of the proposed tower;

b.	Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district
 
boundaries;

c.	Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;

d.	Surrounding topography;

e.	Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;

f.	Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;

g.	Proposed ingress and egress; and

h.	Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as discussed in Section 9.07-B3 herein.

3.	Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, or Alternative Technology: No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's a proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the Commission related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna
may consist of any of the following:

a.	No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant' s engineering requirements.

b.	Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements.

c.	Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.

d.	The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant' s proposed antenna.

e.	The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.

f.	The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.

g.	The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require
 
the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.

4.	Setbacks: The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Commission may reduce the standard setback requirement s if the goals of this Section 9 would be better served thereby:

a.	Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75 percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.

b.	Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements.

5.	Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Commission may reduce the standard separation requirements if the goals of this Section 9 would be better served thereby.
a.	Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.

(1)	Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in
Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1.

(2)	Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards established in Table 1.

Table 1

Off-Site Use/Designated Area	Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex residential units ¹	200 feet or 300% height of tower, whichever
is greater
Vacant single-family or duplex residentially
zoned land which is either platted or has preliminary subdivision plan approval which is not expired	200 fee or 300 height of tower ² , whichever is
greater
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands³	100 feet or 100% height of tower, whichever
is greater
Existing multi-family residential units greater
than duplex units	100 feet or 100% height of tower, whichever
is greater
Non-residentially zoned lands or non-
residential uses	None; only setbacks apply

1	Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes.
2	Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback line.
3	Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any multi-family residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
 
b.	Separation Distances Between Towers:

(1)	Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.


(2)	Table 2:

Existing Towers-Types
	Lattice	Guyed	Monopole 75’ in
height or greater	Monopole less
75’ in height
Lattice	5,000	5,000	1,500	750
Guyed	5,000	5,000	1,500	750
Monopole 75’ in
height or greater	1,500	1,500	1,500	750
Monopole less
75’ in height	750	750	750	750


6.	Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device excluding barb or razor wire fencing; provided however, that the Commission may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.

7.	Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Commission may waive such requirements if the goals of this Section 9 would be better served thereby.

a.	Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.

b.	In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.

c.	Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.

9.8	BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE

A.	Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops: The equipment cabinet or structure used in
 
association with antennas shall comply with the following:

1.	The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 300 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are
less than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 150 square feet of gross floor area or 10 feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.

2.	If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 150 square feet or 20 percent of the roof area.

3.	Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes.

B.	Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles or Light Poles: The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance with the following:

1.	In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be located:

a.	In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than 4 feet in height or 24 square feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 6 feet from all lot lines. The cabinet /structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42-48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.

b.	In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than six feet in height or 24 square feet in gross floor area. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of 8 feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.

2.	In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than 6 feet in height or 64 square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of 8 feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches. In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet in height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of 8 feet and a planted  height of at least 36 inches.

C.	Antennas Located on Towers: The related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than 300 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located.

D.	Modification of Building Size Requirements: The requirements of Sections 9.08-A through 9.08-C may be modified by the Zoning Administrator in the case of administratively approved uses or by the Commission in the case of uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation.
 
9.9	REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS

Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective

1.	The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 300 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 150 square feet of gross floor area or 10 feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.

2.	If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 150 square feet or 20 percent of the roof area.

3.	Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes.

B.	Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles or Light Poles: The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance with the following:

1.	In residential district s, the equipment cabinet or structure may be located:

a.	In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than 4 feet in height or 24 square feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 6 feet from all lot lines. The cabinet /structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42-48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.

b.	In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than six feet in height or 24 square feet in gross floor area. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of 8 feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.

2.	In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than 6 feet in height or 64 square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of 8 feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches. In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet in height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of 8 feet and a planted  height of at least 36 inches.
 
C.	Antennas Located on Towers: The related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than 300 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located.

D.	Modification of Building Size Requirements: The requirements of Sections 9.08-A through 9.08-C may be modified by the Zoning Administrator in the case of administratively approved uses or by the Commission in the case of uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation.

9.9	REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS

Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owners expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.

9.10	NONCONFORMING USES

A.	Not Expansion of Nonconforming Use: Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this Section 9 shall not be deemed to Constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.

B.	Preexisting Towers: Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this Section 9.

C.	Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers or Antennas: Notwithstanding Section 9.09, bonafide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the separation requirements specified in Sections 9 .07-B4 and 9.07-B5. The type, height and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in Section 9.09
 


Section 10 RESIDENTIAL/AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS



10.1	Purpose
10.2	ER Estate Residential District
10.3	R-1 One-Family District
10.4	R-2 One-Family District
10.5	R-3 One-Family District
10.6	R-5 Multiple Family District
10.7	AT Agricultural Transition District

10.1	PURPOSE

The residential and AT Agricultural Transition districts set forth herein are established in order to protect public health and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and welfare. These general goals include, among others, the following specific purposes:

1.	To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, heat, glare and other objectionable factors.

2.	To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through-traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off-street parking.

3.	To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of population through regulation of the bulk of buildings.

4.	To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.

5.	To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open space on the same zoning lot with residential development.

6.	To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which increase safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable influences.

7.	To promote the best use and development of residential and agricultural land in accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of residential development and protect the character and desirable development and protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic base of the City.
 
10.2	ER ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT Amended, 09-9-2, 04-3-1

It is the purpose of the ER Estate Residential District to establish regulations for larger single family residential lot areas. It is anticipated that neighborhoods in this district shall consist of very low density single family homes. Because of the large size of the lots in this district, the City Council may waive the requirement that dwelling units be connected to City sewer.

1.	Dwelling standards:

a.	Every one story building hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages or other habitable spaces.

b.	Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected shall have a floor area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than 1,000 square feet in area on the first floor including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages, and other spaces not frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.

2.	Accessory buildings: The following accessory buildings shall be permitted on an ER Estate Residential District zoning lot:

a.	Up to a four-car garage, not exceeding 1,400 square feet.

b.	Swimming pool with a bath house not exceeding 300 square feet.

c.	Tennis courts no closer than 25 feet to the property line

d.	Greenhouses (total square feet shall not exceed 300 square feet).

e.	Guest house up to 850 square feet in area if the lot is two acres or more in size. The guest house shall not be rented or leased.

f.	Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required yard.

g.	Accessory buildings shall only be permitted behind the building setback line.

3.	Lot requirements:

a.	The minimum lot size is one acre (43,560 square feet) in area.

b.	The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.

c.	The minimum setbacks shall be:

i.	Front yard, 50 feet;
ii.	Corner side yard setback, 50 feet;
 
iii.	Interior side yard setback, 25 feet;
iv.	Rear yard setback, 50 feet; and
v.	Maximum lot coverage shall be 30 percent.

4.	Permitted uses:

a.	Single family detached dwelling on any one platted lot or parcel.

b.	Home occupations pursuant to Section 5.11 of this Zoning Code.

c.	Group homes, subject to the following:

i.	the group home houses no more than 8 persons plus staff;
ii.	the group home is licensed or certified by the State of Illinois; and
iii.	there is a minimum distance of 1,000 feet maintained between group homes.

d.	Lots containing five or more acres may have up to three horses. A stable or barn housing the horses shall be not less than 200 feet from the property line. Horses shall not be permitted in the front yard. No stables or other quarters shall be erected, maintained or used on any portion of the property for stabling or accommodating any cattle, swine, goats, sheep, bees or fowl.

e.	Parks and recreational facilities when publicly owned.

5.	Special uses:

a.	Golf courses including accessory driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms.

b.	Country clubs including accessory driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms.

c.	Group homes pursuant to Section 16.8 of this Zoning Code.

d.	Bed and breakfast establishments.

e.	Solar Farm

10.3	R-l SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT Amended, 09-9-2

A.	Dwelling standards:

1.	Every one story building hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages or other habitable spaces.

2.	Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected shall have a floor area
 
measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than 1,000 square feet in area on the first floor including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages, and other spaces not frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.

B.	Building allowance: Only one principal building shall be permitted on any one platted lot.

C.	Accessory buildings:

1.	No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.

2.	No part of an accessory building shall be located: closer than 5 feet to the side lot line; closer than 5 feet to the rear lot line; and closer than 10 feet to the principal building.

3.	No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.

4.	Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited.

5.	Accessory building shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard.

6.	Accessory buildings are only allowed behind the building setback line.

D.	Lot and building requirements:

1.	Minimum lot area shall be 14,000 square feet.

2.	Minimum lot width shall be 74 feet at the established building line.

3.	Minimum principal building setbacks shall be:

a.	Front yard setback, 25 feet
b.	Corner side yard setback, 25 feet
c.	Interior side yard setback is 10 percent of the lot width at the building line, but not less than 10 feet.
d.	Rear yard setback, 30 feet
e.	Maximum principal structure height, 30 feet
f.	Maximum lot coverage, 30 percent

E.	Permitted Uses:
1.	Single family dwellings

2.	Group homes subject to the following:
a.	the group home houses no more than 8 persons plus staff;
b.	the group home is licensed or certified by the State of Illinois; and
c.	there is a minimum distance of 1,000 feet maintained between group homes.

3.	Home occupations as provided in Section 5.11 herein.
 
4.	Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned.

F.	Special Uses:

1.	Public or private schools (elementary, middle, high, junior college, university) including playground and athletic fields.

2.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues

3.	Convents, monastery and religious retreats

4.	Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses and pitch and putt courses.

5.	Public library

6.	Museums

7.	Cemeteries

8.	Hospitals and nursing home

9.	Planned developments

10.	Public utilities

11.	Group homes subject to Section 16.8 of this Zoning Code

12.	Bed and breakfast establishments

G.	No building shall be erected or maintained on any portion of a residential district for manufacturing or industrial purposes; and no noxious or offensive trade shall be carried on upon any portion of a residential district nor shall anything be done thereon which may be or become a legal nuisance to the neighborhood.

10.4	R-2 SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT Amended, 09-9-2

It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for single family dwellings in established residential neighborhoods. This district is not to be used in newly developed areas.

A.	Dwelling standards:

1.	Every one story building hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages or other habitable spaces.
 
2.	Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected shall have a floor area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than 1,000 square feet in area on the first floor including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages, and other spaces not frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.

B.	Building allowance: Only one principal building shall be permitted on any one platted lot.

C.	Accessory buildings:

1.	No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.

2.	No part of an accessory building shall be located: closer than 5 feet to the side lot line; closer than 5 feet to the rear lot line; and closer than 10 feet to the principal building.

3.	No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.

4.	Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited.

5.	Accessory building shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard.

6.	Accessory buildings are only allowed behind the building setback line.

D.	Lot and building requirements

1.	Minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet.

2.	Minimum lot width shall be 60 feet at the established building line.

3.	Minimum principal building setbacks shall be:

a.	Front yard setback, 25 feet
b.	Corner side yard setback, 20 feet
c.	Interior side yard setback is 10 percent of the lot width at the building line, but not less than 10 feet.
d.	Rear yard setback, 25 feet
e.	Maximum principal structure height, 30 feet
f.	Maximum lot coverage, 30 percent

E.	Permitted Uses:

1.	Single family dwellings

2.	Group homes, subject to the following:

a.	the group home houses no more than 8 persons plus staff;
b.	the group home is licensed or certified by the State of Illinois; and
 
c.	there is a minimum distance of 1,000 feet maintained between group homes.

3.	Home occupations as provided in Section 5.11 herein.

4.	Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned.

F.	Special Uses:

1.	Public or private schools (elementary, middle, high, junior college, university) including playground and athletic fields.

2.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues

3.	Convents, monastery and religious retreats

4.	Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses and pitch and putt courses.

5.	Public library

6.	Museums

7.	Cemeteries

8.	Hospitals and nursing home

9.	Planned developments

10.	Public utilities

11.	Group homes subject to Section 16.8 of this Zoning Code.

G.	No building shall be erected or maintained on any portion of a residential district for manufacturing or industrial purposes; and no noxious or offensive trade shall be carried on upon any portion of a residential district nor shall anything be done thereon which may be or become a legal nuisance to the neighborhood.

10.5	R-3 SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT Amended, 09-9-2, 04-5-5

It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for single family dwellings in established residential neighborhoods which are in transition. This district is not to be used in newly developed areas.

1.	Dwelling standards:

a.	Every one story building hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls
 
including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages or other habitable spaces.

b.	Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected shall have a floor area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than 1,000 square feet in area on the first floor including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages, and other spaces not frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.

c.	Two-family dwelling structures shall have a total floor area of not less than 700 square feet for each dwelling unit including utility rooms but excluding all other areas not used for eating and sleeping purposes.

2.	Building allowance: Only one principal building shall be permitted on any one platted lot.

3.	Accessory buildings

a.	No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.
b.	No part of an accessory building shall be located: closer than 5 feet to the side lot line; closer than 5 feet to the rear lot line; and closer than 10 feet to the principal building.

c.	No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.

d.	Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited.

e.	Accessory building shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard.

f.	Accessory buildings are only allowed behind the building setback line.

4.	Lot and building requirements:

a.	Minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet.

b.	Minimum lot width shall be 60 feet at the established building line.

c.	Minimum principal building setbacks shall be:

i.	Front yard setback, 25 feet

ii.	Corner side yard setback, 20 feet

iii.	Interior side yard setback is 10 percent of the lot width at the building line, but not less than 10 feet.

iv.	Rear yard setback, 25 feet
 
v.	Maximum principal structure height, 30 feet

vi.	Maximum lot coverage, 30 percent

5.	Permitted Uses:

Single family dwellings: a special use permit shall be required for all new construction that abuts a primary thoroughfare designated by a state or federal highway number.

Group homes, subject to the following:

a.	The group home houses no more than 8 persons plus staff;
b.	The group home is licensed or certified by the State of Illinois; and
c.	There is a minimum distance of 1,000 feet maintained between group homes. Home occupations as provided in Section 5.11 herein
Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned.

6.	Special Uses:

Bed and breakfast establishments Cemeteries
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues Convents, monastery and religious retreats
Conversion of single family dwelling into two-family dwelling only when the following conditions are met:

a.	When divided each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 600 square feet in floor area including space used for utility rooms but excluding all other areas not used for living and/or sleeping purposes.

b.	On-site paved parking area shall be provided. Parking areas shall not be in the required yard setback areas with the exception of the driveway; there shall be a minimum of two parking spaces for each dwelling.

c.	All other building and yard requirements for this district must be met. Conversion of existing structures (not including newly constructed structures) into offices for professionals such as physicians, dentists, attorneys-at-law, architects, engineers, music teachers, artists, teachers, accountants, photographers, real estate agents, insurance agents, public stenographers, brokers, business consultants and other professional offices as determined by the Commission. These properties must meet the following conditions:

a.	Paved parking approved by the City Council.

b.	All parking shall be behind the front building line.

c.	Signage shall be approved by the City Council.
 
d.	The subject property shall abut a state designated highway.

Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses and pitch and putt courses.

Group homes subject to Section 16.8 of this Zoning Code. Hospitals and nursing homes
Museums

Planned developments Public library
Public or private schools (elementary, middle, high, junior college, university) including playground and athletic fields.

Public utilities

Two-family dwellings.

7.	No building shall be erected or maintained on any portion of a residential district for manufacturing or industrial purposes; and no noxious or offensive trade shall be carried on upon any portion of a residential district nor shall anything be done thereon which may be or become a legal nuisance to the neighborhood.

10.6	R-5 MULTIPLE FAMILY DISTRICT

It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for multiple family dwelling districts. These regulations establish limitations on the use and character of development so as to take advantage of, and to avoid conflict with, natural topography and existing development.

1.	Dwelling Standards

a.	Every one story dwelling hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages or other habitable spaces.

b.	Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected shall have a floor area, measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than 1,000 square feet on the first floor including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages, and other spaces not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.

c.	Two-family dwelling structures shall have a total floor area of not less than 700
 
square feet for each dwelling unit including utility rooms but excluding all other areas not used for eating or sleeping purposes.

d.	Multiple family dwelling structures shall have a total floor area of not less than the following:

i.	Efficiency apartments shall have a floor area of no less than 600 square feet per dwelling unit

ii.	One bedroom apartments shall have a total floor area of not less than 800 square feet per dwelling unit.

iii.	Apartments of more than one bedroom shall have a total floor area of not less than that required for a one bedroom apartment plus 150 square feet of floor space for each additional bedroom.

2.	Building allowance: Only one principal building shall be erected on any single platted lot.

3.	Accessory buildings:

a.	No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.

b.	No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than: 10 feet to the side lot line; 5 feet to the rear lot line; and 10 feet to the principal building.

c.	No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.

d.	Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited.

e.	Accessory building shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard.
f.	Accessory buildings shall only be permitted behind the building setback line.

4.	Lot and building requirements:

a.	The minimum lot area shall be as follows:

i.	Single family dwelling, 14,000 square feet.

ii.	Two-family dwelling, 14,000 square feet.

iii.	Multiple family dwelling, 5,000 square feet for each dwelling unit but not less than 14,000 square feet total. This standard applies to new construction.

This standard also applies to the conversion of homes originally constructed as single family dwelling into a building which has more than three dwelling units within one structure.
 
b.	The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet at the established building line.

c.	The minimum principal building setbacks shall be:

i.	Front yard, 25 feet. For buildings exceeding 25 feet in height, the minimum front year shall be increased by one foot for each 2 feet or fraction thereof by which the building exceeds 25 feet.

ii.	Corner side yard, 20 feet.

iii.	Interior side yard, 10 percent of the lot width at the building line but no less than 10 feet.

iv.	Rear yard, 25 feet.

For through lots the setback from each street shall be the same as the front yard requirements.

d.	Maximum lot coverage is 30 percent;

e.	Maximum height is limited to 3 stories and 50 feet.

5.	Permitted Uses:

Group homes, subject to the following:

a.	the group home houses no more than 8 persons plus staff;

b.	the group home is licensed or certified by the State of Illinois; and

c.	there is a minimum distance of 1,000 feet maintained between group homes. Home occupations pursuant to Section 5.11 of this Zoning Code.
Multiple family dwellings
Parks and recreation areas when publicly owned Single family dwellings
Two-family dwellings

6.	Special Uses:

Barber shops and/or beauty shops Bed and breakfasts
Cemeteries

Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues Convents, monastery and religious retreats
 
Convenience stores

Conversion of existing structures (not including newly constructed structures) into offices for professionals such as physicians, dentists, attorneys-at-law, architects, engineers, music teachers, artists, teachers, accountants, photographers, real estate agents, insurance agents, public stenographers, brokers, business consultants and other professional offices as determined by the Commission. These properties must meet the following conditions:

a.	Paved parking approved by the City Council.

b.	All parking must be behind the front building line.

c.	Signage shall be approved by the City Council.

d.	The subject property shall abut a state designated highway. Drug stores
Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses and pitch and putt courses.

Group homes subject to Section 16.8 of this Zoning Code. Hospitals
Medical and dental offices and group medical centers

Mobile home and manufactured home park designed and intended for residential purposes, provided they meet the following requirements:

a.	Single family dwelling units only

b.	Each dwelling unit shall be located on a lot which has a minimum size of 5,000 square feet in area with a minimum lot width of 35 feet.

c.	Each lot must front on a street

d.	Streets (including public and private) shall have a minimum of a 60-foot right-of way and a pavement width of 30 feet (face to face). The pavement structure shall consist of 6” BBC base, 2” Class B surface or 6” PC concrete, or 10” aggregate base, Type B (100% crushed), 22” Class I surface (12” binder and 1’ surface). Curb and cutter (M-6.12, B- 6.12) are required. A 4-foot wide sidewalk is required unless an off-street system is provided and approved by the City Council.

e.	Each unit shall be properly anchored by a method which is approved by the City.

f.	Each unit will contain a NOAA early warning weather radio

g.	Each park will have a minimum of 10 units
 
h.	Common recreational areas shall be provided as follows:

i.	Up to 20 units, 700 square feet per unit.

ii.	21 to 50 units, 14,000 square feet plus 600 feet per unit in excess of 20 units.

iii.	51 to 100 units, 32,000 square feet plus 400 feet per unit in excess of 51 units.

i.	A minimum of 2 off-street parking spaces per individual lot shall be provided.

j.	All lots must be serviced by City water and sewer. The size of the mains shall be determined by the City Engineer.

k.	All utilities shall be placed underground.

l.	No sales of new or used units by dealers or brokers shall be permitted unless the unit has been placed on a lot and connected to City sewer and water.

Museums

Planned developments Public library
Public or private schools (elementary, middle, high, junior college, university) including playground and athletic fields.

Public utilities Religious retreats Restaurants
Rest homes, nursing homes hospitals, sanitariums which are licensed and /or registered

10.07	AT AGRICULTURAL TRANSITION DISTRICT Amended 19-10-2

The AT Agricultural Transition District is intended to anticipate expansion of the City into agricultural areas (lands). At the time agricultural areas are annexed into the City, the dwelling standards, building allowance, accessory buildings and lot and building requirements of the McHenry County

Zoning Ordinance, as amended September 15, 2009, are applicable until such time as the property owners petition for re-classification pursuant to this Zoning Code. The following uses are designated for the AT Agricultural Transition District:
 

USE	TYPE OF USE
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower	Special Use
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center	Special Use
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization	Special Use
Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser	Special Use
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or
Processor	Special Use
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or
Transporter	Special Use
Animal: exotic, breeding and training	Special Use
Animal; show, circus	Temporary
Arena, equine enclosed	Special Use
Auction	Temporary
Beach, private	Permitted
Beach, public	Special Use
Blacksmith shop (horse related)	Permitted
Cemetery	Special Use
Christmas tree sales	Temporary
Clinic, large animal	Special Use
Clinic, small animal	Special Use
Single family dwelling	Special Use
Electrical distribution center (non-exempt)	Special Use
Festival	Temporary
Flea Market	Temporary
Game breeding (for spot)	Special Use
Golf, Country Club	Special Use
Golf, driving range	Special Use
Grain elevator, commercial	Special Use
Greenhouse, commercial	Special Use
Horse farm	Permitted
Kennel, commercial	Special Use
Kennel, private	Special Use
Nursery, commercial	Special Use
Public service, fire and rescue	Special Use
Public service, police	Special Use
Roadside sales stand for produce grown on premises	Special Use
Stable, private	Special Use
Stable, public	Special Use
Stable, public (i.e. livery)	Special Use
Tent theater, religious meeting, festival	Temporary
Tower	Special Use
Utility facility, non-exempt	Special Use
Utility, power producer	Special Use
 
Section 11
BUSINESS DISTRICTS



11.1	Purpose
11.2	B-1 Central Business District
11.3	B-2 General Business District
11.4	B-3 Regional Shopping District
11.5	BP, Business Park District

11.1	PURPOSE

The business districts set forth herein are established to protect public health and promote public safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare, and to protect the economic base of the City and the value of property. These general purposes include, among others, the following specific objectives:

1.	To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate locations for the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and strengthening the economic base of the City.

2.	To place in separate districts those businesses which may create noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness or which may generate excessive traffic.

3.	To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacent to or inclusion in a residential area has sufficient elements of service or convenience to such areas to offset the disadvantage.

4.	To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable and so promote public convenience and business prosperity and contribute to the alleviation of traffic and pedestrian congestion.

5.	To provide for the establishment of off-street parking facilities, permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote shopping convenience and business prosperity.

11.2	B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT Amended, Ord. 04-3-1

A.	Purpose: A pedestrian-oriented district geographically designated within the central core of the City in which retail and service uses are provided.

B.	Use Restrictions:

1.	Retail/office only: All establishments located in this district shall deal directly with patrons

2.	Enclosed activities: All activities must be located in an enclosed building (except as indicated in the following paragraph 3).
 
3.	Enclosed activities: Merchandise may be displayed outside but may not use more than 25 percent of the enclosed building square footage.

4.	Processing incidental: Any processing or treatment of goods on any premises must be clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on such premises.

5.	Drive-in/through: In this district a special use permit is required to establish any business that will offer goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles.

6.	Parking: See Section 8, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Zoning Code.

7.	Signs: See Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code.

8.	Unless a special use permit has been issued, dwelling units and lodging rooms shall not be permitted below the second floor. This is not applicable to hotels and motels.

9.	Refuse containers: All refuse generated by facilities located within this district shall be stored in covered containers placed in areas screened by a screening fence or densely planted evergreen hedge of adequate height to screen the refuse containers from adjoining properties and the street. Non-conforming refuse containers existing shall comply with this Zoning Code within one year after the adoption of this Zoning Code, which is August 26, 2003.

10.	Only one principal building may be erected on any one lot.

C.	Lot and Building Requirements: Every building erected in this district shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Minimum lot area: None.

2.	Minimum lot width: Twenty feet at the established building line.

3.	Minimum lot depth: None.

4.	Minimum setback: Generally none required except as necessary to achieve compliance with applicable off-street parking and loading requirements.

5.	Maximum floor area ratio: None.

6.	Maximum percentage of lot building coverage: None.

7.	Height requirements: Maximum height of three stories or 36 feet.

D.	Permitted Uses: Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following uses are permitted:
Auditoriums, meeting rooms and other places of assembly Banks, savings and loans
 
Churches

Clubs and lodges

Dry cleaning operations (including on-site processing) Dwelling units above the first floor only
Funeral establishments Hotels and motels Laundries
Libraries

Mass transit facilities Museums
Offices

Printing and publishing (under 5,000 square feet in area) Restaurants
Retail establishments

Schools, music studios, dance studios Service establishments Taverns/saloons
Theaters (indoors)

E.	Special Uses: Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the City may allow the following uses special use permit:

Any use that involves a retail or service activity which is less than 25 percent outside completely enclosed building. (Outside activity which is over 25 percent is prohibited.)

Any use such as drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks, automobile service stations that offer goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked vehicles or that sell food or beverages for consumption in parked motor vehicles on the premises.

Auto service station
 
Dwelling units if located below the second story, except in hotels and motels. Planned development
Public facilities

Recreational facilities, public and private Restaurant/saloons with live entertainment Tattoo parlors
Utility stations

11.3	B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT Amended, 19-10-2, 04-3-1

This district is intended to accommodate and regulate commercial/business development outside of the B-1 Central Business District. These typically require direct access to major streets and large lots for off-street parking and loading.

1.	Use Restrictions:

a.	Uses: These uses shall deal directly with consumers.

b.	Unenclosed activities: In this district, outside display of inventory is allowable up to 25 percent of the indoor floor space under the following conditions:

i.	It is on private property.

ii.	The area is not designated as parking or required open space. Any outside activity in excess of 25 percent of the total enclosed area requires a special use permit.

c.	Refuse containers: All refuse generated by facilities located within this district shall be stored in covered containers placed in visually screened areas. All non- conforming refuse containers shall comply with this Section 11.03 within 1 year from the effective date of this Zoning Code, which is August 26, 2003.

d.	Screening: Along the side and rear lot lines of any lot abutting any residential district, screening (a wall, solid fence or closely-planted shrubbery) at least 6 feet high and of sufficient density to completely block the view from the adjacent residential property, shall be installed.

e.	Any accessory building shall meet yard setback requirements.

f.	Only 1 principal building shall be permitted on a zoning lot.

g.	Parking: Pursuant to Section 8, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Zoning Code.
 
h.	Signs: Pursuant to Chapter 16, Signs, of Municipal Code.

i.	Drive-In/through: In this district a special use permit is required to establish any business that will offer goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles.

2.	Lot and Building Requirements: Every principal building erected in this district shall conform to the following requirements.

a.	Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet

b.	Minimum lot width: 100 feet at the established building line.

c.	Minimum setbacks: front yard, 50 feet; corner side yard, 50 feet; side yards, 25 feet; and rear yard, 25 feet.

d.	Maximum floor area ratio: Two square feet of floor space for each 1 square foot of lot area.

e.	Maximum percentage of lot building coverage: 50 percent.

f.	Height requirements: Maximum height of 3 stories or 50 feet.

g.	General building setbacks: In addition to any other building setback or yard requirement contained herein, every building hereafter erected or enlarged shall provide and maintain a setback from the public street in accordance with the following requirements:

Primary thoroughfare designated by a state or federal highway number: 75 feet from the property line or 150 feet from the center line of the right-of-way, whichever distance is greater.

3.	Permitted Uses: Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following uses are permitted:

Auditoriums, meeting rooms and other places of assembly Automobile car wash/ laundry
Banks, savings and loans Blueprinting and photostating Bowling alleys
Churches

Clubs and lodges
 
Dry cleaning operations (including on-site processing) Funeral homes
Hotels and motels Libraries
Mass transit facilities Museums
Offices

Printing and publishing (under 5,000 square feet in area) Radio and television broadcasting
Restaurants

Retail establishments

Schools, music studios, dance studios Service establishments Taverns/saloons
Theaters (indoors)

Wholesale when used in connection with retail

4.	Special Uses

Any use that involves a retail or service activity conducted more than 25 percent outside completely enclosed buildings.

Any use, such as a drive-in restaurant, drive-in bank or automobile service station, that offers goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked vehicles or that sell food or beverages for consumption in parked motor vehicles on the premises.

Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower

Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization

Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser.

Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor.
 
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter Automobile repair
Automobile service station

Dwelling units, if located above the first story, except in hotels and motels.

Heating, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, general contracting; retail, wholesale Motor vehicle sales, new and used
Movie and stage outdoor theaters

Planned developments
Printing and publishing (over 5,000 square feet in area) Public facilities
Recreational facilities (public and private) Restaurants with live entertainment Tattoo parlors
Utility stations

11.4	B-3 REGIONAL SHOPPING DISTRICT Amended 19-10-2, 04-3-1

This district is intended to accommodate and regulate business developments which are directly and indirectly accessed from major arterial roadways.

1.	Use restrictions:

a.	In this district all activities shall be conducted within enclosed buildings with the exception that an outdoor area up to 25 percent of the indoor floor space may be used for outdoor sales and display of inventory under the following conditions:

i.	On private property.

ii.	Area is not designated as parking or required open space.

b.	Refuse containers: All refuse generated by facilities located within this district shall be stored in covered containers placed in visually screened areas. Non- conforming refuse containers shall comply within 1 year after the effective date of this Zoning Code, which is August 26, 2003.
 
c.	Along the side and rear lot lines of any lot abutting any residential district, screening (a wall, solid fence at least 6 feet high and of such density to completely block the view from adjacent residential property) shall be installed.

d.	Uses shall consist of office, financial or retail-type activities.

e.	Signs, see Chapter 16, Signs, of the Municipal Code.

f.	Parking, see Section 8, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Zoning Code.

g.	Only one principal building shall be erected on any one lot.

2.	Lot and Building Requirements:

a.	Minimum lot area: 5 acres

b.	Minimum lot width: 75 feet fronting a major roadway; other roadways, 150 feet at the established building line.

c.	Minimum setbacks: front yard, 50 feet; corner side yard, 50 feet; side yards, 35 feet; and rear yard, 35 feet.

d.	Maximum floor area ratio: One-quarter square foot of floor space for each 1 square foot of lot area.

e.	Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 50 percent (all structures, including principal buildings and accessory buildings shall be included in the 50 percent).

f.	Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum setbacks.

g.	Height requirements: Maximum height of 3 stories or 50 feet.

h.	General building setbacks: In addition to any other building setback or yard requirement contained herein, every building hereafter erected or enlarged shall provide and maintain a setback from the public street in accordance with the following requirements:

Primary thoroughfare designated by a state or federal highway number: 75 feet from the property line or 150 feet from the center line of the right-of-way, whichever distance is greater.

3.	Permitted Uses:

Animal hospitals (no outside kennel) Department stores
Dry cleaning operations (including on-site processing)

Financial institutions
 
Hotels, motels

Medical, dental and general offices Movie and stage theaters, indoor Piano and musical, retail only Professional offices
Restaurants

Retail establishments Service establishments Supermarkets
Taverns (including live entertainment) Variety stores
4.	Special Uses:

Any  use  that  requires  commercial,  service  or  storage  activities  conducted  outdoors, amounting to more than 25 percent of indoor floor space.

Any use, such as a drive-in restaurant, drive-in bank or automobile service station, that offers goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked vehicles or that sell food or beverages for consumption in parked motor vehicles on the premises.

Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower

Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter Auto repair and automobile service stations
Drive-in theaters
Motor vehicles sales, new and used Public facilities
 
Tattoo parlors Utility stations
Planned development, commercial

Planned developments, mixed use with residential must meet the following requirements for residential uses:

a.	Lot size: 5 acres.

b.	Minimum  lot  width:  250  feet  fronting  any major  roadway;  fronting  other roadways, 100 feet at established building line

c.	Minimum setbacks:

Yard	Major
Roadway	Other
Roadway
Front yard	60 feet	40 feet
Corner side yard	50 feet	30 feet
Side yards	40 feet	20 feet
Rear yard	40 feet	30 feet

d.	Maximum residential density: 12 units per acre.

e.	Minimum unit size: 600 square feet.

5.	Minimum percentage of lot coverage: 35 percent

6.	Parking and access regulations pursuant to Section 8 of this Zoning Code shall apply.

11.5	BP, BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT Amended 19-10-2, 06-12-3

A.	Purpose: The purpose of the BP, Business Park District is to provide a course of predictability in business park development, set a minimum level of standards by which a business park can be developed and establish a regulatory framework for the planning and development of future business and manufacturing growth.

B.	Use Restrictions: All permitted uses in this zoning district are subject to the following conditions:

1.	Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall conform to the performance standards set forth in Section 14, Performance Standards, of this Zoning Code.

2.	Except as provided in Section 11.05-B3, no outside display, sale or storage of materials (raw, semi-finished or finished in nature), vehicles (including tractor trailers), equipment, merchandise and other similar goods or containers, shall not be permitted except by the
 
issuance of a special use permit as provided in Section 15, Special Uses, of this Zoning Code.

3.	Outside display of retail inventory shall be permitted on up to 25 percent of the indoor floor space with the following conditions: (i) the area is located within the zoning lot; and
(ii) the area is not designated as parking or required open space. Any outside activity in excess of 25 percent of the total indoor floor space shall require a special use permit as provided in Section 15, Special Uses, of this Zoning Code.

4.	Refuse containers: All refuse generated by facilities located within this zoning district shall be stored in covered containers that are located in an area that is not visible from the street. Screening shall enclose all refuse containers.

5.	Screening: Along the side and rear lot lines of any lot abutting a residential zoning district, screening (a wall, solid fence or closely planted shrubbery) at least six feet high and of sufficient density to completely block the view from the adjacent residential property shall be installed.

6.	Accessory Uses: Any accessory use shall meet the same required yard setbacks as required for the principal building.

7.	Principal Building: Only one principal building shall be permitted on any zoning lot.

8.	Parking: Parking shall be pursuant to Section 8, Off-Street Loading, of this Zoning Code.

9.	Signs: Signage shall be pursuant to Chapter 16, Signs, of the Marengo Municipal Code.

10.	Landscaping: Any new construction after January 1, 2007, shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 21, Landscape Code, of the Marengo Municipal Code.

C.	Lot and Building Requirements: Every principal building erected in this zoning district shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Yard Requirements: In addition to any other building setback or yard requirement contained herein, every building hereafter erected or enlarged shall provide and maintain a setback from a public street in accordance with the following requirements:

a.	Primary Thoroughfare Designated by a State or Federal Highway Number: 75 feet from the property line or 150 feet from the center line of the right-of-way, whichever distance is greater.

b.	Minimum Setbacks: Front yard, 40 feet; corner side yard, 40 feet; interior side yard, 20 feet; and rear yard, 20 feet.

c.	Transitional Yards: Where a side or rear lot coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential zoning district, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line not less than 50 feet in depth and shall be screened as provided in Section 11.05-B5. Where a side or a rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot
 
yard in an adjacent business district, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line not less than 30 feet in depth.

2.	Maximum Percentage of Lot Building Coverage: 50 percent for a one-story building; 60 percent for buildings containing two or more stories. A mezzanine is not considered a story.

D.	Permitted Uses: Provided all the use restrictions of this zoning district are observed, the following uses shall be permitted:

Animal hospitals (with indoor kennels);
Assembly, production, processing, wholesaling, warehousing or manufacturing of any commodity, from semi-finished (other than raw) materials, provided explosives, flammable materials, nuclear materials and/or livestock are not involved;

Animal retail sales;

Auditoriums, meeting rooms and other places of assembly; Automobile car wash;
Banks, savings and loans; Blueprinting and photostating; Bowling alleys;
Building materials sales with indoor storage; Churches;
Clubs and lodges;

Drycleaning operations (including on-site processing); Greenhouses with indoor storage;
Funeral homes;

Healthcare and rehabilitation facilities, not involving overnight visits;

Heating, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, general contracting, retail, wholesale, with indoor storage;

Hospitality; Hotels and motels;
Indoor recreation facilities;
 
Institutional; Library;
Local cartage and express facility, provided explosives, flammable materials, nuclear materials and/or livestock are not involved, with no outside vehicle storage;

Mass transit facilities; Museums;
Offices;

Printing and publishing;

Public utility and transportation facilities including shelters, terminals, parking areas and service buildings;

Radio and television broadcasting; Railroad right-of-way;
Research and development facility or parks, provided explosives, flammable materials, nuclear materials and/or livestock are not involved;

Restaurants;

Retail establishments;

Schools, music studios and dance studios; Service establishments;
Sleep research facilities with overnight visits; Taverns, saloons; and
Theater (indoor).

E.	Special Uses: Provided all the restrictions for this zoning district are observed, the following special uses shall be permitted:

Any use that involves a retail or service activity that is conducted on more than 25 percent outside of a completely enclosed building;

Any use, such as a drive-in restaurant, drive-in bank or automobile service station that offers good or services directly to customers waiting in parked vehicles or that sell food or beverages for consumption in parked motor vehicles on the premises;
 
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower

Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter Automobile repair;
Automobile service station;

Dwelling units if located above the first story, except in hotels and motels; Fuel sales and storage;
Motor vehicles sales, new and used; Movie and stage outdoor theaters; Non-retail outdoor storage; Outdoor recreation facilities; Outdoor storage tanks;
Planned developments;

Recreational facilities (public and private); Restaurants with live entertainment; Utility stations; and
Wireless communication facilities.
 
Section 12
ORI OFFICE, RESEARCH & LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

12.1	Purpose
12.2	Use Restrictions
12.3	Lot and Building Requirements
12.4	Permitted Uses
12.5	Special Uses

12.1	PURPOSE

The purpose of the ORI Office, Research & Light Industrial District (“ORI District”) is to provide areas within the community for low intensity manufacturing, offices, research facilities, research parks.

12.2	USE RESTRICTIONS

All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:

1.	Uses not explicitly provided as permit ted or special uses in the ORI District under this Section 12 are prohibited altogether.

2.	Parking. See Section 8, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Zoning Code.

3.	Signs: See Chapter 16, Signs, of the Municipal Code.

4.	Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required yard.

5.	All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:

a.	Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall conform with the performance standards set forth in Section 15 of this Zoning Code.

b.	No outside display, sale or storage of materials (raw, semi-finished or finished in nature), vehicles (including tractor trailers), equipment, merchandise and other similar goods or containers, shall be permitted except by issuance of a special permit pursuant to Section 16 of this Zoning Code.

12.3	LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS

A.	Lot size requirements: None.

B.	Yard requirements: In addition to any other building setback or yard requirement contained herein every building hereafter erected or enlarged shall provide and maintain a setback from the public street in accordance with the following requirements:
 
1.	Primary thoroughfare designated by a state or federal highway number: 75 feet from the property line or 150 feet from the centerline of the right-of-way, whichever distance is greater.

2.	Front yard: Not less than 40 feet in depth along every front lot line

3.	Interior side yard: Not less than 20 feet in depth along each interior side lot line.

4.	Corner side yard: Not less than 40 feet in depth.

5.	Rear yard: Not less than 20 feet in depth along each rear lot line.

6.	Transitional yards: Where a side or rear lot line in an ORI District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line not less than 100 feet in depth and shall contain landscaping and
plantings suitable to provide a year around effective 25 percent screen. Where a side or rear lot line in an ORI District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent business district, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line not less than 60 feet in depth and shall contain landscaping and planting suitable to provide
a year around 25 percent screen.

C.	Only one principal building shall be permitted on any one zoning lot.

12.4	PERMITTED USES

Permitted uses in the ORI District are:

Accessory retail sales operations and display of merchandise produced on the premises.
Any establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, light assembly, storing, cleaning or servicing of materials, goods or products provided that operations are conducted within a completely enclosed building and that operations conform with the performance standards and other applicable requirements of this Section 12.

Auditoriums and theaters.

Banks and financial institutions, including drive-in and drive-through facilities. Business and professional offices.
Computer and/or data processing centers.

Corporate offices. Cultural facilities.

Engineering and testing facilities Medical and dental clinics and offices.
 

Production facilities for prototype products.

Research clinics and laboratories including accessory pilot operations. Show room space.
12.5	SPECIAL USES Amended 19-10-2

Special uses in the ORI District are:

Commercial uses located within permitted and special uses including barber shops and beauty salons; day care centers and pre-schools; drugstores; dry cleaning and laundry establishments; food stores; florists; gift shops; letter and parcel mailing services; restaurants including accessory cocktail lounges, outdoor customer seating, musical entertainment and dancing; shoe repair shops and tailor shops.

Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower

Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter Hotels and motels.
Planned developments.

General aviation planned developments. Public service and facility uses.
Public utilities.

Schools: Vocational, technical, business, data processing, electronic and corporate training centers.

Uses ancillary to permitted and other special uses including meeting and conference facilities, lodging facilities, restaurants and recreational facilities primarily for the private use of the employees, its subsidiaries, affiliates, franchisees and business clients; storage, service and maintenance buildings and areas; central heating and air conditioning plants; dwellings for caretakers, watchmen and operators.
 


Section 13
M MANUFACTURING DISTRICT



13.1	Purpose
13.2	Use Restrictions
13.3	Lot and Building Requirements
13.4	Permitted Uses
13.5	Special Uses

13.1	PURPOSE

The purpose of the M Manufacturing District (“M District” ) is to provide areas within the community for manufacturing facilities, research facilities, research park, warehouses and wholesale manufacturing. It is intended that this particular district will generally provide for manufacturing of an assembly nature from finished goods, warehousing and wholesale activities. Supportive services for manufacturing are generally of a non-retail or personal service character and should be encouraged to locate in this district.

13.2	USE RESTRICTIONS

All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:

1.	Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall conform with the performance standards set forth in Section 15 herein.

2.	No outside display, sale or storage of materials (raw, semi-finished, or finished in nature), vehicles (including tractor trailers), equipment, merchandise and other similar goods or containers, shall be permitted except by issuance of a special permit as addressed in Section 16 herein. This requirement does not apply to greenhouses without side storage.

3.	Parking: See Section 8, Off-Street Parking and Loading, herein.

4.	Signs: See Chapter 16, Signs, of the Municipal Code. Amended, Ord . 0 3 -1 -8

a.	Free standing signs, with the exception of monument and shopping center identification signs, are prohibited.

5.	Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required yard.

6.	Only one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot.
 
7.	Free standing signs, with the exception of monument and shopping center identification signs.

13.3	LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS

A.	Lot size requirements: None.

B.	Yard requirements: In addition to any other building setback or yard requirement contained herein every building hereafter erected or enlarged shall provide and maintain a setback from the public street in accordance with the following requirements:

1.	Primary thoroughfare designated by a state or federal highway number: 75 feet from the property line or 150 feet from the centerline of the right-of-w ay, whichever distance is greater.

2.	Front yard: Not less than 40 feet in depth along every front lot line.

3.	Interior side yard: Not less than 20 feet in depth along each interior side lot line.

4.	Corner side yard: Not less than 40 feet in depth.

5.	Rear yard: Not less than 20 feet in depth along each rear lot line.

6.	Transitional yards: Where a side or rear lot line in a M-District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such side
or rear lot line not less than 100 feet in depth and shall contain landscaping and plantings suitable to provide a year around effective 25 percent screen.

Where a side or rear lot line in a M-District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent business district, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line not less than 60 feet in depth and shall contain landscaping and planting suitable to provide a year around 25 percent screen.

Where manufacturing lots front on a street that constitutes the boundary line between manufacturing and residential districts or between manufacturing and business districts, all such manufacturing lots shall provide a front yard of not less than 60 feet in depth.

C.	Floor area ratio:

1.	Not to exceed 0.4 for one-story buildings.

2.	Not to exceed 0.6 for buildings, containing 2 or more stories. A mezzanine is not considered a story.

13.4	PERMITTED USES

Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed the following uses are permitted: Animal hospitals (with outside kennels).
 
Assembly, production, processing, wholesaling or warehousing or manufacturing of any commodity from semi-finished (other than raw) materials, provided explosives, flammable materials, nuclear materials or livestock are not involved.

Building materials sales with outside storage Equipment sales and service
Greenhouses with outside storage

Local cartage and express facilities, provided explosives, flammable materials, nuclear materials or livestock are not involved.

Printing and publishing


Public utility

Public transportation facilities including shelters, terminals, parking areas and service buildings Railroad right-of-way.
Research and development facilities or parks, provided explosives, flammable materials, nuclear materials or livestock are not involved.

13.5	SPECIAL USES Amended 19-10-2
Provided all the restrictions of this district are observed the following special uses are permitted: Adult businesses pursuant to Section 16 herein and Section 33.23 and Chapter 44 of the
Municipal Code.

Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower

Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter Fuel sales and storage
Asphaltic and concrete plans

Building contractor’s office with outside storage Dwelling units for watchmen’s quarters
 
Outside storage on non-asphaltic or concrete pavement Planned developments of not less than 20 acres
 

Section 14
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

14.1	Purpose
14.2	Noise
14.3	Air Pollution
14.4	Water Pollution
14.5	Open Burning
14.6	Toxic or Noxious Matter
14.7	Odors
14.8	Fire and Explosive Hazards
14.9	Vibration
14.10	Glare or Heat

14.1	PURPOSE

Performance standards set forth herein are established to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the City and to promote a more desirable environment in which to live and work within the City.

14.2	NOISE

No person shall emit beyond the boundary of his property any sound that unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or with any lawful business or activity or so as to violate any rule set forth herein. Lands are to be classified into three classes; Class A is to consist of areas especially noise sensitive in that they incorporate sleeping quarters, namely residential and institutional uses. Class B is to consist of Retail Commercial and Office Commercial land uses, as well as recreational and open space uses. Class C is to include all industrial and manufacturing uses.

The applicable land use designation for undeveloped land shall be determined by the predominant land use of the surrounding property or, if no use is predominant, by the most restrictive designation applicable to any of the surrounding property.

The following standards shall apply.

1. No person shall cause or allow the emission of any noise to abutting Class A property from land used as designated below in excess of the levels specified below, in the designated octave bands, when measured at any point on or beyond the property line of the land on which the noise originates.

Daytime (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.):

Octave Band Center Frequency	Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB) at Emitter’s
Property Line
Hertz	C	B	A
31.5	75	72	72
 

63	74	71	71
125	69	65	65
250	64	57	57
500	58	51	51
1000	52	45	45
2000	47	39	39
4000	43	34	34
8000	40	32	32
A-Level	61 dB (A)	55 dB (A)	55 dB (A)

NIGHTTIME (10:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m.):

Octave Band Center Frequency	Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB) at Emitter’s
Property Line
Hertz	C	B	A
31.5	69	63	63
63	67	61	61
125	62	55	55
250	54	47	47
500	47	40	40
1000	41	35	35
2000	36	30	30
4000	32	25	25
8000	32	25	25
A-Level	51 dB (A)	45 dB (A)	45 dB (A)

No person shall cause or allow the emission of any noise to abutting Class B property from land used as designated below in excess of the levels specified below, in the designated octave bands, when measured at any point on or beyond the property line of the land on which the noise originates.

24 HOURS PER DAY:

Octave Band Center Frequency	Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB) at Emitter’s
Property Line
Hertz	C	B	A
31.5	88	79	72
63	83	78	71
125	74	72	65
250	69	64	57
500	63	58	51
1000	57	52	45
2000	52	46	39
4000	48	41	34
8000	45	39	32
A-Level	66 dB (A)	62 dB (A)	55 dB (A)
 
No person shall cause or allow the emission of any noise to abutting Class C property from land as designated below in excess of the levels specified below, in the designated octave bands, when measured at any point on or beyond the property line of the land on which the noise originates.

24 HOURS PER DAY:

Octave Band Center Frequency	Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB) at Emitter’s
Property Line
Hertz	C	All Other
34.5	88	79
63	83	78
125	78	72
250	73	64
500	67	58
1000	60	52
2000	54	46
4000	50	41
8000	47	39
A-Level	70 dB (A)	62 dB (A)


14.3	AIR POLLUTION

The City adopts the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Air Pollution Regulations. The State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Air Pollution Regulations as adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board on April 14, 1972 and published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this chapter. One copy of said regulations shall be kept on file in the City Hall for public inspection. Any person who violates any provision of said regulations shall be subject to the penalties provided for the violation of this Zoning Code.

14.4	WATER POLLUTION

The City adopts the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Water Pollution Regulations. The State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Water Pollution Regulations as adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board on March 7, 1972 and published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Section 14. One copy of said regulations shall be kept on file in the City Hall for public inspection. Any person who violates any provision of said regulations shall be subject to the penalties provided for the violation of this Zoning Code.


14.5	OPEN BURNING

The City adopts the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Open Burning Pollution Regulations. The State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Open Burning Regulations as adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board on September 2, 1971 and published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all amendments thereto are hereby adopted by
 
reference and made part of this Section 14. One copy of said regulations shall be kept on file in the City Hall for public inspection. Any person who violates any provision of said regulations shall be subject to the penalties provided for the violation of this Zoning Code.

14.6	TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER

No use shall, for any period of time, emit into the atmosphere, store on site, dispose on site or discharge across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business.

14.7	ODORS

The emission of odorous material in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines, or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited.

14.8	FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS

The BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code (current edition) shall be applicable to all buildings, structures and appurtenances thereof.

14.9	VIBRATION

Any operation or activity which shall cause, at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line, earth borne vibrations (other than background vibrations produced by some source not under control of this Zoning Code), such as the operation of mot or vehicles or other transportation facilities, in excess of the limits set forth in Column I herein, is prohibited. In addition, any operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along a residential boundary line, earth borne vibrations in excess of the limits set for in Column II herein is prohibited. Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three component measuring system approved by the City.

Frequency (cycles per second)	I*
Displacement (inches)	II*
Displacement (inches)
0 to 10	.0008	.0004
10 to 20	.0005	.0002
20 to 30	.0002	.0001
30 to 40	.0002	.0001
40 and over	.0001	.0001
* Steady state vibrations, for the purpose of this Zoning Code, which are continuous or, if in
discrete pulses, are more frequent than 100 per minute. Impact vibrations, that is, discrete pulses which do not exceed 10 impulses per minute, shall not cause in excess of twice the displacements stipulated.

14.10	GLARE OR HEAT

No use or activity shall be permitted which causes glare or heat to be transmitted or reflected in such quantities as to be detrimental or harmful to the use of adjacent properties.
 

Section 15 SPECIAL USES

15.1	Purpose
15.2	General Requirements
15.3	Standards for Special Uses
15.4	Motor Vehicle Special Uses
15.5	Motor Vehicle Service Stations
15.6	Kennels
15.7	Rest Homes, Nursing Homes
15.8	Group Homes
15.9	Earth Materials Extraction, Processing, Site Reclamation and Related Operations
15.10	Adult Businesses
15.11	Solar Farm
15.12	Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments
15.13	Conditions of Approval

15.1	PURPOSE

The principal objective of this Zoning Code is to provide for an orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for the proper location of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of the City. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is classified as permitted in one or more of the various district’s established by this Zoning Code. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses which it may be necessary to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service they provide the public. These "special uses" require particular consideration as to their proper location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses, or to the planned development of the community. The conditions controlling the location and operation of such "special uses" are established by the following provisions of this Section 15.

15.2	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

The general requirements of the specific zoning district in which the requested use will be located are applicable except where specifically modified by a special use permit. All conditions and requirements, as determined by the City Council and based on recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City staff, shall be considered as additions to the general requirements as found in this Zoning Code. The special use permit shall include the approved specific conditions required to address circumstances unique to the proposed use.

15.3	STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USES

The City Council may authorize a special use permit as provided herein upon determining and finding as fact, the following:

1.	That the proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare, nor substantially diminish or impair the value of other properties or improvements in
 
the vicinity.
2.	That the proposed use will comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and this Zoning Code generally, including, but not limited to all applicable yard and bulk regulations, parking and loading regulations, sign control regulations, wetlands and flood plain regulations, building and fire codes, and all other applicable City ordinances, or if exceptions
are requested, that such exceptions are justified.

3.	That the proposed use will not negatively impact the existing off-site traffic circulation; will adequately address on-site traffic circulation; will provide adequate on-site parking facilities; and if appropriate or required, will contribute financially, in proportion to its impact, to upgrading roadway systems.

4.	That the proposed use will not negatively impact existing public utilities, facilities and municipal service delivery systems without due consideration for adequate means of upgrading such utilities, facilities and systems.

5.	That the proposed use will not negatively impact the environment by creating air, noise or water pollution, ground contamination, or unsightly view’s without due consideration for adequate means of controlling, mitigating or buffering such impacts.

6.	That the proposed use will maintain, where possible, existing mature vegetation; provide adequate screening to residential properties; and provide appropriate landscaping.

7.	That the proposed use will meet standards and requirements established by jurisdictions other than the City, such as federal, state, county or other governmental units or agencies requiring licensing, permitting or health/safety inspections, and submit written evidence thereof.

8.	That the proposed use shall conform to the regulations established for specific special uses as provided in this Section 15.

15.4	MOTOR VEHICLE SPECIAL USES

Motor vehicle sales and services, parking; used car sales; and sales and service of agriculture implements shall be a special use in any business district. Before a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued for any sales and/or used motor vehicle car sales lot special use, the following requirements must be met:

1.	The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use is economically compatible with existing uses.

2.	The special use will not injure surrounding property values.

3.	Lighting sources shall be directed away from surrounding properties.

4.	Display area shall have a paved surface.

In the event that an sales and/or used motor vehicle sales lot is proposed to be established on a previously improved zoning lot w here no Certificate of Zoning Compliance was required, the
 
requirements of this Section 15.04 must be met prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for such use.

15.5	MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION

Motor vehicle service station shall be a special use subject to the following:

1.	All gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be located at least 25 feet from any street right-of-way line, side lot line or rear lot line.

2.	Every access way shall be located at least 200 feet from the principal building of any fire station, school, public library and church at least 30 feet from the corner of the lot when the lot is at the intersection of public streets.

3.	All trash receptacles, except minor receptacles adjacent to the gasoline pumps, shall be screened from view.

4.	Whenever the use of a service station has been discontinued for 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the Zoning Administrator shall order that all underground storage tanks be removed or filled with material approved by the fire chief.

5.	Auto repair stations:

a.	All body shop repairs to motor vehicles shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building whose doors shall be kept shut tightly during all body repairs or painting work. Such enclosed building shall be located at least 40 feet from the nearest property line with doors not facing toward any residentially zoned or occupied lot.

b.	There shall be no outside parking of motor vehicles except on a temporary basis not to exceed 14 days. Junk parts and junk vehicles shall not be kept outside the building unless in an enclosed privacy fence. This fence must meet all City fence requirements.

c.	Parking shall be provided on the site at a ratio of one parking space for each 3,000 square feet of site area.

15.6	KENNEL SPECIAL USE

A kennel is considered a special use subject to the following:

1.	The lot on which the kennel is situated shall have a minimum of three acres.

2.	Every kennel shall be located at least 200 feet from the nearest dwelling and not less than 100 feet from any lot line.

15.7	REST HOMES, NURSING HOMES
Rest home and nursing home are a special use in any use district provided that when located in a business district such uses shall be established above the first floor when located in a building constructed for a business use. A building originally constructed for residential use in a business district may be used in whole or in part for rest homes or nursing homes.
 

15.8	GROUP HOMES

Group home is a special use in any residential zoning district that is licensed or certified by the State of Illinois, supervised and has 9 or more persons plus staff, subject to the following:

1.	A minimum distance of 1,000 feet is maintained between group homes;

2.	The group home conforms to all current provisions of the Zoning Code, City building code and State of Illinois licensing standards, if applicable to the use. Said conditions may be waived by the City Council.

15.9	EARTH MATERIALS EXTRACTION, PROCESSING, SITE RECLAMATION, AND RELATED OPERATIONS

A.	Definitions: In addition to the definitions in Section 3 herein, terms (whether capitalized or not) used in this Section 15.09 shall have the following meanings:

Concrete building materials production plant: A facility that incorporates machinery and earth materials to produce cement or concrete-based products used in the construction of structures or in the building and landscaping industry for marketing and sale.

Concrete recycling plant: A facility that incorporates machinery and a supply of used concrete, cement products and debris to crush and process such materials into raw products to be utilized for sale or incorporation into other products. The term “concrete” herein specifically excludes bituminous concrete, also known as asphalt.

Earth materials extraction: The mining of any natural earth materials or minerals, such as gravel, sand, stone, clay or aggregate by removing the overburden lying above natural deposits thereof and mining directly from natural deposits thereby exposed, or from the deposition of overburden therefrom. The term “ surface mining” shall be deemed synonymous wit h “ earth materials extraction.”

Earth materials processing: The transporting, washing, sorting, screening, grading, crushing and similar processing of natural earth materials or minerals, such as gravel, sand or aggregate, in order to prepare such materials for marketing, sale or incorporation into other earth materials based products.

Ready-mix plant: A facility used for the dispensing of cement, water, stone and sand into mixer trucks in order to create liquid concrete products to be transported off-site for use in construction of concrete structures and products.

B.	Intent: The purpose of this Section 15.09 is to recognize that earth materials extraction and processing and related operations, such as ready-mix plants, concrete recycling plants and concrete building materials production plants, as well as the associated exterior storage of raw and recyclable materials, are uses requiring unique regulatory controls to ensure that :
 
1.	Operations are conducted in a manner that are compatible with the natural and manmade environment;

2.	Adverse impacts on surrounding areas, including, without limitation, property values, air quality and noise are minimized; and

3.	Mined areas are restored to productive use compatible with the surrounding areas. It is the further purpose of this Section 15.09 to:

4.	Establish regulations and standards for earth materials extraction and processing, ready-mix plants, concrete recycling plants and concrete building materials production plants; the storage and stockpiling of associated raw and recyclable materials; and the trucking and other related operations pertaining to these activities; and

5.	Provide for the conservation and reclamation of lands affected by earth materials extraction, processing and related operations in order to restore them to optimum future productive use consistent with the protection of public health and the environment. Therefore, earth materials extraction and processing, and the operation of ready-mix plants, concrete recycling plants, and concrete building materials production plants shall only be permitted on a special use basis.

C.	Applicable Zoning Districts and Operations: In M-Manufacturing Districts only, an operator desiring to extract and/or process earth materials shall apply for a special use permit jointly with the owner or any person who is entitled to legal possession of the property to be affected and shall comply with the operation and reclamation regulations in this Section 15.09.

D.	Compliance with State and Federal Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to engage in surface mining in an area where the overburden shall exceed 10 feet in depth or where the operation will affect more than 10 acres during the permit year without first obtaining from the Illinois Department of Mines and Minerals a permit to do so, pursuant to the Surface- Mined Land Conservation and Reclamation Act, 225 ILCS 715/1 et seq., as amended.
All owner/operators shall comply with the regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and any other applicable state or federal laws or regulations, including, but not limited to, occupational health and safety. Any necessary permits shall be obtained prior to issuance of the special use permit . Before the onset of any operations, the City Administrator must be provided with copies of all necessary permits. Such permits must be kept valid and in force for the special use permit to be valid and in force.

E.	Application for special use permit: All owner/operators shall apply for a special use permit. In addition to the other requirements of this Section 16, the owner/operator shall present the statements, maps and plans required in Sections 15.09-F and 15.09-G herein. Review and approval of the special use permit and any terms and conditions imposed upon and included  with said special use permit shall take into account the materials provided in Sections 15.09-F and 15.09-G herein.

F.	Statements: The following statements shall accompany an application for a special use permit:

1.	Ownership of land.
 
2.	Minerals to be mined.

3.	Character and composition of vegetation and wildlife on land to be affected.

4.	The nature, depth and proposed disposition of the overburden.

5.	The estimated depth to which the mineral deposit will be mined.

6.	Estimated type and volume of excavation.

7.	The techniques and equipment proposed to be used, as applicable, for:

a.	earth materials extraction;

b.	earth materials processing;

c.	ready-mix plant;

d.	concrete recycling plant; and

e.	concrete building materials production plant.

8.	Practices and methods proposed to be used to minimize noise, dust, air contaminants and vibration and to prevent pollution of surface or underground water.

9.	The method of recycling water used for washing and grading.

10.	The proposed usage or drainage of excess water.

11.	Location of existing roads, and anticipated access and haulage roads planned to be used or constructed in conducting surface mining.

12.	Location and names of all streams, creeks and bodies of water within lands to be affected.

13.	Drainage on and away from the lands to be affected, including directional flow of water, natural and artificial drainways and waterways, and streams or tributaries receiving the discharge.

14.	Proposed days and hours of operation of all excavation, processing and operations on the property.

15.	Projected dates of commencement and completion of all excavation, processing and operations on the property.

G.	Maps and Plans: The following maps and plans, which shall constitute the Operations Plan, shall accompany an application for a special use permit:
 
1.	A map or maps (scale of 1" = 100') showing the following:

a.	Existing topography at 2' contour intervals.

b.	Location of existing water courses or drainage systems.

c.	Location and extent of flood hazard areas.

d.	Boundaries of the area to be excavated and of each phase if excavation is to proceed or be contemplated to proceed in phases.

e.	Locations of proposed and existing structures, equipment and material storage areas and processing areas.

f.	Existing or proposed locations of equipment used for grading, crushing, sorting and other related purposes.

g.	Location, orientation and dimensions of all proposed landscaping, berming, screening, fencing and gates.

h.	Location, dimensions and surface treatment of proposed entrance and exit drive(s), on-site haul roads and parking areas.

i.	Access routes between the property and nearest arterial street designated on the City’s comprehensive plan.

j.	Location, width and grade of all right-of-ways or easements on or abutting the property.

k.	Cross-sections showing extent of overburden, extent of deposit’s to be extracted and water table.

l.	North arrow, scale, date of preparation, name of registered civil engineer, landscape architect or surveyor that prepared the map.

m.	Existing or proposed location of ground water monitoring well(s).

2.	A Reclamation Plan meeting the following requirements:

a.	Map (scale of 1" = 100' ) showing the final condition of the site after extraction and processing activities have been completed.

b.	Locations of proposed water courses, water features and drainage systems.

c.	Future structures, land uses, roadways and open spaces.

d.	Staged schedule of reclamation actions by area detailing dates of completion and reclamation methods.
 
e.	Future landscaping and ground cover.

f.	Final grading.

3.	All approvals of special use permits for earth materials extraction and processing shall expire 10 years from the date they are approved by the City Council, unless a longer time is approved by the City Council. The maximum allowable time limit will be 20 years. The City Administrator or his designee will be responsible for monitoring the operation throughout the life of the operation and special use.

H.	Renewal of a Special Use Permit: A renewal of a special use under this Section 15.09 shall be for a period of time not more than 10 years.

1.	A request to renew a special use permit that involves acreage or equipment in addition to that allowed in the original special use permit , shall be treated in the same manner
as the initial application.

2.	A request to renew a special use permit when no additional acreage or equipment will be brought into use shall be handled in the following manner:

If an owner/operator is unable to finish mining the acreage described in the original special use permit in the time specified, he shall apply to the Zoning Council of Appeals for renewal of the special use permit. A public hearing will be held. The maps required by this Section 15.09 for the initial hearing shall be revised, updated and resubmitted, along with a statement of the current status of the mining reclamation. Any application for a renewal of a special use under this Section 15.09 shall be filed with the Commission not less than 120 days before the expiration date of the original special use permit or any renewal thereof. A failure to file a request for renewal within the required time designated in this Section 15.09 shall result in a required cessation of mining and sale of product upon the expiration of the special use permit.

I.	Surety: All owner/operators shall be required to obtain the proper permits and submit an acceptable irrevocable letter of credit to ensure the completion of the reclamation of the site.
If any form of surety is required by the state, the owner/operator shall only be required to provide the City Administrator with a photocopy. A letter of credit will be required by the City of not less than $3,500.00 for each acre to be affected. The actual dollar amount will be established by the City Administrator based upon 150 percent of the City Engineer’s estimate of the cost of reclamation per acre average at the time mining is to be performed. This estimate shall take into consideration inflation of costs in future years. The actual operation shall be monitored by the City Administrator, or his designee, and he/she shall prepare a written report for review by the City Council on the progress before partial or full release or reduction of the letter of credit. The surety shall be held by the City. Such surety shall remain in effect until the affected lands have been reclaimed in accordance with the Reclamation Plan, and the work is approved by the City Administrator at the annual review of the operation (see Section 15.09-N herein). Land shall not be mined unless a surety for that land has been filed with the City. The
surety shall be approved by the City Attorney. The surety shall be for assurance of completion of reclamation, and the initial surety amount shall be set on an anticipated three years working basis with reasonable allowance for inflation of costs. Before the end of each one-year period, the City Administrator’s evaluation and the approval of the past year’s work shall be required
 
for release of or reduction of the letter of credit amount, and at that time, the surety level shall be established for the next one-year period or fraction thereof. Decisions of the City Administrator relative to any aspect of this Section 15.09-I are appealable to the City Council, whose decision is final.

J.	Reclamation Regulations; The Reclamation Plan map and statement of sequential operation and reclamation shall be followed to produce a finished condition that complies with the Reclamation Plan map and the provisions of this Section 15.09 so as to provide for the return to a useful purpose of the affected land.

K.	Changing the Reclamation Plan: In the event a change in the Reclamation Plan is necessary due to the unanticipated characteristics of the area concerned, the City Administrator, after being provided with appropriate documentation, shall study the proposed change, and give a report
to the City Council for its review. Changes may be made in the Reclamation Plan upon the mutual consent of the owner/operator and the City Administrator and approval by the City Council. The change shall preserve as substantially as possible the original Reclamation Plan, but shall also provide for the previously unknown variables.

L.	Finished Conditions: The finished conditions of all land affected by surface mining shall:

1.	Be back-filled with earth or other suitable fill material approved by the City and graded to a rolling topography traversable by machines necessary for maintenance in
accordance with planned use, with slopes having no more than 15 percent grade. In the case of those lands to be reclaimed in accordance with the filed plan for forest plantations, recreation or wildlife, the final cut spoil, the outside slope of the box cut spoil, the outside slopes of all overburden deposition area, and the side slopes of haulage road inclines shall not exceed 30 percent grade; but such slopes need not be reduced to less than the original grade of the overburden of the area prior to mining;
2.	Be designed to control conditions that could cause erosion on the site or on surrounding streets or properties;

3.	Be designed to eliminate large undrained depressions other than artificial lakes, or depositions designed specifically for erosion control;

4.	Be designed so that any surface drainage from the property shall leave the property at the original natural drainage points. If this is not possible, the drainage plans must be reviewed by the City Engineer as part of the overall submission. Drainage volume shall not be increased over what it would have been if the site was left in its former use and water conservation practices were applied. The finished condition must meet the City standards for storm water retention-detent ion contained within the Municipal Code;

5.	Be covered with arable topsoil (except for areas under water) to a minimum depth of six inches, and shall have a minimum of 10 percent organic material, except that no greater depth of topsoil or percentage of organic material shall be required than that originally existed on the property prior to commencement of operations;

6.	Be successfully planted (after replacement of the topsoil) with trees, shrubs, legumes, grasses or other vegetative ground cover in accordance with the Reclamation Plan in order to avoid erosion.
 
7.	Whenever production and/or processing on any property shall have been completed, then all processing plants, buildings (other than those shown on the Reclamation Plan), structures (except fences), and equipment, shall be entirely removed from the property within one year after completion, including, but not limited to, such items as stumps, boulders and other debris resulting from excavation and related activities.

M.	Operations and Reclamation Requirements and Performance Standards: The operation and reclamation of the property shall be in accordance with the following conditions:

1.	Existing trees, shrubs and other types of woody vegetation along road frontages shall be protected and maintained. Weeds and other unsightly noxious vegetation shall be cut or trimmed as may be necessary to present a reasonably neat appearance, to prevent grass fires or the hazard of grass fires.

2.	The following apply to protection of ground water levels and quality:

a.	No extraction operations shall be conducted in such a manner that the ground water table of surrounding properties is harmfully lowered or impacted. The maximum excavation depth shall not go below existing ground water, except where the approved Reclamation Plan provides for a water feature or for refilling of such excavation. Any such refilling shall be in compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations governing ground water pollution.

b.	Water pumped from the site for the purpose of washing shall be retained in a pond until the silt and clay settles and then the water shall be recycled in the area affected.

c.	The owner/operator shall install a ground water monitoring well or wells, the location, type and number of which shall be shown on the Operations Plan. Such wells and related gauges shall be located and constructed to provide measuring data relative to the movement of ground water and changes in the levels thereof and water quality testing. The City shall have the authority to establish and periodically update ground water parameters consistent with standards in the field of earth materials extraction monitoring typical in the State of Illinois. As of the date of the adoption of this Section 15.09-M2, which is August 26, 2002, the following parameters shall apply:

I.	The owner/operator shall provide ground water level reports quarterly using the data from the monitoring well or wells and related gauges, at times and upon forms provided by the City Administrator.

II.	The owner/operator shall provide annual ground water quality reports at times and on forms provided by the City Administrator using samples from the monitoring well or wells. If the operations involve the removal of materials from below the elevation of the ground water, or if the standing water exists within the area of active operation or disturbed area, then the owner/operator shall provide ground water quality data
to the City Administrator quarterly with the ground water level reports.
 
3.	If the subject areas shall front on a township road which is used for access to the site, the owner/operator shall, coincidental with commencement of operations, bring that township road up to the paving standards defined for industrial roads in the Schedule
of Minimum Design Requirements for Subdivision Roads in McHenry County, from the entrance to the subject area to the nearest federal, state or county road used by the operator. The owner/operator shall repair any section of road damaged as a result of gravel hauling operations, but shall not be responsible for the normal wear and tear of the road. This provision shall not be construed to require the operator to purchase additional right-of-ways.

4.	All operations shall be conducted in a safe manner, especially with respect to hazards to persons, damage to adjacent lands or improvements and wells, and damage to any street by slides, sinking or collapse of supporting soil adjacent to an excavation.

5.	The following apply to surface mining conditions only, not to reclamation conditions:

a.	Surface mining operations that remove and do not replace the lateral support shall not approach property lines, established right-of-way lines of any public roads, streets or highways closer than a distance equal to 100 feet unless a lesser distance is mutually agreed to by the operator and adjacent property owner and submitted in writing for review and approval by the City.
b.	The bottom of the slope of the mined face of the excavation shall not be closer to the point determined per Section 15.09-M5a herein, than a distance equal
to 1½ times the depth of the excavation.

c.	If consolidated materials occur in the mined face, the slope of the face may be steeper than 1½ to 1 slope per Section 15.09-M5b herein for the depth(s) of those materials; however, all other mined slopes of unconsolidated materials shall be no steeper than those per Section 15.09-M5b herein.

d.	Overburden shall not be removed from more land than is to be mined within one year. No overburden shall be removed from additional land until vegetative ground cover in conformance with the Reclamation Plan is installed on all land where excavation is complete and the land is not being used f or earth material storage.

6.	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section 15.09 or of other ordinances and codes relating to screening, all active operations shall be screened and buffered by an earthen berm of not less than six feet in height and/or a farm fence of not less than 54 inches in height , of such a design so as to allow the free flow of wild animals, but to discourage trespass by humans and farm animals. Berms that will remain in place for one year or longer shall be planted with grass or suitable vegetative ground cover, shrubs and trees and maintained as a visual and acoustical screen. They shall be designed so they do not erode into the road or highway right-of-way or onto the adjoining property. Such berms shall be installed prior to the commencement of any operations adjacent to said activity. The berm design and the landscaping plan, including the type, quantity and species of plants, shrubs and trees, shall be subject to review and approval of the City. Trees and shrubbery shall be planted on the berm.
 
Trees planted shall be approximately 10 feet or more in height and shall be planted in two row s approximately 16 feet apart, and shall be centered approximately 20 feet apart in each row, with the back row staggered. Random shrubbery shall also be planted. The trees shall be as specially developed and recommended for rapid growth and appearance by the United States Forestry Service, and shall be in accordance with the standards adopted by the Illinois Department of Mines and Minerals pursuant to the Illinois Surface-Mined Land Conservation and Reclamation Act. Until such growth is established, the owner or operator shall be responsible for weed control and may be required to do re-seeding or re-planting for areas where the vegetation dies or does not take. A gate shall be placed at all entrances that will be kept locked whenever the owner, operator or their agent is not on site.

7.	The processing and stockpiling of earth materials and recyclable materials shall not be conducted within 300 feet of the property lines of any adjoining residentially zoned property. There shall be no importation onto the site of materials that do not relate to
the approved uses, including, but not limited to, mixed construction debris and asphalt. The maximum height of stock piles of any materials shall not exceed the height of the earthen berm on the perimeter of the property.

8.	Other than maintenance functions, no earth extraction and processing operations, ready-mix or concrete production, or recycling of concrete, shall take place at any time on Sundays, or holidays recognized by both state and federal governments, or on Saturday prior to 6:00 a.m. and after 4:00 p.m. or between 6:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m.
on all other days.

9.	Operations shall be conducted so that noise levels and air and water standards comply with federal and state standards.

10.	To minimize airborne dust and the deposit of dirt and gravel on public streets, all access ways and on-site roads shall be maintained in a dust-free condition either by paving or spraying with calcium chloride or other products of like effect.

11.	The premises shall be neat and orderly, free from junk, trash, abandoned equipment, or unnecessary debris. Debris, including, but not limited to rebar from concrete recycling, shall be regularly removed from the site. The site shall not be used as storage for debris not related to the special use permit. Buildings and structures shall be maintained in a sound condition, in good repair and appearance. Salvageable equipment stored in a non-operating condition shall be suitably screened or garaged. Berms and fences shall be kept in good repair.

12.	Enough topsoil must be stockpiled to meet the finished conditions of Section 15.09- M5 herein.

13.	Trucks hauling excavated materials shall be loaded so as to prevent spillage onto public streets. All trucks shall be covered. Any spillage on streets must be removed by the owner or operator within 24 hours of a spill. The entrances into the site shall be swept on a regular basis, with no less a frequency than weekly during peak season (April 1
to November 30). The owner or operator shall attempt to minimize the migration of loose gravel onto public streets by requiring that spread pans, side rails, suspension
 
systems and the like be kept free of sand and gravel to an extent as is reasonably possible.

14.	All equipment, machinery and vehicles operating on the site shall be operated and maintained so as to minimize the possibility of oil or fuel leaks. Should a leak or similar accident occur, the owner or operator shall have a written emergency plan and the proper equipment and materials necessary to contain and clean up any such leak. If a leak occurs such that the plan is put into effect, the City shall receive a report of the incident. The plan shall be updated as technology evolves.

15.	Only those vehicles and items of equipment which relate to the approved activities on the site may be parked or stored on the site.

16.	In case of conflict between any Operations Plan or Reclamation Plan or map and the provisions of this Section 15.09-M, the greatest restriction or highest standard shall govern, unless an exception is specifically provided for in a special use permit.
N.	Enforcement: The City Administrator, or his designee, in conjunction with the City Engineer, shall annually review each special use granted under this Section 15.09 Such inspections shall include all activities permitted on the property. In addition to the Reclamation Plan/map, the owner/operator shall provide the City Administrator with an annual aerial photo of his total operation, enlarged to a scale of one inch equal 100 feet or other scale that would adequately display the property affected on a 30-inch square format. The first photo shall be taken during the first year in operation and subsequent photos shall be taken in the same month of the following years. Each year’s photo shall be presented at the same scale for the purpose of comparison. The photo shall be taken in clear daylight when the area is without foliage or snow. Every three years, the City shall be provided with a new topographical map of the site drawn at two-foot contour intervals.

The City Administrator, in conjunction with the City Engineer, shall prepare a report and submit it to the City Council for its review and approval. If it is determined that the operator is not in compliance with this Section 15.09-N, the surety requirement, the operations and reclamation statements, plans or maps, or any other aspect of the approved special use permit, the City Administrator shall issue a stop-work order on all operations other than reclamation work needed to bring the operation into compliance.

Before release or reduction of a surety, an on-site inspection of the acreage reclaimed shall be made by the City Administrator and the City Engineer to check for compliance with the Reclamation Plan and any additional conditions of the special use permit. A random count procedure shall be used to check seeding, plantings and depth of topsoil. The full costs of all inspections shall be borne by the owner/operator. Failure to pay invoices for such costs after the expiration of 30 days after the date the invoices are mailed or delivered to the owner/operator, shall result in a stop-work order being issued by the City.

15.10	ADULT BUSINESSES

A.	Purpose and Intent: It is the intent of this Section 15.10 to protect and preserve the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the City by regulating adult business within the City.
 
B.	General Standards:

1.	A special use permit must be issued for each adult business pursuant to this Section 15.

2.	Location Restrictions: No adult business shall be operated within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning district or within 1,000 feet of the property boundaries of any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park, public housing, nursing home, rest home, sheltered care facility and place of religious worship. The distance limitation shall be measured in a straight line from the lot lines of said adult business and applicable residential zoning district, school, day care center, cemetery, public park, public housing, nursing home, rest home, sheltered care facility and place of religious worship.

3.	Only one adult business shall be permitted per block face.

4.	Sign Requirements: The following sign requirements shall apply to any adult business:

a.	All signs shall be flat wall signs.

b.	The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, or as permitted by the ordinances of the City, whichever is more restrictive.

c.	Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way. No sign shall be placed in any window. One 1 square foot sign may be placed on the door
to state hours of operation and admittance to adults only.

5.	Advertising: No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building.

6.	Alcoholic Liquor Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any adult business to sell, distribute or permit beer or alcoholic beverages on the premises.

15.11	SOLAR FARM

A.	All Solar Farm special use permits shall be subject to the following standards and regulations:

1.	Setback. The Solar Farm above ground components must be set back at least 25 feet from all property lines. However, for any Solar Farm above ground improvements including, but not limited to, fences or solar panels, abutting a state route, the Solar Farm above ground components shall be set back 150 feet from the centerline of such state route. In addition, Solar Faun above ground components
must be set back at least 50 feet from the centerline of any non-state route right-of way.

2.	Visual Screening. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment that is visible outside the perimeter of the property on which the Solar Farm is located must be screened from view of roads and dwelling units located within 1,000 feet of the Solar Farm
 
in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Required screening and bews shall be located within required setbacks, but outside of any paved road surface on land dedicated to the City by the owner, and must comply with one of the following options or a similar alternative approved by the City Council at the time of special use permit approval as follows:

a.	A landscaped area at least ten feet in width with at least one shrub per five linear feet) plus at least one evergreen tree per 25 linear feet of perimeter area. Shrubs must be at least three feet in height at the time of planting. Evergreen trees must be at least 5 feet in height at the time of planting; or
b.	A landscaped area at least ten feet in width with a solid wall or privacy fence with a minimum height of 8 feet. At least one evergreen tree is required per 30 linear feet of the fence or wall.

In addition, a landscaped berm of at least five feet in height may be installed in the required setback area relative to any adjacent parcel on which a residence is situated. Such berm shall be landscaped with one evergreen with a minimum height of five feet every 25 linear feet.

Every evergreen in the landscaped area described in 2(a) or 2(b) above, at the time of planting, shall be at least five feet in height. In the event that a shrub or tree dies within any such landscaped area, such shrub or tree shall be promptly replaced by the then owner of the subject property, weather permitting, No portion of the landscaped area or berm shall be situated within any right of way.

3.	Glare. The solar energy system utilized must be designed, constructed and sited to insure glare or reflections on adjacent properties and roadways will not materially and negatively impact the use of such adjacent properties and roadways by their owners and travelers and to not interfere with traffic, including air traffic, or otherwise create a safety hazard. In the event that glare concerns are documented and presented to the City following commercial operation, the Solar Farm owner will take actions to address those concerns) including adding landscaping or privacy fencing as necessary or otherwise modifying the project site to address such concerns.

4.	Soil and Ground Cover.

a.	Top soils shall not be removed from the site during development unless the removal is expressly approved as part of the special use permit.

b.	Perennial vegetative ground cover must be maintained or established in all areas containing a solar energy system and in required setbacks to prevent erosion and manage stormwater run-off. The ground cover shall also include an area
that is suitable habitat for pollinators such as bees.

5.	Compliance with Endangered Species Laws. The applicant shall be in compliance with federal and state laws regarding endangered species.

6.	Lighting. A Solar Farm may not be artificially illuminated, unless required by the
 
FAA or other applicable government agency or authority or approved by the City as part of the special use process. If lighting is approved by the City, such lighting shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Lighting of the solar panels shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cutoff fixtures to reduce light pollution.

7.	Underground Utilities. Onsite power lines communications and utility connections must be placed underground unless expressly provided otherwise in the text of the body of the ordinance granting the special use permit. Such undergrounding requirement includes but is not limited to those power, communication or other
lines running between banks of solar panels, but does not include transmission lines and interconnection facilities that will be used by the Solar Farm to connect to electric lines, electric substations or interconnections with buildings.

8.	Signage. Any sign on a Solar Farm shall comply with the City's sign ordinances. A sign consistent with the City's sign ordinance shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number.

Solar panels shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar panels.

9.	Abandonment and Decommissioning. A Solar Farm that (a) fails to transmit any energy to the electric distribution system within any period of twelve or more consecutive months and (b) where the owner/operator is not pursuing the repair of such Solar Farm will be presumed to have been abandoned. If the City reasonably believes an abandonment to have occurred in accordance with the prior sentence, the City shall provide written notification of such belief to the owner/operator and the owner/operator shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such written notice to reply to such notification with evidence refuting such contention. In the event the owner/operator fails to refute such contention within such thirty-day period, the City may presume that the Solar Farm has been abandoned unless, prior to the City

(i)	accessing any cash or letter of credit posted by owner as security for the decommissioning or (ii) taking over and commencing the decommissioning, the City is provided with clear and convincing evidence otherwise.

a.	Any Solar Farm that has been abandoned must be decommissioned and removed within 180 days.

b.	Decommissioning must consist of:

i.	Physical removal of all solar panel installations, structures, foundations, equipment, security barriers or fences and transmission lines from the site to a depth below grade of three (3) feet.

ii.	Recycling or disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations.
 
iii.	Stabilization, restoration and/or re-vegetation of the site.

The Zoning Administrator is authorized to allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated foundations three (3) feet or less below grade in place in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.

b.	Decommissioning Plan.

i.	A decommissioning plan prepared by a qualified engineering firm outlining the anticipated means and costs of removing the Solar Farm must be submitted with the building permit application associated with the special
use permit application.

ii.	The decommissioning plan shall ensure that the owner or operator properly removes the equipment and facilities upon the end of project life or after
their useful life. The plan must include provisions for the removal of all structures and foundations, the removal of all electrical transmission components and the restoration of soil and vegetation in accordance with this section.

iii.	The owner/operator must provide a present-day decommissioning cost estimate and identify the parties responsible for decommissioning, This estimate will include the cost to remove equipment, less applicable salvage values.

iv.	The owner/operator must submit a summary of the decommissioning plan to all property owners owning properties adjacent to the Solar Farm site. Before issuance of a special use permit, the owner/operator of the Solar Farm must provide to the City Administrator a certificate signed by the
Solar Farm owner certifying that a summary of the decommissioning plan has been sent by certified mail to all of such property owners. In addition, prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction of a Solar Farm on all, or a portion, of the property, the City shall require cash in an escrow account or an irrevocable letter of credit, in an amount equal to 125% of the present-day decommissioning cost estimate provided by the owner/operator under Section 15.03.A.9.c.iii., designating the City as beneficiary, issued by
a financial institution with an office in Illinois upon which the letter of credit may be drawn and substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A or otherwise in a form approved by the City attorney. The letter of credit shall
provide that the City may draw upon the funds upon the occurrence of any of the following events: i) a breach or failure by the owner or operator to complete all or a portion of such plan; or ii) a material breach or failure to comply with any requirement or condition of any zoning ordinance relative to a Solar Farm on the subject property; or iii) such letter of credit is about to expire and has not been, or will not automatically be, renewed; provided, however, that such draw shall not occur in the event of items (i) and (ii) above unless owner has failed to cure such breach or failure within fifteen
(15) days of being notified in writing by the City of such breach or failure.
 
The City may also draw upon such letter of credit to compensate any adjacent property owner for property proven to have been damaged as a direct result of a drain tile on the subject property being damaged by the owner/operator of the subject property. In the event that a letter of credit rather than a cash escrow is utilized, such in-evocable letter of credit shall be renewed by the owner of the subject property or operator of the Solar Farm without interruption for the term of the special use permit. In the event that such letter of credit lapses, such lapse shall result in the revocation of the special use permit for the Solar Farm by the City if not remedied within fifteen (15) days of the City notifying the owner of such lapse or thirty (30) days of such lapse.

10.	Monitoring and Maintenance, The owner/operator of the Solar Farm is responsible for keeping the Solar Farm in a safe, sound and well-maintained condition,
including painting, grounds keeping, structural repairs, internal access drives and the integrity of security measures. The owner of the Solar Farm will certify to the City at the start of commercial operations that the Solar Farm is in compliance with the Site Plan, and its operation will comply with all federal, state and local regulations in effect at that time.

11.	Avoidance and Mitigation of Damages to Public Infrastructure

a.	Roads. If the subject property is adjacent to a state route, such state route shall be used for the purpose of transporting components and equipment for construction, operation or maintenance of the Solar Farm. The owner/operator shall obtain applicable permits from the applicable highway authority prior to construction or as needed to remain in compliance with all state laws and regulations.

b.	Existing Road Conditions. The owner/operator must conduct a pre-construction. survey in coordination with the applicable highway authority to determine the condition of existing roads within the City that will be utilized by the Solar Farm.
The pre-construction survey must include photographs and a written agreement to document the condition of the roads and applicable public facilities. The owner/operator is responsible for reasonable ongoing road maintenance and dust-control measures identified by the applicable highway authority for all
vehicles used for construction of the Solar Farm during all phases of construction and installation. The owner/operator shall conduct (within 30 days of
completing construction) a second video survey of all existing roads used by the Solar Farm for construction activities. Prior to starting construction, the owner/operator shall deliver or have delivered to the City a letter of credit or cash escrow in the amount of Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) as security for the City to cover, in the event of a failure of the owner/operator to meet its obligations, the costs of the City performing the obligations of the owner/operator to make any necessary road repairs to the existing roads used by the Solar Farm for construction activities required clue to the impact of such construction activities on such roads. Such letter of credit or cash escrow shall serve as the sale source and amount from owner/operator to cover the costs incurred by the City for its undertaking any such future road repairs to existing
 
roads required due solely to Solar Farm construction activities that the owner/operator has failed to perform. The City shall release such letter of credit or cash escrow with any unused amounts remaining thereon or therein upon completion of any such necessary road repairs.

c.	Drainage and Detention Systems, The owner/operator is responsible for identifying the location of all drain tiles (or, alternatively, the information required in Section 15.03 B.2.d. as an alternative to a drain tile study), detention and subsurface drainage systems on the property and submitting such information to the City at the time of application. In addition, the applicant shall identify detention, drain tile (or, alternatively, the information required in Section 15.03 B.2.d.), or subsurface drainage systems that will be incorporated into the site stormwater permit and for preparing a plan for maintaining such drainage systems during construction and operation of the solar facility. Owner/operator is responsible for repairing, at all times, including but not limited to as part of decommissioning, any damage to drain tiles and other drainage systems that result from construction, operation, or maintenance of the Solar Farm.

12.	Financial Assurance. The owner/operator must provide reasonable evidence of financial ability to construct the Solar Farm and all required improvements, as determined by the City Council at the time of special use permit approval.

13.	Height. The height of any solar energy system) including panels, shall not exceed twelve feet and six inches as measured from adjoining grade at base to the highest elevation of the equipment, when oriented at maximum tilt position. This limitation does not apply to transmission lines and interconnection facilities or operations and maintenance facilities.

14.	Airports. For solar units within 500 feet of an airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the Airport Traffic Control Tower cab and final approach paths. Solar farms shall not be located adjacent to or within a control
zone of any airport.

B.	All applications for special use permit approval for a Solar Farm shall include the customary submittal requirements for special use permit applications. In addition, the following information and documentation listed below must be submitted by the later of the date of the submittal of the application for special use or the date of the City Council's having approved this Ordinance.

1.	A project description - Applicant shall provide a general description of the project, which will be subject to revision prior to application for the project building permit. Such description shall include the total generating capacity, the equipment manufacturer, the type and model of solar panels proposed, the number of solar panels, the nameplate generating capacity of each solar panel, the proposed height of each solar panel as installed and overall dimensions thereof.

2.	Site plan, which may utilize or be based upon an ALTA survey, showing property
 
lines and physical features, including roads, setbacks, floodplain (if applicable), buildings, the assumed location of solar panels, rights of way, and zoning district designation for the subject property and all abutting properties. Such site plan shall also include or be accompanied by the following:

a.	All existing and proposed underground and above ground utilities including but not limited to overhead electric lines on the Solar Farm site including any for
the transmission of energy from the Solar Farm to any buyer.

b.	Ingress and egress from the site as proposed during construction and thereafter, which indicates the proposed road surface and cover all the subject property.

c.	Wetland boundaries.

d.	A drain tile study identifying existing drain tiles on the subject property, or, alternatively, a narrative and supporting evidence indicating to the satisfaction of the City Enforcement Officer that drain tiles are not likely to be present within the development site. This evidence may consist of:

i.	Soil maps;
ii.	Historic aerial photographs;
iii.	Historic topographic maps; and
iv.	Wetland maps.

e.	A signed reimbursement agreement, in a form approved by the City, which provides for an initial deposit of $10,000 for the City's professionals fees associated with such application and review by the City

f.	Location and size of any abandoned wells or septic systems.

g.	Vertical elevation drawings.

h.	Number, location, and spacing of solar panels/arrays.

i.	Solar energy equipment schematic drawing.

j.	Identification of access to, and traffic control for, the project site, during construction and operation of the Solar Farm.

k.	Elevation drawing(s) (and/or photographs and or architect's renderings) and site plan showing location, size and design details of Solar Farm, including but not limited to how the power generated will be delivered and proposed meter connections.
l.	Endangered Species EcoCat and IDNR Consultation Termination.

m.	IHPA consultation initiation in accordance with Section 20 ILCS 3420 (Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act),

n.	Natural Resources Inventory Report from McHenry County Soil and Water
 
District.

o.	ALTA survey and title report for the site.

p.	Wetland boundary map/delineation reports with an U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional determination letter.

q.	A tree survey and tree preservation plan for trees within the site that are identified as significant either in the (1) Natural Resource Information Report from the SWCD) or (2) identified as an oak stand of high ecological significance by the McHenry County Conservation District.

r.	Landscape plans.

s.	Grading and excavation plan.

t.	A map shall be provided identifying all offsite tributary areas. A calculation of flow depths on overland flow paths including all onsite and offsite tributary area is also required.

u.	Stormwater management report shall identify volumes of depressional storage before and after improvement.

v.	Easement documents (proposed and existing).

w.	Sight distance studies for access points.

x.	Phasing map or plan, as applicable.

C.	No Solar Farm shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. The application for a building permit for a Solar Farm must be accompanied by the fee required for a building permit. All applications
for a building permit for a Solar Farm must include the information and documentation listed below in addition to the customary submittal requirements for a building permit.

All material modifications to a Solar Farm made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the City.

1.	Interconnection service agreement or evidence of filing required Interconnection service applications with the electric utility.

2.	Operation and maintenance plan of the Solar Farm, including measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, dust control and maintenance plans for roads, stormwater controls, as well as general procedures for operation and maintenance of the Solar Farm.

3.	Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or corporation constructing and installing the Solar Farm.
 
4.	Manufacturer specifications and installation methods of the solar panels, poles and racks and other major equipment and devices including: wattage capacity, dimensions of panels, mounting mechanisms and/or foundation details and structural requirements.

5.	Evidence that the system shall conform to applicable industry standards including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).

6.	A certificate of compliance demonstrating that the equipment comprising the Solar Farm has been tested and approved by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or other approved independent testing agency.

7.	No Solar Farm shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. The application for a building permit for a Solar Farm must be accompanied by the fee required for a building permit.

8.	The Solar Farm owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local fire chief. All means of shutting down the Solar Farm shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person by title for public inquiries throughout the life of the Solar Farm.

9.	Description of the hours of operation for construction and maintenance of the facility, numbers of employees and type of traffic to be generated from the site (TIS).

10, Water usage impact study indicating any impact on county and city water resources.

11.	Complaint Resolution Process - the applicant shall submit a process to review and address any complaints that may arise from neighboring property owners during
the construction and operation of the Solar Farm.

12.	Waste Disposal Plan - All solid waste generated from supplies, equipment, parts, packaging or operation of the facility shall be removed from the site in a timely manner and disposed of in an appropriate manner. Any hazardous waste
generated by the facility including but not limited to lubricating materials shall be removed consistent with all local, state and federal rules and regulations.

13.	Weed/grass control plan.

14.	Signage plan - signs warning of the high voltage associated with the Solar Farm shall be posted at every entrance to the facility, at the base of all pad mounted transformers and substations. A sign that provides emergency contact
information, such as phone number, shall be posted near the tower and the operations and maintenance building.

15.	Fence Plan (8' minimum) with appropriate warning signage.
 
16.	A fire protection plan for the construction and operation of the facility, and emergency access to the site,

17.	A permanent, nonexclusive easement, in a form approved by the City, providing for a blanket ingress and egress easement in and upon the subject property in favor of the City allowing it, in its sole discretion, to i) remove all solar panel installations, structures, facilities, equipment, and security barriers or fences, as well as transmission lines from the subject property to a depth below grade of
three feet; ii) remove and recycle or dispose of all solid or hazardous waste in accordance with local regulations, and state and federal law; and iii) stabilize, restore or re-vegetate the subject property and to restore the soil on the subject property if the Solar Farm is deemed abandoned in accordance with Section 15.03. A,9, Such easement shall be conveyed to the City no later than 30 days after expiration of a building permit for a Solar Farm, The sole purpose of the easement will be to enable the City, in the event the City determines in its reasonable discretion that there has been a material breach by the owner/operator in the implementation of the decommissioning plan for the subject property, to enter and exit the property in order to complete the decommissioning.

18.	Stormwater Management Permit application including stormwater management report, drainage plan and erosion control plan.

19.	Grant by warranty deed(s) with plats of dedication from the owner of the property to the appropriate governmental unites) dedicating a right-of-way from the center
line of the road to three feet adjacent to the roadway adjacent to the subject property.

20.	An encroachment, cooperation or similar agreement from owner of gas or other pipelines to grade over their pipeline.

21.	A current general liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage naming the City as additional insured with limits of at least two million dollars per occurrence and four million dollars in aggregate.

22.	Copy of NOI, copy of SWPPP for construction and post construction and copy of approved NPDES permit.

23.	Structural Engineering plans for foundation and design of solar panels racking and support given local soil and climate conditions.

24.	Storm sewer calculations.

25.	Signed, sealed and dated Engineer's Opinion of Probable Construction Costs for infrastructure improvements relevant to stormwater management and municipal services.

26.	Soils reports with logs.
 
27.	IDOT approval, if required.

28.	All material modifications to a Solar Farm made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the City. Any material modification must be reviewed and acted upon by the City within a sixty (60) day period after being submitted by the owner to the City for approval.

29.	The decommissioning plan required to be submitted pursuant to Section 15.03 A.9.c.

All other requirements of the ER Estate Residential District shall apply unless relief is provided by the City. In addition) the City may require as a condition of such special use that a development or annexation agreement be entered into by the parties.



15.12	ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT

A.	Purpose and Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this Section 15.12 to provide regulations regarding the craft growing, cultivation, infusing, processing, dispensing and transporting of adult- use cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of the City. Such facilities shall comply with all regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be amended from time- to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the regulations provided below. In the event that the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act is amended, the more restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply.

B.	General Standards: In determining compliance with this Section 15, the following components of the adult-use cannabis business establishment shall be evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular property in the context of the existing and intended future use of the properties:

1.	A special use permit must be issued for each adult-use business establishment pursuant to this Section 15.

2.	Location Restrictions: An adult-use cannabis business establishment may not abut the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section 15.12.

3.	An adult-use cannabis business establishment may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.

4.	Security Requirements: An adult-use cannabis business establishment shall install building enhancements, such as security cameras, lighting or other improvements, as set forth in the special use permit, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the adult-use cannabis business establishment, as well as its environs. Said improvements shall be determined based on the specific characteristics of the floor plan for the adult-use cannabis business establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the requirements of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
 
5.	Co-Location of Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments: The City may approve the co-location of an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization with an adult-use cannabis craft grower or an adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser, or both, subject to the provisions of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act and the special use criteria within this Section 15. In a co-location, the floor space requirements of Section 15.12(E)(2) and 15.12 (F)(2) shall not apply, but the co-located establishments shall be the sole use of the space.

6.	Impact of the proposed adult-use cannabis business establishment on existing or planned uses located within the vicinity of the subject property.

7.	Proposed structure in which the adult-use cannabis business establishment will be located, including co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security installations/security plan and building code compliance.

8.	Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees.

9.	Anticipated parking demand based on Section 8, Off-Street Parking and Loading, and available private parking supply.

10.	Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway capacity and access to such roadways.

11.	Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.

12.	Proposed signage plan.

13.	Compliance with all requirements for the specific adult-use cannabis business establishment provided herein, as applicable.

14.	Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with Section 15, Special Uses.

15.	Petitioner for a special use for an adult-use cannabis business establishment shall file an affidavit with the City affirming compliance with this Section 15, Special Uses, as provided herein and all other requirements of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.

C.	Additional Standards for Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower: In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis craft grower may be located, an adult-use cannabis craft grower may not abut the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential purposes.

D.	Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center: In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center may be located, an adult-use cannabis cultivation center may not abut the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential purposes.

E.	Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization: In those zoning districts in which an adult- use cannabis dispensing organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:

1.	Location Restrictions: An adult-use cannabis dispensing organization may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential purposes.
 
2.	At least 75% of the floor area of any space occupied by a dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the dispensing organization as authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, and no adult-use cannabis dispensing organization shall also sell food for consumption on the premises other than as authorized in subsection 3 below in the same space.

3.	An adult-use cannabis dispensing organization may be issued a permit to host on- site consumption of cannabis if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the adult-use cannabis dispensing organization and smoke from the facility does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. The security plan for the adult-use cannabis dispensing organization required by Section 15.12(B)(7) shall also reflect adequate provisions to respond to disruptive conduct and over-consumption. The on-site consumption permit shall be reviewed annually and may be suspended or revoked following notice and hearing.

F.	Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser: In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:

1.	Location Restrictions: An adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential purposes.

2.	At least 75% of the floor area of any space occupied by an adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser shall be devoted to the activities of the adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser as authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.

G.	Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor: In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:

1.	Location Restrictions: An adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential purposes.

2.	At least 75% of the floor area of any space occupied by an adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor shall be devoted to the activities of the adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor as authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.

H.	Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter: In those zoning districts in which an adult-use transporting organization or transporter may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:

1.	An adult-use transporting organization or transporter may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential purposes.

2.	The adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter shall be the sole use of the space in which it is located.
 
15.13	CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL

A.	Development of Conditions: The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose, such conditions of approval upon a special use permit as to the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of a special use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements of Section 15.03 herein.

B.	Landscape Plan: A Landscape Plan shall be required for all applications for a special use permit. The Landscape Plan shall be prepared in accordance with Chapter 21, Landscaping Code, of the Marengo Municipal Code. The Commission or the City Council may request or require the review of all landscape plans as part of the consideration of a petition for a special use permit.
 
Section 16
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT



16.1	Purpose
16.2	Where Permitted
16.3	Minimum Area
16.4	Required Sewer and Water
16.5	Procedure, Application and Referral
16.6	Preliminary Application f or Development Plan
16.7	Planned Development Final Approval
16.8	General Standards
16.9	Bulk Regulations
16.10	Approval
16.11	Time Limit
16.12	Minor Modification of Plans
16.13	Performance

16.1	PURPOSE

The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based upon the division of the City into districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. It is also recognized that new types and procedures in land development or redevelopment are emerging and that the mixing of uses and variations in heights and yards can produce very satisfactory and lasting results, if properly designed and planned, without adverse influence upon surrounding property.

16.2	WHERE PERMITTED

A planned development may be located in any zoning district, subject to the procedures and standards set forth below and subsequent to the issuing of a special use permit.

16.3	MINIMUM AREA

No minimum lot area or acreage is required to be eligible for consideration as a Planned Development Area. The major requirement is that the tract be both self-contained and homogeneous, as well as being improved so as to benefit the entire City with no adverse effect upon the surrounding property.

16.4	REQUIRED SEWER AND WATER

A planned development shall be served by a sanitary sewerage system and a public water supply system.
 
16.5	PROCEDURE, APPLICATION AND REFERRAL

The applicant shall submit a concept plan to the City Council for information purposes and for referral to staff and the Planning and Zoning Commission. Following staff review and comments, and the review by the Planning and Zoning Commission the applicant may begin the preliminary plan procedures.

16.6	PRELIMINARY APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN

Any person or persons owning lots or land within the City may apply to the Commission for consideration of a planned development. The Commission may approve or disapprove the application or may make recommendations regarding changes or revisions that it deems desirable. Said recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council. If the preliminary plan is approved by the City Council the petitioner may proceed with final plan. The preliminary application shall be accompanied by the following.

1.	A reproducible map with 15 prints of a survey of the property showing existing features of the property, including specimen trees, structures, streets, easements, utility lines and existing land use.

2.	A reproducible map with 15 prints of a preliminary development plan which shall be in conformance with the approved tentative plan, showing, as appropriate, all the information required on the tentative development plan; the approximate location and proposed density of dwelling unit s; non-residential building intensity; and land uses considered suitable for adjacent properties.

a.	Proposed land uses, population densities and building intensities.

b.	Proposed circulation pattern, indicating bot h public and private streets and off-street parking ratio.

c.	Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites and other open spaces.

d.	A market analysis of proposed commercial use, if the property is not zoned for commercial purposes at the time of submittal of the preliminary development plan.

e.	Delineation of the units to be constructed in progression, if any.

f.	Relation to future land use in surrounding area and Marengo Comprehensive Plan.

3.	A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and streetscapes; tabulation of total number of acres in the project and the percent thereof designated for various uses; the number of dwelling units proposed by type of dwelling for each unit of the development; estimated residential population by type of dwelling for each unit of the development; estimated non-residential population; proposed retail sales by unit and economic justification; anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height; open space, parking area and parking spaces, lot coverage, land in streets, floor area ratio, population density and public improvements proposed for each unit of the
 
development whenever the applicant proposes an exception from the standard zoning district or other ordinance regulations governing development. The applicant shall provide an itemized
list of exceptions by unit and by zoning district, when exceptions are requested by the applicant from the standard zoning district.

4.	The written approval of every property owner within the development to be bound by the proposed agreements and conditions, and to agree to file the written agreement w ith the Recorder of Deeds of McHenry County before the final plan is approved by the City Council.

5.	Engineering feasibility studies, as necessary.

16.7	PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FINAL APPROVAL

Planned development approval, valid for one year, shall be secured for each unit of the development as delineated on the preliminary development plan and approved by the Commission and the City Council. Planned development plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional team and be concerned with but not necessarily limited to the following:

1.	A reproducible map with ten prints of the site plan showing buildings, various functional use areas, circulation and their relationships.

2.	Preliminary building plans, including floor plans, exterior elevators and outline specifications of type of building materials, type of wall and roof construction, type of pavement and surfacing materials.

3.	Landscaping plans including type of plant materials and their arrangement.

4.	Engineering plans, including site grading, street improvements, drainage and public water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer extensions, as necessary.

5.	Information necessary for evaluation and assignment of fire zone designations, including proposed use and occupancy, and building heights and area of each building or structure and proposed distances between buildings and structures and distances to property lines.

6.	There shall also be submitted with the final plan, a written agreement of restrictions assuring the City that the development will be carried out in full compliance with the final plan and within the time schedule of construction submitted with the final plan.

7.	All required materials such as maps and proposals, exhibits, etc., along with the proper fees, shall be presented to the City Clerk prior to notice of publication for a Commission meeting or a zoning hearing.
8.	Final development plans must be submitted to the Commission after approval of the preliminary development plan.

16.8	GENERAL STANDARDS

A planned development shall conform to the following requirements:
 
1.	The number of dwelling units erected shall not exceed the number permitted by the regulations of the district in which it is located.

2.	The yards and open spaces adjoining the boundaries of the project shall not be less than the yard requirements of the district in which it is located.

3.	If a building is permitted to exceed the height limit of the district in which it is located, the yards and open spaces around such building shall be increased by an amount equal to the height that the building exceeds the height limit of the district measured in feet.

4.	If more intensive uses are permitted than are required by the district regulations, there must be clear evidence that such uses are needed to service the project provided the Commission shall find:

a.	That the use permitted by such exceptions are necessary or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;

b.	That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the development nor on the surrounding neighborhood;

c.	That not more than 15 percent of the ground area or of the gross floor area of such development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by said exceptions;

d.	That in a planned manufacturing development such additional uses allowed by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the district in which the development is located as set forth in Section 13 of this Zoning Code;

e.	That the use except ions so allowed are recorded on the zoning district maps by appropriate symbols or by reference to documents on file with the Zoning Administrator;

f.	Where the planned development is to be located in a residential district, no use exceptions shall be allowed unless the size of the planned development exceeds 20 acres.

5.	The amount of off-street parking must be adequate to serve the needs of the projects and the Commission and City Council may require more off-street parking than is otherwise required by this Zoning Code.
6.	If any open space or recreational facility is to be used solely by the residents of the project, adequate provisions shall be made for assessments against the property within the project so that such facilities can be properly improved, maintained and operated.

7.	Underground Utilities. Underground utilities including telephone and electric systems are required within the limits of the planned development. Appurtenances to these systems which can be effectively screened may be excepted from this requirement if the Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character of the development.
 
16.9	BULK REGULATIONS

In the case of any planned development, the Commission may recommend, and the City Council may authorize, exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this Section 16.09 within the boundaries of such development, provided that the Commission shall find:

1.	That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of encouraging a desirable living environment no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such development , as w ell as of neighboring properties, than would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this Zoning Code for buildings developed on separate zoning lots.

2.	That the gross population density shall not be increased above the number which would be permitted under the otherwise applicable district regulations.

3.	That along the periphery of planned developments, yards shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which said development is located.

4.	That not less than 50 percent of the lot coverage in a residential planned development in the residential zoning districts shall be used for green space and recreational facilities.

5.	Other standards for height, density, yard regulations, parking, loading and screening for a planned development shall be governed by the standards of the residential, commercial or industrial zoning district (s) most similar in nature and function to the proposed planned development as determined by the Commission. Standards for public improvements shall be governed by the applicable ordinances and laws of the City. Exceptions to these standards by the Commission and the City Council are possible when these bodies find that such exceptions are warranted in terms of the total proposed development.



16.10	APPROVAL OF THE DEVELOPMENT PLAN

Whenever the Commission and the City Council approve the final plan and accompanying agreements, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the necessary permits f or all of the project or for such phases thereof that are to be first constructed provided fees are paid and building codes are met. The City Administrator may, from time to time, approve minor changes within the project, but such changes shall not be of a nature that would affect the character and standard of the Planned Development.
16.11	TIME LIMIT

If no construction has been started within two years from the date of approval of the final plan, the permits shall be declared null and void and the project shall not be initiated unless it is resubmitted and reapproved in the same manner that it was approved in the first instance. The City Council may, however, extend the period f or initiating construction upon a showing of good and sufficient cause.
 
16.12	MINOR MODIFICATIONS TO PLAN

The Zoning Administrator may, from time to time, approve minor changes within the project, but such changes shall not be of a nature that would affect the character and standard of the planned development.

16.13	PERFORMANCE.

At the time of the granting of the permit, the City Council shall make appropriate arrangements with the applicant which will insure the accomplishment at the scheduled times, of the public improvements and grants of easement shown on the approved final plan.
 
Section 17
ADMINISTRATION



17.1	Zoning Administrator
17.2	Certificate of Zoning Compliance
17.3	Certificate of Appropriateness
17.4	Continuance of Existing Uses
17.5	Planning and Zoning Commission
17.6	Variations and Standards for Variations
17.7	Special Uses and Standards for Special Uses
17.8	Text Amendments and Standards for Text Amendments
17.9	Re-zonings (Map Amendments) and Standards for Re-zonings
17.10	Conditions
17.11	City Council Action
17.12	Change of Zoning
17.13	Implementation of Variations/Special Uses
17.14	Revocation of Variations/Special Uses
17.15	Public Hearing Requirements
17.16	Written Protests
17.17	Hearing Officer Alternative Process

17.1	ZONING ADMINISTRATOR

The Administrator, or his or her designee, is the Zoning Administrator (also called the Zoning Enforcement Officer) and shall have the following powers and duties:

1.	Receive and process all applications and petitions for zoning matters pursuant to this Zoning Code.

2.	Be responsible f or the interpretation of the provisions and regulations of this Zoning Code.

3.	Be responsible for administering and enforcing this Zoning Code, including conducting of inspections required by this Zoning Code or as are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.

4.	Serve as a staff liaison to the Commission.

5.	Publish annually an up-to-date copy of the Zoning Map as provided by Illinois compiled Statutes.

6.	Maintain for public inspection, during regular business hours, a copy of this Zoning Code together with the Zoning Map, along with all amendments thereto.
 
7.	Maintain all minutes and records of the Commission, and documents, including but not limited to ordinances and permit s, that memorialize or authorize zoning actions taken by the City Council.

8.	Perform such other duties as are delegated to him or are provided for generally in this Zoning Code.

9.	To review and refer requests for variances, special uses permits and zoning amendments affecting designated landmarks or property within a designated historic district to the Historic Preservation Commission after review and approval by the Commission.

10.	To refer applications for construction, alteration, removal or demolition affecting proposed or designated landmarks or structures within designated historic preservation districts.

17.2	CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE

Upon the adoption of this Zoning Code no land shall be developed, no new use or structure shall be established or erected and no existing use or structure shall be enlarged, extended, altered, relocated or reconstructed until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance unless it has been determined that the proposed work conforms to the applicable provisions of this Zoning Code.

1.	Application: An application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in graphic and/or in narrative form containing the following:

a.	Name, address and phone number of the applicant(s).

b.	Name, address and phone number of the owner(s) or operator(s) of the proposed structure or use, if different.

c.	Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of operation, number of occupants or employees and other related information.

d.	Location of the proposed use or structure and its relationship to existing adjacent uses or structures.

e.	Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use.

f.	Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any.

g.	Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and access ways.

h.	Any other information that the Zoning Administrator may require.

2.	Relationship to Building Permit s: Upon the effective date of this Zoning Code, the Building Commissioner shall not issue any building permit for the erection, enlargement, extension, alteration or reconstruction of any structure unless the applicant for such
 
permit presents to the Building Commissioner a copy of the Certificate of Zoning Compliance pertaining to such work.

3.	Corrective Action Orders: Whenever the Zoning Administrator finds by inspection or otherwise, that any lot, structure or use or work thereon is in violation of this Zoning Code, he/she shall so notify the responsible party and shall order corrective action.

4.	Content s of Order: The order to take corrective act ion shall be in writing and shall include:

a.	A description of the premises sufficient for identification.

b.	A statement indicating the nature of the violation.

c.	A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance.

d.	The date by which the violation must be corrected.

e.	A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference with the Zoning Administrator if he/she so desires.

f.	The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must be filed and a statement of the procedure for so filing.

g.	A statement that failure to obey a corrective act ion order shall result in revocation of the Certificate of Zoning Compliance and may result in the imposition of fines.

5.	Service of Order: A corrective action order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner, occupant or operator of the offending lot, structure or use if it is: served personally; sent by certified or registered mail to his/her last known address; or posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.

6.	Stop Orders: Whenever any work is being done in violation of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or this Zoning Code, the Zoning Administrator’s corrective act ion order may state that the violation must cease immediately. In such cases, the corrective action order is equivalent t o a stop order.

7.	Emergency Measures: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Zoning Code, whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that any violation of this Zoning Code poses an imminent peril to life or property, he may institute without notice or hearing any necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition. At the earliest possible time notice shall be served. Costs including attorney fees incurred by the City shall be paid by violator.

8.	Complaints: Whenever any violation of this Zoning Code occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record such complaints, immediately investigate and if necessary, institute appropriate corrective action.
 
17.3	CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS

Upon adoption of this Zoning Code no structure or property designated as a landmark or for Which designation as a landmark has been applied or which is included within the boundaries of a designated historic preservation district shall be developed, constructed, altered, removed, or demolished without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness for such actions. Additional information is available in the City’s Historic Preservation Ordinance.

17.4	CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING USES

Nothing in Sections 17.02 or 17.03 herein shall prevent the continuance of the present occupancy or lawful use of any existing building or zoning lot, except as provided in Section 6 of this Zoning Code, and except as may be necessary f or the safety of life and property. Certificates for the continued occupancy of legal non-conforming uses existing at the time this Zoning Code and subsequent amendments become effective shall be issued by the Building Commissioner upon request, and the certificate shall state the use is non-conforming and does not conform with the provisions of this Zoning Code.

17.5	PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION

The Commission, in addition to its powers and duties as prescribed in Section 3.06 of the Marengo Municipal Code and State Statutes, shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this Chapter 22, Zoning Code, of the Municipal Code.

1.	Commission Jurisdiction: The Commission is hereby vested with the following powers and duties:

a.	To hear and decide appeals alleging error in any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or Building Commissioner relating to zoning matters set forth in this Zoning Code. After holding a public hearing, the Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or Building Commissioner.

b.	To recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on applications or petitions for variations from the strict enforcement of any provisions of this Zoning Code, in accordance with the rules and standards hereinafter set forth.
c.	To recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on applications and petitions f or special uses listed in each of the several zoning districts.

d.	To recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on applications and petitions for Planned Developments referred to it by the City Council and to hear and decide other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the provisions of this Zoning Code.
 
e.	To sit as a special zoning commission for considering text amendments to this Zoning Code. After holding a public hearing on any proposed text amendments the Commission shall recommend to the City Council whether or not such text amendments should be passed. The Commission may also make recommendations f or text amendments, after public hearing, on its own petition.

f.	To recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on petitions for amendment of the provisions of this Zoning Code (a.k.a. text amendments) and the boundary lines of zoning districts herein established (a.k.a. re-zonings or map amendments). Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize the Commission to change any of the provisions of this Zoning Code or district boundary lines established hereby.

g.	The concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Building Commissioner or Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the petitioner or applicant in considering any matter upon which the Commission is authorized to act.

h.	To transmit to the City Council, with every recommendation, a written finding of fact and to refer to any documents and exhibits containing plans and specifications relating to its recommendation, which documents, plans and specifications shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Commission. The finding of fact shall specify the reason or reasons for its recommendation. The recommendation, or the terms of any relief recommended, shall be incorporated into the finding of fact, and shall be specifically set forth in a conclusion of the finding.

2.	Commission Meetings and Hearings: All meetings and hearings of the Commission shall be held at such times as the Commission and/or the Corporate Authorities may determine, and the schedule of such meetings and hearings shall be posted at City Hall. The presence of four Commissioners shall be necessary for a quorum. The Chairman, or Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Commission shall have the authority to adopt procedural rules for the conduct of its meetings and hearings consistent with the provisions of this Chapter 17 and other codes and ordinances of the City. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep record of its examinations and other official actions, prepare findings of fact, and record the individual votes upon every question. Such minutes shall be filed with the City after each meeting or hearing, which shall be a public record.

3.	Appeals and Stay of Proceedings: An appeal may be taken from any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Commissioner relating to zoning matters set forth in this Zoning Code by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved thereby, or by any officer, department, board or commission of the City. The appeal shall be taken within 45 days of the action complained of by filing a notice of appeal in duplicate, specifying the grounds thereof, in the office of the City Clerk who shall transmit forthwith one copy to the Building Commissioner and one copy to the Chairman of the Commission. The Building Commissioner shall forthwith transmit to the Chairman of the Commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
 
from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building Commissioner certifies to the Commission that, by reason of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case the proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order issued by the Commission or a court of record after notice to the Building Commissioner and on due cause shown. The Commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to all interested parties and shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear at the hearing and present testimony in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney.

17.6	VARIATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR VARIATIONS

A.	Variations, Purpose and Intent: In order to accomplish the general purpose of this Zoning Code, consideration may be given to certain practical difficulties or hardships in carrying out the strict letter of regulations of this Zoning Code. The purpose of a variation is to provide relief from difficulties and hardships arising from requirements including, but not limited to, bulk, setback, height, parking and loading, and other regulatory elements of this Zoning Code. The term “variation” as used in this Zoning Code does not include and is not applicable to map amendments (rezonings), text amendment’s, or special uses. The Commission may recommend to the City Council variations of the regulations of this Zoning Code in harmony with their general purpose and intent only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth and grant by ordinance a variation to permit relief from any provision relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land, w here the Commission makes a finding of fact based on the standards hereinafter prescribed, when evidence in a specific case shows conclusively that literal enforcement of any provision of this Zoning Code would result in a practical difficulty or particular hardship because of unusual surroundings or condition of the property involved, or by reason of exceptional narrow ness, shallowness or shape of the zoning lot, or because of unique topography, underground conditions or other unusual circumstances.

B.	Standards for Variations: Before recommending any variation, the Commission shall first determine based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:

1.	The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in the zoning district in which it is located;

2.	The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;

3.	The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality; and

4.	The variation, if granted, will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Zoning Code.

For the purpose of implementing the above rules, the Commission shall also, in making its determination whether there are practical difficulties or particular hardships, take into consideration the extent to which the following facts and conclusions favorable to the applicant
 
have been established by the evidence and are justified:

1.	The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out;

2.	The conditions upon which the pet it ion f or a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought, and would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;

3.	The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the value of the property, the monetary gain to be realized from the property, or to alleviate financial difficulty experienced by the petitioner in the attempt to comply with the provisions of this Zoning Code;

4.	The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by the application of this Zoning Code and has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property;

5.	The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;

6.	The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fires, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values in the neighborhood; and

7.	The granting of the variation requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Zoning Code to other lands, structures, or buildings of the same zoning classification.

C.	Administrative Variations: For existing structures that do not comply with the setback requirements for that zoning district, the Zoning Administrator may grant administrative variations of no more that 2.5 percent of the required setback. Ord . 0 3 -1 -8

17.7	SPECIAL USES AND STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USES

See Section 15 of this Zoning Code.

17.8	TEXT AMENDMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR TEXT AMENDMENTS

For the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare, the City Council may, from time to time, upon recommendation of the Commission in the manner herein set forth, amend the regulations imposed and the zoning districts created by this Zoning Code. Before recommending any text amendment to this Zoning Code, the Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the follow ing:
 
1.	That the proposed amendment is beneficial to the orderly development of the City;

2.	That the proposed amendment will benefit the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the community;

3.	That the proposed amendment promotes the public interest and not solely the interest of the petitioner or applicant.

17.9	RE-ZONINGS (MAP AMENDMENTS) AND STANDARDS FOR RE- ZONINGS

For the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare, and conserving the values of property throughout the City, the City Council may, from time to time, upon recommendation of the Commission in the manner herein set forth, amend the zoning classification of property (also known as a re-zoning or a map amendment ), provided that in all amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this Section 17.09, due consideration shall be given to a) existing conditions, b) the conservation of property values, c) the direction of property development and land use that is to the best advantage of the entire City, and d) the uses to which property is devoted at the time of the adoption of any such amendatory ordinance. Before recommending any change in the zoning classification of a particular property, the Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following:

1.	That the proposed re-zoning is not detrimental to the orderly development of the City;

2.	That the proposed re-zoning will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare of the community;

3.	That the request promotes the public interest and not solely the interest of the petitioner or applicant;

4.	That the request is consistent with the existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question;

5.	That the request is consistent with zoning classifications of property within the general area of the property in question;

6.	That the property is not generally suitable for the uses permit ted under the existing zoning classification;

7.	That the trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which may have taken place since the original zoning of the affected property was established supports the request;

8.	That, if applicable, the length of time that the property in question has remained undeveloped under its current zoning is considered in the context of land development in the vicinity of the property in question;
 
9.	That property values of the surrounding and adjacent property will not be substantially diminished or impaired; and

10.	That the request is in harmony with the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.

17.10	CONDITIONS

The Commission may recommend, and the City Council in granting any variation or special use may impose such conditions or restrictions as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this Zoning Code, to reduce or minimize possible detrimental effects of such a variation or special use upon other adjacent properties, and to better carry out the general intent of this Zoning Code.

17.11	CITY COUNCIL ACTION

No action on any specific petition, application or case shall be made by the City Council without a hearing by the Commission as required herein, nor without a report thereof having been made by the Commission to the City Council. Said report shall consist of the hearing minutes and a finding of fact. Upon the report of the Commission, the City Council, without further public hearing, may adopt, modify or deny any proposed petit ion or application or may refer the petition or application back to the Commission for further consideration.

In the event the Commission does not recommend that a zoning variation be granted a two-thirds vote of the City Council shall be required to grant the variation.

17.12	CHANGE OF ZONING

Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the Commission the power or authority to alter or change the Zoning Code or any use district made a part of the zoning map; such power and authority being reserved to the City Council, and the Commission shall not have any power or authority with respect to any alterations or change of the Zoning Code except to make recommendations to the City Council in such specific cases as may properly come before the Commission.

17.13	IMPLEMENTATION OF VARIATIONS/SPECIAL USES

No order for a variation or special use permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period longer than six months, unless such use is established within such period, provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.

17.14	REVOCATION OF VARIATIONS/SPECIAL USES

Whenever any variation or special use granted under the terms of this Zoning Code has been discontinued or abandoned for a period of six consecutive months, or whenever there is evidence of a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a variation or special use, such variation or
 
special use, after being discontinued or abandoned, shall be considered void and the owner shall submit a new application or pet it ion pursuant to this Zoning Code.

17.15	PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS

All hearings before the Commission shall require public notice. The Commission shall cause notice of a petition or application to be given in the following manner:

1.	By publishing notice of the time and place of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Marengo, Illinois, at least 15 days prior to the hearing;

2.	By causing said notice to contain the both the legal description and common address or location for which the petition or application is requested, as well as a brief statement describing the nature of the petition or application; and

3.	By sending a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all property owners within 250 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be addressed to the person(s) who last paid property t axes.

4.	By notifying such property owners, groups or organizations of the proposal in writing as the City deems desirable.

17.16	WRITTEN PROTESTS

In the event of written protest against the petition or application, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 per cent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley or rear line therefrom, or by the owners of 20 per cent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to such regulations or zoning district , and filed with the City Clerk, such petit ion or application shall not be approved except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all trustees then holding office.

17.17	HEARING OFFICER ALTERNATIVE PROCESS

Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-13-14.1, in the event the City Council determines that a zoning petit ion filed with the City to be heard by the Commission is likely to require a hearing of such duration or complexity so as to cause difficulties or hardships upon the members of the Commission to attend and adequately manage all of the sessions of the hearing, then the City Council may at its sole discretion by ordinance establish the position of Hearing Officer and delegate to said officer the authority to conduct said hearing. The hearing officer alternative process shall be established and conducted in the following manner:

1.	Appointment, Qualifications and Duties of Hearing Officer: The City Council shall appoint a Hearing Officer to govern the proceedings under this Zoning Code. The Hearing Officer will preside over the hearing. The Hearing Officer shall be a licensed attorney in the State of Illinois. The Hearing Officer shall have the duty to conduct a fair hearing, to maintain order, and to ensure development of a clear, complete and concise record of the proceedings. The Hearing Officer, if requested by the Commission, shall prepare recommended findings of fact and law for consideration by the Commission.
 
2.	Evidentiary Standards: The Hearing Officer shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence as applied in the Courts of Illinois pertaining to civil actions. The Hearing Officer shall receive evidence which is material, relevant and would be relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of serious affairs. When the admissibility of evidence depends upon an arguable interpretation of substantive law, the Hearing Officer shall admit such evidence.

3.	Public Hearing Parameters: All parameters for public hearings, including but not limited to notice requirements, shall comply with this Zoning Code unless altered by the provisions listed in this Section 17.17:

a.	Within a reasonable time from the date that the complete zoning petition is filed, the date, time and location of the hearing on the petition shall be determined by the Hearing Officer in consultation with the Commission, but the hearing shall begin no later than 90 days following said filing.

b.	The City shall reserve the right to engage the services of one or more court reporters to provide transcripts of all sessions of the hearing, which transcripts shall be deemed to constitute the minutes of the hearing. Any and all costs associated with such engagements, including the necessary copying of transcripts required for internal use by the City, the Commission, and the Hearing Officer, shall be borne by the petitioner.

c.	Any and all costs associated with the compensation and expenses of the Hearing Officer shall be at the petitioner’s expense.

d.	The hearing shall be treated as if it w ere equal in all respects t o a hearing conducted in normal circumstances by the members of the Commission, except that the attendance of one member of the Commission shall be deemed to constitute a quorum for the purposes of the hearing officer alternative process. After the Hearing Officer has closed all testimony and complete transcripts of the proceedings up to that point have been received, Commission members will then begin their deliberations in order to prepare
a recommendation. Before beginning their deliberations, the Commission members shall be required to sign an affidavit attesting that they have received and read all the transcripts of the proceedings as a substitute for any sessions at which any member
may not have been able to be in attendance. The deliberative and recommendation phase of the proceedings by the Commission shall require the normal quorum of four members to be in attendance.

e.	If, in the City’s opinion, City facilities are not sufficient to accommodate the number of persons expected to attend the hearing, the City may arrange for the hearing to be conducted at another site. In such a circumstance, the City is authorized to rent appropriate facilities and equipment , including but not limited to an adequa ely-sized meeting space such as an auditorium, as well as a sound system, chairs, tables, and associated services such as custodians and set-up personnel as may be necessary to conduct a proper hearing. Any and all costs associated with such arrangements shall
be at the petitioner’ s expense.
 
f.	The City Attorney or his designee shall serve as legal advisor, and the City Administrator or his designee shall serve as staff advisor, to the Hearing Officer and Commission.

g.	All testimony at the hearing shall be under oath or affirmation.

h.	Any person appearing at the hearing shall have the right to give testimony and comment on the zoning petition. Any person testifying shall be required to state their name and address and who they are representing.

i.	The Hearing Officer reserves the right to prevent argumentative comments, prohibit personal attacks on other parties, maintain order and decorum during the hearing process, and prevent irrelevant, incompetent and unnecessarily cumulative or repetitive materials in the record. The Commission members reserve the right at all times to ask questions of or reply to any party testifying in order to clarify an issue, statement or fact.

j.	Any person shall have the right to be represented by a licensed attorney-at-law at the hearing. Such attorneys shall have the right of reasonable cross-examination. The scope of cross-examination shall be determined by the Hearing Officer.

k.	The City, at its sole discretion, shall have the right to determine whether the information provided can be evaluated by qualified professionals on its staff, and if the City cannot accomplish this evaluation because such qualified personnel are not available and the employment of such persons would impose a financial burden upon the City, then the City shall have the authority to retain the services of one or more professional consultants to assist the City staff and Commission in the process of reviewing any  aspect of the zoning petition. Any and all expenses of such services shall be at the petitioner’s expense. Such consultants shall have the same standing to testify and to
be cross-examined as may be necessary as any other witnesses at the hearing.

l.	Members of the public shall be allowed to obtain copies of any documents filed with the City upon application and payment to the City of the actual cost of reproduction in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act.

m.	The City, in consultation with the Hearing Officer and the Commission, shall have the authority to establish reasonable rules and procedures for the conduct of hearings and
the order of business to be followed during hearings
 

Section 18
INTERPRETATION: PURPOSE AND CONFLICT

In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this Zoning Code to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or repeal any ordinance, rules or regulations previously adopted and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Zoning Code or which shall be adopted, pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, nor is it intended by this Zoning Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that where this Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by such other ordinances or such easements, covenants or other agreements, the provisions of this Zoning Code shall control.
 
Section 19
FEES

Fees pertaining to petitions or applications f or zoning text or map amendments, special use permit’s, certificates of compliance, planned developments, variations and for appeals to the Commission shall be established by action of the City Council from t ime to time (see Chapter 20 of the Marengo Municipal Code). Such fees shall be due and payable to the City at the time of filing of an application or petition. The petitioner or applicant shall, in addition to such fees, bear the City’s cost of preparing and publishing the public notice, bear the cost of preparing, copying or printing, and distribution of all documents and drawings necessary f or review of the petition or application by the City, recording and filing of ordinances or documents when such publication, recording or filing is required, and bear the cost of all fees and expenses incurred by the City, including but not limited to fees charged by a professional land consultant, attorneys' fees and engineers' fees, when those fees are incurred by the City regarding any petitions or applications heard by the Commission.
 
Section 20
VIOLATIONS: PENALTY

Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus the City’s cost of prosecution including reasonable attorney’s fees, for each offense. Each day that a violation is permit ted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
 
Section 21
VALIDITY

Should any section, clause, or provision of this Zoning Code be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Zoning Code as a w hole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
 
Section 22
WHEN EFFECTIVE

This Zoning Code is hereby declared to be urgent and necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, and safety, and shall be in full force and effect from and after its due passage, approval, and recording and publication as provided by law.

PASSED by the City Council and approved by the Mayor this 26th day of August, 2002.
 












Marengo



Subdivision Ordinance
 
CHAPTER23 SUBDIVISIONS



23.1	SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS

The City hereby adopts as and part of its Subdivision Ordinance pages i-i through i-vi, Articles 1 through 9, and all Appendices, the List of Figures and List of Charts and Tables thereto all attached hereto as Exhibit A.

23.2	PENALTY

Any person violating any provision of the City's Subdivision Ordinance shall on conviction be subject to a fine of $500 per day along with payment of attorney's fees and costs incurred by the City in prosecuting each such violation.

23.3	COLLECTION

In the event such fine and/or attorney's fees are due the City are not paid, the cost of collecting such attorney's fees and fines shall be added to the fine and attorney's fee incuned by the City. Each act of violation and each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.

23.4	COMPLETION  OF IMPROVEMENTS

Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any improvement contemplated by a final plat of subdivision approved by the City must be completed by the subdivider/owner, in accordance with the applicable requirements of the City's Subdivision Ordinance, no later than six months from the last sale of a lot by the owner/subdivider constituting the majority of lots (excluding outlots, as designated on the final plat) in the Subdivision.
























Chapter 23, Page I
 
MARENGO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE


Article 1 General Subdivision Provisions	Page
101 Title	1-1
1 02 Purposes	1-1
103	Authority	1-1
104	Jurisdiction	1-1
105	Interpretation and Separability	1-2
106	Repeal of Ex isting Ordinance	1-2
Article 2 Subdivision Review Procedure and Submission Requirements
201	Concept Plan	2-1
201.1	Submittal and Scheduling	2-1
201.2	Information Required	2-1
201.3	3  Staff and Consultant Reports	2-2
201.4	Pre-Application Meeting	2-2
201.5	Pre-Application Summary Report	2-2
201 .6  Determination on Need for Full Concept Plan Review	2-2
201.7	Revised Concept Plan Submission	2-2
201.8	8  Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting	2-2
201.9	Planning and Zoning Commission Report	2-3
201.10	Revised Concept Plan Submission	2-3
201.11	City Council Meeting	2-3
201.12	Validity of Concept Plan	2-3
202	Preliminary Plat	2-3
202.1	1  Staff Meeting	2-3
202.2	Plats with Four or Fewer Lots	2-3
202 .3  Submittal, Scheduling, and Notice	2-3
202.4	School and Park District Action	2-4
Information Required
202.5
202 .6	Staff and Consultant Reports	2-6
202.7	7	Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting and Recom.	2-6
202.8	Planning and Zoning Commission Report	2 -6
202 .9	Revised Preliminary Plat Submission	2-7
202.10	City Council Meetings and Action	2-7
202.11	Preliminary Plat Expiration	2-7
203	Final Plat	2-7
203.1	Submittal, Scheduling, and Notice	2-8
203.2	Information Required	2-8
203.3	Supporting Documents	2-8
203.4	Staff and Consultant Reports	2 -9
203 .5  Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting and Recom.	2-9
203 .6  Planning and Zoning Commission Report	2-9
203.7	Revised Final Plat Submission	2-9
203.8	City Council Meeting and Actions	2-10
203.9	Final Plat Expiration	2-10
203.10	Signature on Final Plat	2- 10
203 .11  Recording of Final Plat	2-10
 
204	Plats of Vacation
204.1	Submission of Plats of Vacation
204.2	Plat of Vacation  Distribution
 
2- 10
2-10
2-10
 
204.3	Written Approval of Easements	2-11
204.4	Review of Plat of Vacat ion by Planning and Zoning Commission 2-11 204 .5  Planning and Zoning Commission Approved Plat of Vacation 	2- 11
204.6	6  Review by the City Council	2-11
204.7	Recording of Plat of Vacatio n	2-11
204.8	8  City Council Approved Plat of Vacation Expiration	2-11
 

205	Procedure for Resubdivision
206	Plat Corrections and Addenda
207	Chart 1 - Marengo Subdivision Process
 

2-11
2-12
2-13
 

 
Article 3 Design Requirements
301  Conservation Subdivision Standards 301 .1	Purpose
301.2	Density
301.3	Lot Clustering Siting Standards
301.4	Open Space
301 .5	Curb and G utterNegetated Swales
301.6	Sidewalks/\tValkways
301.7	Street Light Spacing
301.8	Natural Area and Buffer Protection and Conservation

302	Traditional  Subdivisions Standards
 


3-1
3-1
3-1
3-2
3-3
3-3
3-3
3-3
3-3

3-4
 






I

303	Streets
303 .1	Classification of Streets	3-6
303 .2	Cu I-de-sacs	3-6
303 .3	Continuing Streets	3-7
303 .4	Dead-End  Streets	3-7
303.5	Access to Adjacent Property	3-7
303.6	Alleys	3-7
303.7	Half Streets	3-8
303 .8	Private Streets	3-8
303 .9	Medians	3-8
303 .10	Street Names	3-8
303.ll	Intersection of Streets	3-8
303 . 12	Street Jogs	3-8
303 .13	Topography  and Layout	3-8
303 .14	Sight Distances	3-8
303.15	Reverse Curves	3-9
 
303.16	Return Radii at Intersections and Corner Lots	3-9
303.17	Minimum Design Requirements for Urban/Traditional	3-12
Subdivision Streets
303 .18 Minimum Design Requirements for Rural/Conservation  Design   3- 16 Subdivision Streets
 
304	Bicycle Circulation
305	Lots
 
3-18
3-18
 








306	Landscaping
306.1	1	Street Trees
306.2	Plant Type
306.3	Tree Preservation
306.4	Tree Survey
306.5	5	Transformer,  Cable, and Other  Ground  Mounted  Fixture Screening

307	Natural Area Protection and Management
307.1	Natural Landscape Sensitivity Plan
307.2	Natural Area Management
307.3	Landscape Management and Maintenance Plan

308	Signs

309	Easements
309.1	Easements
309.2	Limitations on the Use of Easements
309.3	Maintenance of Easements

310	Electric and Communication
 









3-18
3-18
3-19
3-19

3-19

3-19
3-19
3-20
3-20

3-22



3-22
3-23
3-23
 
310.1	Coordination	3-24
310.2	Lines Underground	3-24
310.3	Pole Placement	3-24
310.4	Street Lighting	3-24
310.5	Permits for Utility Services	3-25

311	Impact Assessment
311.1	Flood Hazard Area	3-25
311.2	Critical Soils	3-26
311 .3	Traffic Impacts	3-26
311.4	Snowplowing	3-26

 
312	Construction Specifications
312 .1   Excavation and Grading
312.2	Base Courses
 
3-26
3-26
3-26
 

312.3	Bituminous Surface Courses	3-27
312.4	Bituminous Surface	3-27
312.5	Concrete Pavement	3-2 7
312.6	Sidewalks	3-27
312.7	Curb and Gutter	3-27
312.8	Drainage	3-28
312.9	Topsoil and Seeding	3-28
312.10	Trench Backfill	3-28

 
Article 4 Water and Wastewater Systems
401 Water Supply
 


4-1
 
401.1	General	4-1
401.2	Capacity	4-1
401 .3	System Design	4-2
401 .4	Fire Hydrants	4-3

 
402 Sanitary Sewers
	General
	Sanitary Design and Placement 403 Oversizing Water and Sewer Facilities
I	Article 5 Stormwater Control
Article 6 Impact Fee Ordinance
601 Dedication of School Site or Payment of Fees in Lieu Thereof
	Legislative Intent
602  Park and Recreation Space and Faci I ities
	1 Criteria for Requiring School Site Dedications
	Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreational Land Dedications
	Fire and Rescue Capital Facilities Contributions and Site Dedications
	Criteria for Requiring Library Site Dedications
603 Developer Donation to the Local Public Library District.
603 .1 Criteria
603.2	2    Refunds
603.3	Fair Market Value
603.4	Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Contribution

604 Consumer Price Index 605 Density Formula
606 Reservation of Additional Land
607 Combining with Adjoining Developments 608 Site Requirements
608.1	Topography and Grading
608.2	Improved Sites
608.3	Environmental Risk Audit
608.4	Suitability of Soils at Site
608.S	Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats
608.6	Real Estate Tax Escrow
 
4-3
4-3
4-4

4-5

5-1



6- 1
6-1
6-1
6-1
6-2
6-3

6-4
6-5
6-5
6-6
6-6
6-7

6-7
6-8
6-8
6-8
6-9
6-9
6-10
6-11
6-12
6-13
6-13
 
609  Objections
	1	Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission
	Information and SeNices to be Used
	Procedure for Resolving an Objection
	Costs and Fees
 
6-13
6- 14
6-14
6-14
6-15
 

 
610  Condition of Annexation 611  Indemnification
612    Distribution
613   Time of Payment
 
6-15
6-16
6-16
6-17
 


Article 7 Administration  and Enforcement
701 General

I





 
702 Violations and Penalties
	Illegal to Transfer
	No Metes or Bounds 703 Variations and Exceptions 704 Separate Publication
705 Engineering Drawings and Guarantees 705 .1	Engineering Drawings
705.2	Construction Supervision
705.3	Maintenance of Improvements
705.4	Estimates of Costs
705.5	Amount of Performance Guarantee
705.6	Partial Release
705.7	Complete Release
705.8	Types of Guarantees
705.9	Completion of Improvements
 


7-1
7-2

7-2

7-2

7-2
7-2
7-2
7-2
7-2
7-3
7-3
7-3
7-3
7-4
 

Article 8 Plat Certificates, Guarantees and Other Miscellaneous Requirements
801	General Requirement	8-1
802	Required Certificates - Preliminary Plats	8-1
803	Required Certificates - Final Plat	8-2
804	Tax Search	8-10
805	Retained Personnel Fees	8-10
806	Filing Fee: Preliminary Plat	8-11
 
Article 9 Definitions
901 General
902 Listing of Definitions
 


9-1
9-1
 

 
Appendix A. Appendix B. Appendix C. Appendix  D. Appendix E. Appendix F. Appendix G. Appendix H.
 
Engineering Summary
Table of Estimate Population per Dwelling Units Endangered Species Consultation Action Report Security Requirements
Retained Personnel Fees Recommended Street Trees Water  Main Materials List Fees
 


List of Figures
Figure 1 - Conventional Subdivision Design vs. Conservation Design	3-2
Figure 2 - Lot Clustering	3-2
Figure 3 - Images of Conservation Design	3-4
Figure 4 - Images of Traditional Neighborhood Design	3-4
Figure 5 - Conventional Subdivision Design vs. TND design	3-5
Figure 6 - Street Light Spacing	3-5
Figure 7 - Typical cul-de-sac (left) vs. crescent layout (right)	3-6
Figure 8 - Examples of alternatives to typical cul-de-sac street design	3-7
Figure 9 - T-turnaround illustration	3-7
Figure 10 - Examples of permitted and prohibited alleys	3-8
Figurel 1 - Minimum Des ign Requirements for Urban/Traditional Arterial Roads	3-12
Figure12 - Minimum Design Requirements for Urban/Traditional Collector Roads	3-12
Figure 13 - Minimum Design Requirements for Local/Traditional Roads	3-13
Figure 14 - Minimum Design Requirements for Business/Industrial  Roads	3-13
Figure 15 - Minimum Design Requirements for Rural Arterial Roads	3-16
Figure 16 - Minimum Design Requirements for Rural Collector Roads	3-16
Figure 17 - Minimum Design Requirements for Local/Traditional Roads	3-17
Figure 18- Minimum Design Requirements for Local/Traditional Roads	3-17
List of Charts and Tables
Chart 1 - Marengo Subdivision Process	2- 13
 



Table 1 - Minimum Design Requirements for Urban/Traditional Subdivision Streets
Table 2 - Minimum Design Requirements for  Rural/Conservation  Design Subdivision Streets
Table 3 - Public Water Supply
Table 4 - Sanitary Sewer Service
Table 5 - School Size and Classification
Tabl e 6 - Requirement and Population Ratio Criteria for Schools
Table 7 - Requirement and Population Ratio Criteria for Fire
 



3-10

3-14

4-1
4-3
6-2
6-3
6-4
 
Article 1   	
TITLE, PURPOSE, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS


101	TITLE


This Ordinance  shall  be known as and  may be cited as "The City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance ."

102	GENERAL


For the purposes of uniform interpretation of this Ordinance, certain terms and phrases shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section. The words "shall" and "must" indicate mandatory items, while the word "may" indicates optional items.



 103 PURPOSE 	


In the subdivision and resubdivision of land, a developer is required to comply with certain procedures outlined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes. This Ordinance establishes additional procedures and requirements governing the platting of land in the City, and is adopted for the following purposes:

A.	To establish reasonable design standards and procedures for subdivision and resubdivision
of land;
B.	To provide for an orderly subdivision process and promote continuity with existing developments;
C.   To encourage development which is compatible with the natural features of a particular site;
D.	To  establish  guidelines  for  the  dedication,  use  and  continuing  maintenance  of  common
areas;
E.	To establish a single document to serve as a guide in providing an adequate street system; public utilities (sewer and water);  surface  drainage  and  stormwater  control;  and  other services related to the use of subdivided  land; and
F.	To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City.

104 AUTHORITY


This Subdivision Ordinance regulates the subdivision of land under the jurisdiction of the City. The subdivision plans and layouts are incorporated  in the City's Comprehensive  Plan.	It is intended to provide for the orderly development of the City and its environs; for the location and width of proposed streets within new subdivisions, the reservation of roadway corridors for the  establishment  of  new  collector  and  arterial  streets  in  locations  consistent  with  the Comprehensive Plan, and connections with other existing or planned streets; for the dedication and acceptance of land for public use; for the installation and construction of utilities, roadways and other  improvements  essential  to  service  the  subdivided  lands; for  the  dedication  and acceptance  of  land acquired for schools, parks, playgrounds and other public uses; for the preparation of subdivision plans and the procedure for the submittal, approval and recording of
 
Article I - Title, Purposes, and General Provisions



subdivision plats in and about the City, and is in accordance with the authority vested in the municipality under the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.

105 JURISDICTION


This Ordinance shall apply to any subdivision or dividing of any parcel of land made within the borders of the City as well as to any subdivision or dividing of any parcel of land within 1.5 miles of the corporate limits of the City. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, all standards herein shall apply equally to subdivisions both in the City and within its 1.5 mile planning jurisdiction.

 106 INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY 	


106.1 Interpretation. When interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, the standards of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements throughout the City.

106.2	Conflicts of Law. Where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions or requirements than are imposed or required by other provisions of the law or rules, covenants or other agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. However, nothing herein shall interfere with or be construed to abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements between parties which impose restrictions greater than those imposed by this Ordinance.

106.3	Invalidity. If any section, provision or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.

107 Repeal of Existing Ordinance


The existing Subdivision Ordinance of the City, entitled An Ordinance for the Subdivision and Platting of Land and Providing for Jurisdiction. Of Subdivision Improvements, adopted March 24, 1977, as amended, is hereby repealed.
 
Article 2  	
SUBDIVISION  PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION  REQUIREMENTS



201	CONCEPT PLAN



201.1	Submittal and Scheduling. Prior to s ubmitting a Preliminary Plat for approval, the developer shall submi t to the City ten copies of a Concept Plan and post a retained personnel fee as required by Article 8 of this Ordinance. The City Clerk shall schedu le a Pre-app lication Meeting at a time at least 20 business days from the date of filing.

201.2	Information Required. Except where the City Administrator specifically provides otherwise, the Concept Plan shall contain at least the following information :

A.	Identification
(1)	Proposed name of development ;
(2)	Scale, date and north arrow;
(3)	Vicinity map;
(4)	Name and address of developer and engineer;
(5)	Boundaries;
B.	Existing Site Conditions
(6)	Wetlands as shown on the U. S. Fish and Wildlife maps;
(7)	Floodplain as shown on the FEMA maps (wooded areas as aerial);
(8)	Location of water and sewer facilities c losest to s ite;
(9)	Location of nearest park(s);
(10)	Location of existing streets within 1,000 feet of site;
(11)	Identification of hazards (underground storage tan ks, electric utiIity Iines) on or adjacent to site;
(12)	Existing easements on-site;
(13)	Existing zoning;
(14)	Environmental Reconnaissance of the Site - examining and evaluating site conditions through the use of available historical information regarding land usage, to identify possible environmental degradation or impairment. Environmental problems should include potential, actual and alleged hazardous contamination above or below the ground at the site;
(15)	Historic districts and historic landmark properties;
(16)	Adjacent properties;
C.	Nature of proposed development
(17)	Number of proposed lots;
(18)	Size of tract;
(19)	Minimum lot size proposed;
(20)	Approximate location of streets,water and sanitary sewer;
(21)	Indication of whether floodplain or wetlands will be modified;
(22)	Indication of whether park and/or school land and facilities will be provided;
(23)	Proposed zoning;
(24)	Calculation of gross and net density;
(25)	Proposed land use ratio, including streets, wetlands, etc.
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements





201.3	Staff and Consultant Reports. A least five business days prior to the pre­ application meeting date, the City staff and appropriate retained consultants shall file a preliminary report with the City Clerk who shall distribute copies to the Planning and Zoning Commission, other appropriate City staff, officials and the developer.

201.4	Pre-Application Meeting. The developer shal I meet with the appropriate City staff to evaluate the proposed Concept Plan and alternatives to it. Among other things , the Concept Plan shall consider the future development potential of the surrounding area, especially the extension of streets and utilities, and how this proposal should relate to it.

Staff will discuss potential problems with the development, apparent violations of existing ordinances, and suggest changes to the Concept Plan; including the desire for alterative designs. Staff will not take action other than to determine that the review is complete or that additional information or alternative concepts are needed for  its review.

Review of the Concept Plan does not relieve the developer from compliance with any changes in the City ordinances made after review of the Concept Plan and prior to approval of a Preliminary Plat by the City Council. Additional meetings with staff may be necessary prior to presenting the Concept Plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission.

201.5	Pre-Application Summary Report. Staff will file a report summarizing the discussions at the Pre-Application meeting(s) at least 5 days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.

201.6	Determination on Need for full Concept Plan Review. Upon completion of the Pre-Application Meeting, the City Administrator  is authorized to determine the need for concept plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, if the Concept Plan involves the division of a lot, block, or tract of property not greater than four (4) acres in size into not more than four (4) lots or blocks which does not involve any new streets or easements of access. The Administrator's recommendation shall be in writing and shall include any conditions of approval or his reasons for disapproval. If the City Administrator determines that he does not require review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, the Developer may proceed directly to the Preliminary Plat process. Otherwise, all Concept Plans will be reviewed and discussed at a regularly scheduled Planning and Zoning Commission meeting no more than 30 days after the Pre-Application Meeting, and at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting no more than 20 days after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission .

201.7	Revised Concept Plan Submission. The Developer shall incorporate changes recommended by City staff and retained consultants and shall submit 15 full size and 10 11xl7 sized copies of the revised Concept Plan at least 10 days prior to meeting with the Planning and Zoning Commission.

201.8	Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting. The developer shall meet with the Planning  and  Zoning  Commission  to  evaluate  the  proposed  Concept  Plan.    The
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements



Planning and Zoning Commission  will  provide informal direction  as to the generally
acceptability of the proposed concept, and will recommend modifications if desired.

201.9	Planning and Zoning Commission Report. The Planning and Zoning Commission will submit a report summarizing the discussion and recommended changes at least 5 days prior to the City Council meeting.

201.10	Revised Concept Plan Submission.  The  Developer  shall  incorporate changes recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall submit 15 full size and 10 11x17 sized copies of the revised Concept Plan at least 10 days prior to meeting with the City Council.

The City Clerk shall schedule a City Council meeting within 20 days of the Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting after all required documents have been received.

201.11	City Council Meeting. The developer shall meet with the City Counci I  to evaluate the proposed  Concept  Plan.  The  City  Council  will  provide  informal  direction as to the generally acceptabi Iity of the proposed concept , and wi 11 recommend modifications  if desired.

201.12	Validity of Concept Plan. A Concept Plan shall remain val id for one year following the Developer's meeting with City Council.

202 PRELIMINARY PLAT



202.1 Staff Meeting. Prior to submitting a PreIiminary Plat for review by the Plan Commission, the Developer shall meet with appropriate City Staff and retained consultants to discuss submission requirements, conformance with City standards, consistency with the Concept Plan, and to recommend modifications.
I	202.2   Plats  With  Four  or  Fewer  Lots.  The  City  Administrator	is  authorized  to recommend approval or denial of a preliminary plat to the City Council, without referral
to or recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, if the preliminary plat involves the division of a lot, block or tract of property not greater than four (4) acres in size into not more than four (4) lots or blocks which does not involve any new streets or easements of access. The Administrator's recommendation shall be in writing and shall
J	include any conditions of approval or his reasons for disapproval.

202.3 Submittal and Scheduling and Notice. The developer shall submit 1S full size and 10 11x17 sized copies of a Preliminary Plat to the City within one year of completion of Concept Plan review, and shall post the required retained personnel fee prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which it is to be heard.

The City Clerk will distribute the Preliminary Plat to the appropriate City staff for their review and shall schedule a review of the Preliminary Plat for a meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days after all required documents have been received.
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements



The City Clerk shall not accept a Preliminary Plat for review unless the property is appropriately zoned for the intended use and density, or unless a petition to amend the Zoning Ordinance or map has been filed which, if adopted, would have the same effect.

The Developer will notify the following individuals and organizations of the date time and place of the meeting when the Final Plat will be considered. He shall furthermore provide the City Clerk and City Attorney with an affidavit stating that each of the following individuals and organizations was notified by U.S. Mail, certified mail, return receipt requested and provide the Clerk with U.S.P.S. documentation from the mailing indicating the address to which each notice was sent:

A.	City Attorney;
B.	City Engineer;
C.	Fire Protection District;
D.		Homeowners Association (any which have indicated an interest in the review of the subdivision);
E.	Plan Commission  Members;
F.	Park District
G.	School District(s);
H.	Contiguous property owner(s);
I.	Township Road Commissioner (if annexation is being considered);
J .	Township   Supervisor   (if  annexation   is:  being  considered);
K.	UtiIity Company Representatives,
L.	Cable Television,
M.	Electric,
N.	Gas,
0.	Telephone,
P.	Sewer and Water Utility(s);
Q.	U. S. Postmaster for the City of Marengo;
R.	Illinois Department of Conservation Endangered Species Notification;
S.	Illinois  Department  of  Transportation  (if  a  driveway  and/or  access  permit  is needed to enter any State road};
T.	McHenry  County  Highway  Department  (if a driveway  and/or  access  permit  is
needed to enter any County road);
U.	McHenry County Soil and Water Conservation District;
V.	McHenry-County Department of Health (if it involves septics or wells); and
W.	Marengo Rescue Squad.

202.4	Schoof and Park District Action: All school districts will be requested to agree in writing to accept the school donation or submit its objection to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Park District will be requested to agree to accept designated public open space in writing or make an objection to the Planning and Zoning Commission. School districts and the Park District will be requested to agree to accept lands to be donated to the respective districts before the initial Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.

202.5	Information Required. Except where the City Administrator specifically provides otherwise , the Preliminary Plat submittal shall contain at least the following information:

A.	Identification and description
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements



(1)	Proposed name of development;
(2)	Vicinity map;
(3)	Location by township , section, range;
(4)	Legal description;
(5)	Name and address of developer and engineer;
(6)	Scale (1" = 100 feet required), date and north arrow . Elevations (United States
Geodetic Survey [USGS] shall be used);

B.	Natural Area Protection and Management Plan (see Section 307)

C. Nature of existing conditions
(7)	Aerial photograph;
(8)	Boundary line of development, acreage of tract location of property lines and
names of subdivisions within 300 feet;
(9)	Locations and dimensions of streets which lie in, adjacent to, or near the development;
(10)	Location of water and sewer facilities together with a description of the same
which lie in, adjacent to, or near development;
(11)	Location of railroad, utility and other easements or facilities which lie in, adjacent to, or near development Location of parks, recreation and open space owned by the public or by property owners associations which lie in, adjacent to, or near development;
(12)	Structures on the development  site with an indication of whether they will
remain, be changed in use, or will be removed;
(13)	Existing elevations at 1 or 2 foot intervals which lie in site and within 300 feet
of it;
(14)	Identification of drainage basins which lie in, adjacent to , and near the development ;
(15)	Consultation Agency Action Report to the Illinois  Department  of  Natural Resources (IDNR), in compliance with 520 ILCS 10/1 et seq .
(16)	Location of water courses;
(17)	Delineation of wetlands, and, floodplain together with studies explaining how the wetlands and floodplain were, determined and, evaluating the quality of the former;
(18)	Submission of an Archaeological Phase 1 report prepared by an l.H.P.A . certified professional archaeologist to identify any archeologically sensitive areas, which lie in, adjacent to, or near development;
(19)	Location of any historic districts or landmark sites, which lie in, adjacent to, or near development;
(20)	Zoning on development tract and adjacent tracts.  Such additional information
as required by the reviewing authority;

D. Proposed development
(21) Layout of streets, water and sewer facilities together with relevant information, including proposed street typical sections, water and sewer line sizes location and improvement plans of proposed parks, recreation and open space; statement of intent regarding ownership of these areas or facilities;
(22)	Any proposed modifications to floodplain or wetlands.  Approximate  location
and size of  stormwater  detention  areas  together  with  support  information describing how the sizes of the areas were determined;
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements


(23)	Existing drainageways with proposed conveyance systems for areas receiving runoff in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 29 of the Marengo Municipal   Code;
(24)	Location of lot lines, setback lines and identification of easements;
(25)	Information describing the number of lots, lot areas and widths for each lot;
(26)	Soils information as required by County Department of Health, where on-site
sewage disposal systems proposed;
(27)	Traffic impact analysis and other studies;
(28)	Fiscal impact analysis;
(29)	Any proposed change in zoning and list of all variances from any municipal
code regulation;
(30)	Phasing;
(31}   Construction access;
(32)	A letter from each affected School District and Park District indicating whether they request the dedication of a school site, or a cash donation in lieu of land,
(33)	Appropriate  certificates  as required by this Ordinance;
(34)	If septic systems are to be used in the proposed subdivision the developer
shall submit a soils report with each copy of the Preliminary Plat.

202.6	Staff and Consultant Reports. At least five days prior to the meeting date, the City staff and appropriate retained consultants shall file a preliminary report summarizing relevant comments with the City Clerk who shall distribute copies to the Planning and Zoning Commission, other appropriate city staff, officials and the developer .

202.7	Planning and Zoning  Commission Meetings and Recommendations. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a regularly scheduled public meeting  to review the  proposed  Preliminary  Plat.   The owner  or  his  designated  representative  is
I	required to be present at this meeting.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require such modifications or revisions of the Preliminary Plats as are deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community. Additional meetings with the Planning and Zoning Commission may be required to review modifications.

The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend denial, approval, or approval with amendments , conditions and/or restrictions within 90 days from the date of the completed application (including all supporting data), unless such time is extended by mutual consent.

202.8	Planning and Zoning Commission Report. Within 30 days following the approval or denial of the Preliminary Plat, the Planning and Zoning Commission, with the assistance of City staff and retained consultants , shall prepare a report of their findings and recommendation for action by the City Council. If recommending denial , the Planning and Zoning Commission shall include in their report a written statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval and specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this Ordinance or with the intent  of  the Comprehensive Plan.
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements



202.9	Revised Preliminary Plat Submission. The Developer shall incorporate changes recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall submit 15 full size and 10 11x17 sized copies of the revised Preliminary Plan at least 15 days prior to meeting with the City Council.

202.10	City Council Meetings and Action. The Developer shall submit 15 full size and 10 11xl7 sized copies of the revised Plat addressing conditions placed on approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. After all required documents have  been received, the City Clerk shall schedule the Preliminary Plat for a meeting of the City Council.

The City Council shall accept, accept with modifications and/or conditions, remand to Planning and Zoning Commission for further review, or reject the Preliminary Plat within 30 days of its regularly scheduled meeting following the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. In the event of a conditional  approval, the Council shall require the developer to resubmit a Plat showing the changes required.

Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council is tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout of the proposed subdivision as submitted .

202.11	Preliminary Plat Expiration. The Preliminary Plat shall expire one year from the date of approval by the City Council. Where approval has expired, the entire process must begin anew, unless a time extension is granted by the City Council.

203	FINAL PLAT


203.1	Submittal, Scheduling and Notice. The developer shall submit 15 full size and 10 11xl7 sized copies of a Final Plat and five copies of the Final Improvement Plans to the City Clerk within one year after Preliminary Plat approval by the City Council, and shall post the required retained personnel fee prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which it is to be heard. Where the Preliminary Plat shows the development to be phased, then the Final Plat for each phase shall be submitted within one year of approval of the Final Plat for the previous phase, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.

The City Clerk will distribute the Final Plat to the appropriate City staff and retained consultants for their review and shall schedule the Final Plat for a meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission within a minimum of 30 days after all required documents have been received.

The Developer will notify the individuals and organizations listed in Section 202.3 of this Ordinance of the date time and place of the meeting when the Final Plat wlll be considered. He shall furthermore provide the City Clerk and City Attorney with an affidavit  stating that each of the following individuals and organizations was notified by U.S. Mail, certified mail, return receipt requested and provide U.S.P.S. documentation from the mailing indicating the address to which each notice was sent.
 
Article2-SubdivisionProceduresandSubmissionRequirements




203.2	Information Required. Except where the City Administrator specifically provides otherwise, the final plat shall contain at least the following information:

A.	Identification and description
(1)	Proposed name of development;
(2)	Location by township, section, range;
(3)	Legal description;
(4)		Name  and  address  of  developer  and  certification  by  registered  land surveyor;
(5)	Scale 1 inch = 100 feet  required, date and north arrow;
B.	Property information
(6)	Boundary of tract, property lines of lots, street right-of-way, dedicated areas and easements based on an accurate traverse with angular and lineal dimensions (in feet);
(7)	Any  municipal,  public  utility  or  other  easements,  including  drainage, stormwater detention, road construction, and pedestrian easements;
(8)	Centerlines  of  streets  with  radii,  internal  angles,  points  and  curvatures,
tangent, bearings and lengths of all, arcs. Names of all streets within and adjoining the plat lines and lot widths with linear dimensions;
(9)	Accurate   location  of  at  least two  concrete  monuments  constructed  and placed as required by the Plat Act (765 ILCS 105/0.01 et seq.);
(10)	All  districts,  such  as  library,  elementary  school, junior  high  school,  high
school, fire protection, etc.;
(11}  Legal  description  for  areas  to  be dedicated  or  reserved  for  public  or
common uses with nature of ownership and purposes of same indicated;
(12)	Appropriate  certificates  as required by this Ordinance;
(13)	Historic districts and historic Landmarks properties;
(14)	State plane coordinates; and
(15)	Any variation from the City Municipal Code.
I	203.3	Supporting  Documents.	The developer shall submit 5 copies of the
following  supporting  documents,  as  herein  described,  with  the  required  Final  Plat submission.

A .  Final Engineering Plans, shall at a minimum consist, of the following: ( 1) Title Sheet;
(2)	Project Specifications and General Construction Notes;
(3)	Geometric Plan;
(4)	Grading Plan, which includes the street paving plan, all storm sewer lines and structures, stormwater retention/detention facilities, erosion control measures, floodplain and wetland protection measures;
(5)	Lighting Plan, which includes a photometric plan that indicates the layout
of lighting fixtures, the maximum and minimum light levels, and underground conduits and cable for off-street parking and/or public street lighting facilities;
(6)	Street Plan and Sections;
(7)	Construction Details;
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements



(8)	Sanitary and Storm sewer profiles; and
(9)	Soil Erosion and sedimentation plan.

B.  Drainage Overlay . A reproducible overlay drawing, as required by the Plat Act
(765 ILCS 105/0.01 et seq.) .

C.  A detailed statement by the subdivider setting forth the nature, kind, character, and extent of all improvements that will be constructed within the subdivision.

D.  A statement by a professional engineer registered in the State of Illinois giving a
detailed estimate of the total cost of construction for all proposed improvements.
I	E.   Completed   copies   of  all   permit  application	forms	(IEPA,  IDOT,   Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, US Army, etc.)
I		203.4	Staff and Consultant Reports. At least five days prior to the meeting date, the City staff and appropriate retained consultants shall file a report with the  City
Clerk who shall distribute copies to the Planning and Zoning Commission, other appropriate city staff, officials and the developer.

203.5	Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting and Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a regularly scheduled public meeting to the review the proposed Final Plat. The owner or his designated representative is required to be present at this meeting.

The Final Plat shall be consistent with the Preliminary Plat and meet all applicable
City requirements.

The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend denial, approval, or approval with amendments, conditions and/or restrictions within 30 days from the date of the completed application (including all supporting data), unless such time is extended by mutual consent.

203.6	Planning and Zoning Commission Report. A least five days prior to the City Council meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission, with the assistance of City staff and retained consultants, s hall prepare a report of their findings and recommendation for action by the City Council. If recommending denial, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall include in their report a written statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval and specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this Ordinance and with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan.

203.7	Revised Final Plat Submission. The Developer shall incorporate changes recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission  and shall submit 1S full size and 10 11x17 sized copies of the revised Final Plat at least 15 days prior to meeting with the City Council. After all  required  documents  have  been  received, the  City Clerk shall schedule the Final Plat for a meeting of the City Council.
 
Article 2 - S11bdivisio11 Procedures and Submission Requireme11ts



203.8	City Council Meetings and Action. The Developer shall submit 15 full size and 10 11x17 sized copies of the revised Plat addressing conditions placed on approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.

The City Council shall accept, accept with modifications and/or conditions, remand to Planning and Zoning Commission for  further review, or reject the Final Plat within 30 days of its regularly scheduled meeting following the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. If the proposed Plat is approved, the City Clerk shall attach a certified-copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy of the Plat. If the proposed Plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval.

203.9	Final Plat Expiration. A Final Plat which has not been recorded within six months after its approval by the City Council shall have no validity and shall not thereafter be recorded.

203.10	Signature on Final Plat. After a Final Plat has been approved by the City Council, the Developer shall obtain signatures from all required personnel, as required in Article 8.

203.11	Recording of Final Plat. When all signatures required on the Plat have been obtained, the Developer shall submit the Plat to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall then present it to the County Recorder for recording and shall pay all recording fees.


204 PLATS OF VACATION



204.1 Submission of Plats of Vacation. A Developer wishing to vacate all or part of an existing Plat shall submit 12 copies of the Plat to the City Clerk and post the required retained personnel fee.

The Developer shal I provide the clerk with an affidavit stating that each individual or organization has been notified by U.S. Mail, certified mail, return receipt requested and provide the Clerk with U.S.P.S. documentation from the mailing. The City clerk shall deliver a copy of the Plat to the City Attorney and City Engineer.

204.2 Plat of Vacation Distribution. The Developer shall  notify  the  following individuals and organizations of the meeting date and time at which the Plat of Vacation will be considered.
A.   City Attorney;
B.	City Engineer;
C.	Fi re Protection District;
D.	Utility Company Representatives:
E.	Cable Television;
F.	Electric;
G.  Gas;
H.	Telephone; and
I.	Sewer and Water  UtiIities.
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements




The Developer shall provide the clerk with an affidavit stating that each individual or organization has been notified by U.S. Mail, certified mail, return receipt requested and provide the Clerk with U.S.P.S. documentation from the mailing.

204.3	Written Approval of Easements. It shall be the developer's responsibility to contact the utility companies and the CATV company to obtain their written approval of any vacation of utility easements.

204.4	Review of Plat of Vacation by Planning and Zoning Commission.
The approval of the Plat of Vacation by the Planning and Zoning Commission is required prior to submission of the Plat to the City Council. If a Plat has been conditionally approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, all conditions of approval must be met before the Plat of Vacation may be submitted to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve or deny the proposed Plat of Vacation within 30 days of the completed application (including all required submissions) .

The owner or his designated  representative  is required to be present when the Planning
1	and Zoning Commission  reviews the Plat of Vacation.

204.5	Planning and Zoning Commission Approved of Plat of Vacation Expiration. Approval of a Plat of Vacation by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall expire one year from the date of approval. When such approval has  retired,  the  Planning  and Zoning Commission must again review and approve the Plat of Vacation  before submission of the Plat to the City Council.

204.6	Review by the City Council. Within 30 days of its approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a Plat of Vacation may be scheduled for approval by the City Council in accordance with its adopted agenda procedures. Twenty copies of the Plat of Vacation should be submitted ten days prior to City Council meeting.
I		204.7  Recording of  Plat of Vacation. After a Plat of Vacation  has been approved by the City  Council, the  Developer  shall  obtain  all  necessary  signatures.  When  all  signatures
required on the Plat have been obtained, the Developer shall submit the Plat to the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall then present it to the Recorder for recording.

204.8 City Council Approved Plat of Vacation Expiration. A  Plat of Vacation which has not been submitted by the City Clerk within six months after its approval by the City Council shall have no validity, and shall not thereafter be recorded.


205 PROCEDURE FOR RESUBDIVISION


The procedure for resubdivision of land in the City shall be the same as for initial platting.
 
Article 2 - Subdivision Procedures and Submission Requirements





206 PLAT CORRECTIONS AND ADDENDA


All minor Plat corrections and addenda shall be reviewed by the City Engineer before being presented for recording. Any change to the Plat that in the opinion of the City Engineer represents a significant departure from the approved Plat shall be first approved by the City Council prior to recording.



1

I









I

I










1
 
- - - - - - - -
Marengo Subdivision Process

 


Filo for Concept P&An
Review
 




,".'..
"'"O'
0
N
 
Concept Plan


.",,'	".'
 


Submit Concepl Plan (10 copies)
Post Retained Personnel Fee

Submit Staff Reports
 


 

Pr Application
Meeting
 
Preapplication  Meeting
(Developer to meet with appropliate City Staff to discuss submlssio11requirements1.nd inlt1alstaff  comments. Additfonat meetings may be required)
 

 


"'"O' 0 M
 
,...------------------·---  .........................................................     _
----:'City Administrator Determinat ion on need for Concept
:._ Plan review by PZC and CC with 4 lots or less	•
r---- Submit Revised Concept Plan (15 full-size and ten 11xl7 sized copies)
 
NO	l .--Submit St aff Reports
.s	>-


 

PZCMeeting
 
Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting
(Developer to meet with Plan Commission. Additlona l
meetings may be required)
 







CC Mooting



















Complete Application
For Preliminary Plat
 

",..'. ""'O' 0
N
 
r---- Submit Revised Concept Plan - (1S full-size and ten 1lx17 sized copies)
I	.--Submit Plan Commission Report




City Council Meeting
(Developer to meet with City Council)





Preliminary Plat



Staff Meeting
(Developer to meet with appropr iate City Staff to d iscuss submission requirements and Initialstaff comments . Additional mEietings may be requ1rf?d)


.----( i;;·  i- i ; t ; :; i -a-t  -  -	·  ;; i·n· ;y-- ·--
Plat review by PZC and CC for Subdivisions w ith 4lots orless !
'....------- --- -- - ---- --- ---- --- ---------- ----------- ------
 





Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting
(Plan Commission to recommend approval or deniaO

Submit Revised Preliminary Plat (15 full-size and ten 1lxl7 sized copies)
 
ISubmit Staff Report
 
Back to
 

PZCActlon •
 

.I	Submit Letters from Schooland Park Dist ricts (see Sect on 202.4)
!
 
Concept Plan
 
NO	-C-it-y -Co-u-nc-il-M-eet-in-g
(City Counc lto approve or deny)
 
----------
 




CCAction.




 





Complete Application
For FinalPlat
 









"'
"'O 0 M
 
Final Plat
Submit Final Plat (15 full-size and ten 1lxl7 sized copies)
I	Not ify All Appropriate Parties (see Section 203.1)
I   I  r Su bmit Staff Report




Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting
(Plan Commission to re<ommend approval or denlal)
r---
 


PZCAction
 
Submit Revised Preliminary Plat (15 full-size and ten 1 x 17 sized copies)
I  r--- Submit Plan Commission
i j
 
Back to Preliminary Plat
 

 
">'-
""O'
0
M
CC Ac tion r9l
i
.c2
0
:E
"'

Rocord Final Plat
 


City Council Meeting
(City Councll 10app1ove or deny)









Record Plat
(Developer to obtain required signatures.	 	
 
City Clerk shallrecord the finalPlat.}
 
May 9,2005	Pag e2- 13
 
Article 3  	
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS




 301  CONSERVATION  DESIGN SUBDIVISIONS 	

301.1	Purpose. Conservation design is intended to encourage more efficient use of land and public services through unified development that is principally intended to protect biodiversity, conserve community resources, preserve natural areas, and protect the health and safety of the community . This Section establishes reasonable standards and criteria to permit suffic ient flexibility in the development of subdivisions, to maximize the achievement of conservation design objectives , and to promote  the following purposes:

A .  To guide the future growth and development of the community consistent with
the City's Comprehensive  Plan;
B.   To  preserve  the  rural  character  of the  community  through  the  preservation  of open space and sensitive natural resources;
C. To provide commonly-owned open space areas for passive and/or active recreational uses by residents of the development and, where specified, the larger community;
D.	Protect and enhance biodiversity;
E.	Minimize development on and destruction of sensitive natural resource areas
and wildlife habitats;
F.	Reduce the quantity and improve the quality of stormwater runoff from the new development;
G.	Minimize impervious surface area;
H.	Reduce soil erosion potential;
I.	Increase future property value;
J.	Create livable and susta inable communities .

301.2	Density. The maximum density sha ll be that of the underlying or pre-existing zoning, or as described in the City of Marengo Comprehensive Plan for uninco rporated areas in dwelling units per acre . Dwelling units per acre is determined by dividing 43,560 by the minimum lot area provided in the Zoning Ordinance. Minimum lot area shall not apply to conservation subdivisions. Density in a conse rvation subdivision shall be based on the net site area of the overall project area by deducting the following :

A.	Any public right-of-way within  the project boundary existing at the time the development plan is submitted;

B.	The area of land within a floodplain , designated wetland, or ex1st1ng water body that exceeds the minimum acreage required for restricted open space. Where floodplains and wetlands overlap, they shall only be counted once .

C	Stormwater detention and right-of-way dedication .
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements




The net buildable area multiplied by the dwelling units per acre (as described above) equals the number of units allowed within a conservation subdivision.


 

Figure   1  -    Conventional  Subdivision  Design  (left) vs.  Conservation  Design  (right)


301.3	Lot Clustering Siting Standards.

A.	Lots are encouraged to be grouped into clusters. It is recommended	that each cluster contain between 5 and 20 units.

B.	Clusters shall be arranged to minimize negative impacts on the	natural, scenic, and cultural resources of the site and		conflicts between incompatible uses.

C.	Clusters shall avoid encroaching	on   rare   plant
commun1t1es,	high	quality	Figure 2.  An example of lot clustering
sites,  or  endangered  species
identified by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.

0.	Whenever  possible,  open  space  shall  connect  with  existing or  potential open space lands on adjoining parcels and local or regional  recreational trails.
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements



301.4	Open Space. At least 40% of the net site acreage of a conservation subdivision shall be set aside as open space. The open space counted toward this set-aside shall not include parkways, landscape islands, wetlands , floodplains,  or other inherently unbuildable areas, and should meet the definition of open space provided in Article 9 of this Ordinance .

301.5	Curb and Gutter/Vegetated Swales. All streets with lot frontages of 100 feet or less must provide enclosed drainage and curb and gutter. The use of swales vegetated with native materials  is allowed for streets with lot frontages greater than 80 feet.

301.6	Sidewalks/Walkways.

A.	. Sidewalks or walkways are required on both sides of street rights-or-way,  unless there are no adjacent residential lots, in which case sidewalks are only  required on one side of the street.    Sidewalks must be separated from  moving traffic lanes.

B.	Walkways shall be provided to connect residential areas to common open space areas and to provide convenient pedestrian access throughout the conservation development and from the conservation development to other areas of the community .

C. When the proposed walkway system provides pedestrian access equal to or better than sidewalks along street rights-of-way, sidewalks along public streets are not required.

301.7	Street Light Spacing. Street lights shall be provided at every street intersection so as to adequately  light the intersection.  No maximum or minimum street light spacing is required for conservation subdivisions.   (Also see Section 310.4)

301.8	Natural Area, Buffer Protection and Conservation. Natural areas and buffers shall be preserved or restored on the site and will include native vegetation, wetlands, natural floodplain storage , or other valuable environmental or biological resources in accordance with the Natural Area Protection and Management Plan.

A.	An area designated for natural area and buffer protection purposes may be:

(1)	Preserved or restored to its natural state;
(2)  Designed and intended for the passive use and/or enjoyment of residents of
the proposed development, or
(3) Preserved in order to expand  and  extend  the  usefulness  of  existing preserved open space and natural areas.

B.	Dedicated buffers and natural areas shall be designed and located to conserve significant natural features located on the site .
(1)	A 10 foot conservation easement buffer shall be provided for all lots where the  rear yard  areas  abut a conservation  area owned  or  maintained  by the McHenry County Conservation District. The  buffer easement  shall  consist of  dense  native  vegetation,  fence,  or  berm  to  create  a  physical  barrier between the residential  use and Conservation  District property.
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements




C.    Dedicated   natural   areas   shal I   be   interconnected    with   open   space   areas,
greenways, and trails on abutting parcels where possible and appropriate .

 
Figure 3 - Examples of the preservation and conservation of natural features and open space in conservation design




 302  TRADITIONAL  NEIGHBORHOOD  DESIGN SUBDIVISIONS 	


302.1	Purpose. Traditional neighborhood design (TND) is a concept and practice that focuses on the creation of mixed use pedestrian oriented neighborhoods, similar to those found in the traditional urban core of Marengo. While TND subdivisions may support a mix of land uses, they are intended to be comprised primarily of single-family residential uses. A TND Neighborhood:

A.	Is compact;
B.	Is designed for the human scale;
C.   May provide a mix of uses, including residential, limited commercial, civic, and open spaces in close proximity to one another within the neighborhood;
D.	Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes;
E.	Incorporates a system of relatively narrow, interconnected streets  with sidewalks, bikeways, and transit that offer multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists;
F.	Retains existing buildings with  historical features;
G.	Incorporates significant environ mental features;  and
H.	Is consistent with the City of Marengo's Comprehensive Plan.

 
Figure 4 - Elements of Traditional Neighborhood Design, such as human scale, density, mix of housing
styles, and sidewalks
 
Article 3 - Desig11 Requirements





302.2 Street Layout. Streets should generally  be laid out in traditional grid pattern, maintaining the existing street grid, where present, and restoring any disrupted street grid where possible.





I
I








Figure 5 - Conventional subdivision design and street layout (left) and Traditional neighborhood design and street layout (right)



302.3 Blocks. Blocks shall be no less than 350 feet and no greater than 650 feet in length.  Block widths should generally range between 250 and 400 feet in depth.

302.4  Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets within TND
subdivisions (widths shall be consistent with Table 303.1 7).

302.5 Crosswalks. Crosswalks  are required at all collector and arterial intersections with sidewalks. Crosswalks shall be well lit and clearly marked with contrasting paving material  or  striping.

302.6 Street Light Spacing. Street lighting shall be provided along all streets within a TND subdivision. Generally  more, smaller  lights, as opposed to fewer,
high-intensity  lights,  should  be  used.    Street  lights
0
should  be  installed  on  both  sides  of  the  street  at
alternating intervals between 75 to 100 feet. The final spacing between street lights shall be based on a City approved photometric  plan.  The  minimum  light  level for pedestrian areas shall be 0.2 footcandles. (Also see Section  310.4)

302.7 Open Space.  At least 15% of the net buildable acreage of TND subdivisions must be open space.  The
open  space  counted   toward  this  set-aside  shall   not	Figure 6 - Street Light Spacing
include   right-of-ways,   parkways1      landscape   islands,
 
Article 3 - Design Req11irements



wetlands, floodplains, or other inherently unbuildable areas, and should meet the definition of open space provided in Article 9 of this Ordinance. All residences should be located within 1,4 mile of common open space.

 303 STREETS 	

303.1	Classification  of  Streets.   The developer shal I classify eac h street shown on the
Plat of Subdivision as to its functional use as follows:

A.	Arterial S treet. An arterial street is a major street that serves to c irculate traffic into, out of, or around the City, and which carries, or is intended to carry high volumes of traffic.

B.	Collector Street. A collector street is a street that serves to  carry traffic  from local streets to other collectors or arterial streets. It may provide limited access to some abutting properties.

C.	Lo cal/Trad itional Street.   A local street is a street whose  primary funct ion is to
provide access to abutting properties within traditional subdivision.

0. Business Access  and  Indu strial  Access  Streets.  Streets  providing access  to co mmercial or industrial property shall be classified as "Busines s Access Streets" or "Industrial Access Streets," respectively.

E.	Alley. An alley is a public or private way permanently reserved as a seco ndary means of access to abutting properties.


303.2 Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited. Based on unique site conditions, the City Council  may allow cu I-de-sacs consistent with standards	set forth  in  Sections 303. 17 and 303.18 . Preferred alternatives to traditional cu 1-de­ sacs are provided to the right and below .





Figur e 7 - Typical cul-de-sac (left) vs. crescent la yo ut (right). The crescent design (right) has the advantage of severa l stop signs, reduced driving speed, and discouraged through-traffic. Source: APA/PAS Report 4871488, Crossroads, H am let, Village, Town: Design  Characteri stics  of  Traditional  Neighborhoods,  Old and  New.
 
Article 3 - Design Req11ireme11ts


 


Figure 8 -  Examples of alternatives to typical cul-de-sac street design



303.3	Continuing Streets . All existing streets which terminate at the boundary of a proposed subdivision shall be continued into the subdivisions and be incorporated into the street pattern.

 
303.4	Dead-End Street. Dead-end streets are prohibited. However where a street is intended to extend beyond the perimeter of the subdivision to provide access to adjoining undeve loped land, a temporary "T-turnaround" may be provided. T­ turnarounds may be no longer than one lot in length and driveway access shall not be allowed to or from it.

303.5	Access to Adjacent Property. Access to adjacent properties in the form of stubbed roads is required. However, access  shall  not be required on a side of a tract where physical barriers would prevent a street from practically being continued, as where  the  boundary  of  the  tract  is a  creek  which

cou Id be crossed only with a bridge, or a  steep slope which could not  be graded to an acceptable slope for the street intended.
 


...  '




L
I



.L








Figure 9 - T-lurnaround illustration
 

303.6	Alleys. Alleys are permitted in traditional design neighborhoods and in conservation design neighborhoods when deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Alleys are required for single-family detached units with widths of 60 feet or less. Alleys must provide a minimum 16 foot wide vehicular pavement width. No building or accessory structure shall be located within 10 feet of the alley pavement. Alleys shall not terminate in dead ends and shall not intersect with arterial or collector streets.
 
Article  3 -Design  Requirements



 


Figure I0 - Example of permitted alley (left), prohibited alley without setbacks (right)



303.7	Half Streets.  Half streets are prohibited.

303.8	Private   Streets.   Private streets are prohibited.

303.9	Medians. The developer may elect to build streets, or portions thereof, with a landscaped median. See Sections  303.17  and  303.18  for  requirements.  Shade  trees shall be planted no greater than 40 feet on center. Supplemental landscaping may be required .    Cross-sections shall be widened as necessary.

303.10	Street Names. Each street shall have a unique name which will not duplicate any other in the City or adjoining township. Proposed streets which are in alignment with or join an existing street shall bear the name of the existing street. A loop street shall have only one street name for the entire loop. The developer should consider naming proposed streets, which connect to Historic Route 20, for the original settlers of the subject property. Street names are to be approved by the City of Marengo.

303.11	Intersection of Streets. Streets shal I be designed to intersect as nearly  as possible at right angles.   The minimum allowable angle of  intersection of two st reets  is
70 degrees. Whenever possible, the intersection of more than two streets shall be avoided . The first 100 feet into the intersection shall be limited to a maximum grade of two percent.

303.12	Street Jogs . Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shal I be prohibited.

303.13	Topography and Layout Streets shall be approximately related to the topography. Grades of streets shal I conform, to extent practical, to original contours.

303.14	Sight Distances . Sight distances shall be consistent with the IDOT Local Road Manual.
 
Article 3 -Design Requirements



303.15	Reverse Curves. - Reverse curves on arterials and collectors will be separated by a straight roadway section consistent with standards set out in the IDOT Local Road Manual.

303.16	Return Radii at Intersections and Corner Lots. Return radii at all intersections shall be measured to the back of curb with curb and gutter, and to the edge of pavement without curb and gutter. See Sections 303 .1 7 and 303.18.






















I





I
 
-	-




Table 1 -  Minimum Design Requirements for Urban/Traditional Neighborhood Subdivision Streets


Standard	
Arterial	Collector	
Local (Traditional)		Business & Industrial	
				Access	

Minimum Right-of-way	
100 feet	
70 feet	
60 feet	
70 feet

Travel Lane Width	
12 feet each	
12 feet each	
10 feet each	
12 feet


On-Street Parking	

Not Allowed	

Not Allowed	
One or Both Sides 8 feet each	

Not Allowed



Median/Turn Lane	
18 feet wide, painted and mounted or landscaped with  curb and gutter	
18 feet wide, painted and mounted or landscaped with curb and gutter	Optional with City Approval. 18 feet wide if provided, painted and mounted or landscaped with curb and gutter	
18 feet wide, painted and mounted or landscaped with curb and gutter
				


Pavement Width	24 feet minimum (without median or turning lane)	24 feet minimum (without median or turning lane)	

26-28 feet	24 feet
(w ithout median or turning lane)

Parkway Width	
25 feet on each side	
15 feet on each side	
10 feet each side	
15 feet on each side

Sidewalk	Both sides of the street 4 feet wide, 1 foot from ROW	Both sides of the street 4 feet wide , 1 foot from ROW	
Both sides of street 5 feet wide	Both sides of street or one side with bike path.4 feet wide

Curb  Radii	
35 feet	
25 feet	
25 feet (10 feet for alley)	
35 feet



Bike Lane	Off-Street bike lane required on one side (opposite side of sidewalk) .
8-12 feet wide	Off-Street bike lane required on one side (opposite side of sidewalk) .
8-12 feet wide	

Optional On-Street striped (4 feet minimum)	

Optional off-street bike lane.





 
Ci(y of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance
Teska Associates, Inc.
 

May 9, 2005
p,1ge 3 - JO
 
Table  1 - Minimum  Design  Requirements  for   Urban/Traditional Neighborhood  Subdivision  Streets  (cont.)




Standard	

Arterial	

Collector	

local (Traditional)	

Business & Industrial Access

Curb and Gutter	Required
M-6.12; B-6.12	Required
M-6.12; B-6.12	Required
M-6.12; M-3.12; B-6.12	Required
M-6. 12; B-6.12



Cul-de-sac	


Not Allowed	


Not Allowed	Allowed by exception only. Maximum length is 500 feet. Minimum  bulb  ROW diameter is 140 feet and pavement is 100'.	
Allowed by exception only. Maximum length is 500 feet. Minimum bulb diameter is 100 feet.




Alley	



Not intersecting	



Not  intersecting	Required  for single-family detached  units with  lot widths of 60 feet or less . Allowed  in all other circumstances.
16 feet wide pavement
required.	



Not Allowed
Horizontal Alignment
(Centerline Radius)	
467'	
46 7'	
250'	
467'
Vertical Alignment (Max./Min.)	
6%/0.5%	
8%/0.5	
8%/0.5	
6%/0.5%



Pavement Structure	8" BBC base 4" N70
Superpave , (2Yi" surface, 2 Yi binder) or 8" PC concrete with wire fabric and 4" aggregate sub- base	
7" BBC base, 4" NSO
Superpave, (2Y2" surface, 2Y2 binder) or 811  PC concrete with  wire  fabric and 4" aggregate sub-base	
6" BBC base 4" N50
Superpave, (2 Yi" s urface, 2Yi binder) or 6" PC concrete with  wire  fabric and 4" aggregate sub-base	
9'' BBC base 4" N70
Superpave, (2Y2" surface, 2Yi   binder) or 8" PC concrete with  wire fabric
and 4" aggregate sub-base


Notes:
BBC - Bituminous Base Course





 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance
Teska Associates, Inc.
 

May 9, 2005
Page 3 - 11
 



Figure 11 - Minimum Design Requirements for Urban/Traditional Arterial Roads


I


I_




 







25'
4
 
.(




'--------------'-------+---No Parking
24'-48' Minimum	25'	8-12'
 
1

Sidewalk
 
Parkway 	i
 
----- --- --->;<-----11
(\!Vrthout Tum Lane or Median)	Parkway	Off-Street
Bike Lane
 

 


Minimum
 
100'
 

-----------------4'
 
Right.of-Way

Arterial Road (Urban Section)




Figure 12 - Minimum Design Requirements for Urban/Traditional Collector Roads











I
l.	_	._l_No parJng
4'	15'	24' - 36'	15'	8-12'
 
idewalk-:
 
Par_kwa y_ ------2-M_o_v_i.n_g_Lan_es


Minimum 70
Right-Of-Way
 
--ti•:---P-ar_kwa_y_> <  Off-Street

Bike lane
 
 	Collector Road (Urban Section) 	
 
Figure 13- Minimum Design l equirements for Urbarifrc:iditiona[ Local Roads

 

-	- ---P.c_irking(One or Both Sides)

s'	1a	4'	26'-28'	I	1a	5'
 
Sidewalk	Parkway
 
<f----2 M_o_vi-ng_L_a, nes  ------->I<	Parkway	Sidewalk
Optional
Bike Lane	Min.60'
Right-Of-  -----------

Local Road (Urban Section)
 



Figure 14 - Minimum Design Requirements for Business and IndustrialAccess Roads



















 
4'	15'
 
Min.24'	15'	4'
 


Sidewa11'1
 
Parkway
 
2 Moving lanes	Parkway
 

SidewaU
 
Optional Bike Path
 
Min.70'
Right-Of-Way
 

Business and lndusbial Access (Urban Section)
 
-


Table 2 -  Minimum  Design  Requirements  for  Local/Conservation  Design for  Subdivisions  Streets



Standard	
Arterial	
Collector	
local Street		Business & Industrial	
					Access	
Minimum Right-of-way	
100 feet	
90 feet	
70 feet	
90 feet
Travel lane Width	
12 feet each	
12 feet each	
10 feet each	
12 feet
On-Street  Parking	
Not Allowed	
Not Allowed	One or Both Sides
8 feet each	
Not Allowed


Median/Turn Lane	18 feet wide, Painted and mounted or landscaped with curb and gutter	
18 feet wide, Painted and mounted or landscaped with curb and gutter	
Optional with City Approval. 18 feet wide if provided.	
18 feet wide, painted and mounted,	or landscaped with curb and gutter

Pavement Width	24 feet minimum (without median or turning lane)	
24 feet minimum (without
median or turning lane)	
26-28 feet	24 feet
(without median or turning
lane)
Parkway Width	10-28.5  feet on each side	
10-28.5 feet on each side	
10 feet each side	10-28.5
feet on each side

Sidewalk	One side of street
4 feet wide, 1 foot from ROW	One side of street
4 feet wide,  1 foot from
ROW	Both sides of street unless there is no residential frontage 4 feet wide	
Both s ides of street
4 feet wide

Curb  Radii	
35 feet	
25 feet	
15 feet (10 feet for alley)	
35 feet



Bike Lane	Off-Street bike lane required on one side (opposite side of sidewalk).
8-12 feet wide	
Off-Street bike lane required on one s ide (opposite side of sidewalk).
8-12 feet wide	

Optional On-Street stripped (4
feet minimum)	


Optional.













 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance
Teska Associates, Inc.
 

May 9, 2005
Page 3 - 14
 
Table 2 - Minimum Design Requirements for Local/Conservation Design for Subdivisions Streets (cont.)



Standard	
Arterial	
Collector	
Business & Industrial Local Street
Access

Shoulder Width	
6 feet on each side	
6 feet on each s ide	
4 feet on each s ide	
6 feet on each side

Roadway  Ditches (Both Sides)	
2' Depth	
2' Depth	
2' Depth	
2 ' Depth

Maximum Slopes	
3: 1
4:1	
3: 1
3: 1	
3: 1
3: 1	
3: l
3: 1


Cul-de-sac	

Not Allowed	

Not Allowed	Allowed by exception only . Maximum length is 500 feet. Minimum bulb diameter  is 100 feet.	Allowed by exception only. Maximum length is 500 feet.   Minimum bulb diameter is 100 feet.

Alley	
Not intersecting	
Not  intersecting	Allowed
16 feet wide  pavement	
Not Allowed

Curb and Gutter	If required by City, use standards set in Table 1 of this Ordinance	If required by City, use standards set in Table 1 of this Ordinance	
Require in clusters where  lot frontage s are less than 80 feet	If required by City, use standards set in Table 1 of this Ordinance
Horizontal Alignment (Centerline Radius)	
467 '	
467 '	
250'	
467'
Vertical Alignment (Max./Min.)	
6%/0.5%	
8%/0.5	
8%/0.5	
6%/.5%




Pavement Structure		
8" BBC base 4" N70
Superpave,  (2Yz" surface, 2Vz   binder) or
811  PC concrete with wire fabric and 4" aggregate sub-base	
7" BBC base, 3" NSO
Superpave  (2Y2 11    surface,  2Y2
binder)  or
8" PC concrete with wire fabric and 4" aggregate sub- base or 17" Aggregate Base, 3" N50 Superpave	6" BBC base, 4" N50
Superpave (2Yi" s urface, 2Yz binder)   or
8" PC concrete with wire fabric and 4" aggregate
s ubbase or 12" Aggregate
base, 4" N50 Superpave (2Yz"
Surface, 2Yz  Binder)	
9" BBC base 4" N70
Superpave  (2 Y2"  s urface,
2:/i  binder)
or
8" PC co ncrete with wire fabric and 4" aggregate sub- base

Notes: BBC - Bituminous Base Course



 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance Teska Associates, l1tc.
 
May 9, 2005
Page 3 - 1 5
 
Figure '1 5- Minimum Design Requirements for Rural Arteria l Roads
I	?l


(
/
 
<"'""'°',,,.	/\')
<'
 	1 1	. 	





<---------(	---->!)I
 


 




24'-48'
 










25'
--- --- I
 










8-12'
 
k	Parkway
 
Parkway	I    Off-Street
Bike lane
 

100
Min imum Right-Of-Way

Arterial Road (Rural Section)



Figure 16 - Minimum Design Requirements for Rural Collector Roads



















 
4'	15'
<     idewaJk  l	Parkway
 





Min.90'
Right-Of-Way
 
15'
 
8-12'
Off-Street
Bike Lane
 

 






City of itfarengo Subdh•isilm Ordi11once
Tesko Associ ates, Inc.
 
Collector Road (Rural Section)
 






May 9, 2005
Page 3 - 16
 
Figure 17- Minimum Design Requirements for Rural Local Roads












- ;





 
4'	1()'
Parkway
 
4'


Optional
Bike lane	Min.70
 
10'	4'
Parkway	Sidewall<
(both side;)
 
'<---------
 

Right-Of Way
 

Local Road (Rural Section)



Figure ·1 s - Minimum Design Requirements for Rural Business and Industrial Access Roads









Q I	o
II
 	J 	


 



4'	15'
 



Min.24'
 
No Parking
 


,r--	1_5_· --}I	4'
 
r	Parkway
SidewaJk/
Optional Bike Path
I
'<------
 

2 Moving Lanes (Optional Turning)   i

Mi n. 90'
Right-Of-Way
 

Parkway	rSidewalk
 

I IL.._	B_us_in_e_ss_· a nd_ ln_ d_ u_st r_ i·a l Acces_s_ (R_u _ ra l Se_ cc_:ti_ on_ )		.




 
Ci r of ;lfar e11gu Subdivision  Ordinance Tes/;a Associates, foe.
 
Mily 9, 2005
P1we 3 - J 7
'
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements


304	BICYCLE CIRCULATION


Bicycle circulation shall be accommodated  on streets and/or on dedicated  bicycle paths.   Where feasible, any existing bicycle routes thought the site shall be preserved and enhanced.   Facilities for bicycle travel may include 8-12 foot off-street bicycle paths and separate, striped, 4 foot bicycle lanes on streets .  Bicycle facilities shall comply with standards contained  in the "Guide for the  Development of Bicycle Facilities," AASHTO,  1999, as amended .

305	LOTS


305.1	Lot Arrangement.   Lots shall be laid out in an efficient and uniform manner to
avoid the creation of odd shaped lots and unusable remnants of land

305.2	Auto Access. Every lot shall be provided direct automobile access from a publicly dedicated street or  alley. No lot shall provide direct automobile access to arterial or co Ilector streets .

305.3	Double Frontage. Double frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back onto a collector or arterial street. Such lots must have an additional depth of at least 20 feet in order to allow for an easement sufficient to contain a landscape berm. No fence, temporary, or permanent structure may be provided in within this easement.

305.4	Lot Dimensions . Lot dimensions, areas and building setback lines shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Corner lots shall be of sufficient size to provide for building setback lines on each street frontage not less than the depth of the required front yard and corner yard  specified  in the  Zoning Ordinance .  Additional width or length shall be provided for lots abutting a collector or arterial road, McHenry County Conservation District property, a flood hazard area, wetlands, stream or other similar feature.

305.5	Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the street and extend in a straight line to the rear lot line or radial to street line when it intersects a curved street right-of-way .

306	LANDSCAPING


306.1	Street Trees. A minimum of one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof, shall be required (always round up to the nearest whole number when fraction of tree is required) . Trees can be clustered and do not need to be evenly spaced, but maximum separation is still 40 feet. Trees should be located in parkways between the sidewalk and the curb. Trees should be located so as not to interfere with underground or overhead utilities. No tree shall be planted within 20 feet of a sanitary or storm sewer manhole or catch basin that is located outside the pavement of the street.

306.2	Plant Type. The developer shall select trees and shrubs that  are appropriate  for the location . Plant types recommended in Appendix F - Street Tree List are presumed to be  appropriate;  while  those   listed  as  "unacceptable"  are  presumed   inappropriate.   In
 
Article 3 - Design Requireme11ts



selecting trees that are not on the list, the developer shall submit information to the City
staff for review and approval and shal I consider:

A.	The ge neral suitability for the climate and soil conditions of this area, especially
its hardiness and growth rate,

B. The ease of maintenance and resistance to pests and diseases ,

C.  The tolerance of urban conditions, particularly road salt and air pollution,

1.	The  suitability  of  its branching and foliage,  especially  the  potential  for  low branching that might interfere with use of the streets by motor vehicles, and

E.	The availability from  local nurseries.

306.3	Tree Preservation. Tree preservation is addressed 1n Section 6.24 of the City Code .

306.4	Tree Survey . For the purpose of complying with the above requirements, the developer shall submit with this Preliminary  Plat a tree survey  showing trees that meet the above requirements.  Where the  number of trees that would meet the above requirement is so extensive as to impose an unfair burden on the developer, the developer may indicate the wooded areas by showing the approximate perimeter of the trunks constituting such an area and listing the types and sizes of trees within that perimeter. In any event the developer will clearly note any trees that meet the standards set out in 306.2 above and that lie within  25  feet  of  any  right-of-way  or  within  any utility  easement.

306.5	Transformer and other Public Utility Ground Mounted Fixtures Screening. Al I transformers and other public utility fixtures shall be screened from view at the public right-of-way  by a dense evergreen  hedge at  least as tall  as the tallest  piece of equipment.

307	NATURAL AREA  PROTECTION  AND MANAGEMENT


307.1	Natural Landscape Sensitivity Plan.  Priority shal I be placed on site design that maintains natural drainage patterns  and watercourses. Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create flooding conditions or degradation  in water quality  for adjacent or downstream  property.  A  Natural Landscape Sensitivity  Plan (NLS) must be prepared to insure protection of the natural contours and vegetation on a development site.

A .   The NLS Plan shall address the following requirements :

(1)	Site development shal I be fitted to the topography and soil so as to create the least potential for vegetation loss and site disturbance;
(2)	Vegetation  removal  shall  be  limited  to  that  amount  necessary  for  the
development of the site;
(3)	Vegetation native to the site or plant community shall be restored in areas affected by construction activities . Temporary  vegetation ,  sufficient  to stabilize the soil, may be required on all disturbed areas as needed  to prevent soil erosion.
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements



(4)	Site design shall minimize the disturbance and loss of vegetation .

B.	The NLS Plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the nature and extent of the  work  and  restoration  efforts  proposed.    The  NLS  Plan  shall  include  the following    information:
(1)	Existing contours of the site, as well as finished contours to be achieved by
grading.	Contours shall be sufficiently detailed to define the topography over the entire site;
(2)	Delineation of areas to be cleared during development activities;
(3)	Restoration of vegetation proposed for all surfaces to be exposed during development activities, including any dredged, filled, or graded areas;
(4)	The location and extent of natural area buffers and  method  of implementation.

C.	All approved measures to mitigate the loss or impact to the natural landscape shall become conditions for approval of the project.   In addition, all approved NLS measures shall be carried out prior to final issuance of the building permit or  concurrently with the installations of site improvements in the case of a final plat of subdivision.

D.	The NLS must be approved by City retained consultants or staff.

307.2	Natural Area Management. Natural areas and buffers in a conservation subdivision may be owned by the City, an association, a land trust or other conservation organization  recognized  by the City, or may  remain in private ownership .

A.	Public Ownership and Management. The City may, but shall not be required to, accept dedication in the form of fee simple ownership of the designated natural area or buffer.

B.	Homeowners Association.  Restricted natural areas may be held in common ownership by a homeowner's association,  community  association,  or  other similar legal entity, or the individual members of a condominium association as tenants - in-common . The City's attorney shall determine that the associations by-laws or code of regulations specify the following  requirements:

(1)	Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all purchasers of lots in the development.
(2)	The  association   shal I  be  responsible  for  maintenance,  control,   and insurance of the common areas, included the dedicated natural areas. The association shall notify the City of its officers, providing contact  information .

In the event  the Homeowners  Association  fails to maintain the Common Areas or other areas or items the Association is required to maintain, the City  of Marengo shall have the right, but not the obligation to take over management of common areas. Any and all costs incurred by the City of Marengo shall be reimbursed upon written request to the Association . In the event the City exercises its rights pursuant to this provision it shall be granted the rights and remedies described in the declaration of covenants or Homeowners Association bylaws in a form approved  by the City.
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements




C.	Creation of Conservation Easements . A property owner can  create  a conservation easement restricting the use of the property to protect or preserve its natural features. If the property owners chooses to grant a conservation easement to a public entity, that entity can accept this grant provided that:

(1)	The provisions of the conservation easement are acceptable to the City; and
(2)	Continuing maintenance and management responsibilities are established .

307.3	Landscape Management and Maintenance Plan (LMMP). A Landscape Management and Maintenance Plan must be prepared to ensure that all common landscape areas that are the responsibi I ity of a homeowner' s association are kept in a healthy growing condition in accordance with commonly accepted landscape nursery performance standards for maintenance . The LMMP shall address the following requirements:

A.	A qualified consultant will periodically visit the property to monitor the health of the plants, naturalized open space areas and preserved or re-created wetland areas.
I	B.  Debris Management:	All  trash , brush, grass clippings, debris, etc. shall  be
periodically removed from the created detention ponds.
I	C.  Stormwater Control Structures:  Al I storm water control structures and si It basins etc. shal I be cleaned out and/or repaired every two weeks to prevent clogging.
This will be especially important in early spring and late fall during construction activities. Dammed water can drown certain wetland plants if not rectified quickly .

1.	Sediment and Soil Erosion Control Management: All sediment and soil erosion control devices, structures, and features, etc. are to be installed as required by the sediment and soil erosion control plan, and function properly at all times. Any deficiencies shall be corrected immediately. Twice monthly  erosion control visits should be completed until the plantings have stabilized the site.

(1)	The  area  of  disturbance  on-site  at  any  one  time  shall  be  Iimited  to  20 acres. An additional 20 acres  (not to  exceed  a  maximum  of 40  acres  at any one time)  may be disturbed  if  necessary  for earth balance.

(2)	The City Engineer may approve a larger area for disturbance if (i) the developer adequately demonstrates the need for a larger  area,  (ii) the City Engineer finds that sufficient temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures can be maintained and (iii) and the area of disturbance is the smallest practical area at any one time and still minimizes the risk of sediment being introduced into site runoff  and carried off-site.

(3)	All disturbed areas shall be stabilized within fourteen days of final grading or when left idle for more than seven days, excluding maintained haul roads, sediment basins, site runoff storage facilities,
 
Article 3 - Desig11 Requirements



utility   corridors   less   than   20  feet   in  width,   and   any   permanently stabi I ized areas.



E.	Prescribed Burn Management: The detention ponds and preserved wetlands shall undergo periodic burns after the second growing season or as fuel allows. These burns help to reduce undesirable weedy species and encourage native species.  These burns should only be performed by a qualified burn contractor.

F.	Invasive Non-native Weeds: Purple loosestrife,  reed  canary  grass,  common reed, willow, buckthorn, thistle and other invasive weeds shall  be controlled by the following: Mechanically, through the use  of  mowing  no  sooner  than  the third week of July; fire (as fuels  allow);  application  of  herbicide;  or  a combination of these methods as deemed appropriate by the consultant.

G.	Protection of Detention Ponds and Open Space Areas: Open space areas and constructed detention ponds shal I have construction fencing placed around the limits of a no construction zone. No equipment or materials shall be stored within the no construction zone and no equipment shall be driven within it.

H.	An annual report based on the above maintenance and management activities shall be submitted to the City by the spring of each year following the completion of the management tasks . The report will include a review of compliance with performance standards, and the proposed actions to reduce any shortfalls .


308	SIGNS


The developer shall furnish and erect all necessary signs, including street signs, as designated by the City Engineer, Police Department or City staff. All signs shall be of a type approved by the City Engineer, Police Department or City staff. The developer will submit a signage plan to be included with the final engineering plans which fully address the above. All signs shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 16 (entitled "Signs") of the City Code.

309	EASEMENTS


309.1	Easements.  The  following  easements  shall  be  provided  where  appropriate  and
identified on the Plat of Subdivision.

A.	Utility Easements. Easements shall be provided for utility services including but not limited to gas, telephone, cable, and electric.

B.	Municipal Easements. Easements shall be provided for municipal or public services including water, sewer, and storm sewer. A municipal utility easement for water or sewer shall not be placed in a side or rear yard.

C.	Drainage Easements. When a subdivision is traversed by a waterway, intermittent stream or drainageway, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage easement conforming substantially with the Iines of same. Such easement shal I be of
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements



sufficient size to protect said waterway , intermittent stream or drainage way, and to permit ingress and egress for maintenance.

D. Street Construction and Maintenance Easements. Street construction  and maintenance easements shall be provided adjacent to dedicated streets whenever additional width is necessary to meet the maximum earth slope requirements contained in the Schedule of Minimum Design Requirements for Subdivision Streets in the City of Marengo (Section 608). Street, construction and maintenance easements shall be separate and distinct from utility easements and the two shall not be combined. See Article 8 of this Ordinance for certification required on Final Plat to permit crossing of other easements.

E.	Greenway, Bikeway, and Pedestrian Path Easement. Where a development includes or proposes to include a greenway, bikeway and/or pedestrian path easement, the developer shall, if the property is not dedicated to the City, or a public or quasi­ public entity which accepts the same, provide an easement to allow the City and/or County to maintain the space in the event that it is not properly maintained and to charge the benefited properties.

F.	Landscape Berm Easement. Where a development is required to provide reverse frontage lots with a landscape berm separating the residential  lots from  the  street, the developer shall provide for the maintenance of the material.
I
309.2	limitations on the Use of Easements.

A.	No construction of structures, dams, embankments or channels (except as indicated on the Engineering Drawings), and no planting of trees, shrubbery or other flow­ impeding vegetation, which hinders the flow of water or otherwise inhibits the intended purpose, shall be allowed within any drainage or stormwater retention or detention easements.

B.	Municipal  utility  easements  must  be  separate  and  distinct  from  public  utility
easements and the two shall not be combined.

C.   A  septic  limitation  line  shall  be  shown  in conjunction  with  each  drainage  and
stormwater retention or detention easement demarcation line.

309.3	Maintenance of Easements.

A.	Drainage and stormwater retention and detention easements shall be adequately maintained so  as to  provide for  removal  of accumulation  of vegetation,  silt, debris or other material which  may interfere with the flow  characteristics  of drainage ways or the essential features of retention or detention faci Iities. The removal shal I be undertaken at least annually.

B.	.  Pedestrian way easements shall be maintained to permit their continued use.
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements



C Provisions shal I be made through a homeowners assoc1at1on, deed restrictions, covenants or other acceptable means to maintain all easements in accordance with Sections 307.3.



310	ELECTRIC AND UTILITIES

310.1	Coordination. The developer shall keep all utility, i.e., gas, electric, cable and communication entities appraised of the progress on the subdivision, and coordinate construction activities with theirs. If underground utility installation cannot be completed prior to final grading and seeding, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to restore the ditches and turf following installation of underground utilities. Utility companies shall not dig trenches across any streets after placement of the aggregate base course unless complete restoration., meeting the approval of the City Engineer, is provided.

310.2	Lines Underground.

A.	New Development. All electric, telephone,  television  and  other  communication lines, both main and service connections servicing new developments , shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way and installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services. Conduits and/or cables shall be placed within the easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services . All transformer and above ground utility boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.

B.	Existing Streets  and Service .  Lots that abut existing easements or public rights-of­ away, where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service, connections have previously been installed, may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead Iines, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground . In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a street widening, or an extension of service, or other such condition occur as a result of the subdivision and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground.

310.3	Pole Placement. Whenever overhead lines are permitted, consistent with or as an exception to the above standards, the placement and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines. Alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations along horizons; clearing swaths through wooded areas shall be avoided by selective cutting and a staggered alignment; trees shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles and the alignments; and alignments shall follow rear lot lines and other alignments .

310.4	Street Lighting. Every development shall provide street lighting in accordance with the following standards:

A.	Every street  intersection  shall have at least one streetlight placed in such a manner as to adequately  light the intersection.
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements



B.  Streetlights shall be installed and operable before occupancy will be granted on any
improved lots.

All street lighting shall be installed and maintained by ComEd using standard ComEd fixtures and poles. Where there is a choice of poles, fixtures and size of luminaire, the City shall make the final selection . Poles made of wood are not acceptable to the City. The City will consider the use of alternative decorative custom light fixtures, only when the homeowners association assumes responsibility for maintenance. Final subdivision plats, as approved by the Village Board, shall be sent to ComEd for approval of street lighting placement. The final street lighting plan shall also be reviewed by the City of Marengo to determine that adequate light levels are maintained and do not create excessive glare or light in residential areas .

C.   All costs associated with the installation of the ComEd street lighting, equipment
shall be paid by the developer.

D.	All  streetlights  shall be on at dusk and off at dawn .  Streetlights shall be controlled
by a photo cell mounted on top of the luminaire.

E.	The height and shielding of lighting standards shall provide proper lighting without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents.

F.	Streetlight standards shall be installed at least 10 feet from the edge of pavement for a rural section, or 30 inches behind, the back of curb for an urban section .

G.  Lighting for  safety  shall  be provided along walkways,  between buiIdings and  in parking areas that have or could be expected to have significant night traffic.

H.  Spacing of streetlights shall comply with the standards set forth in sections 301.7 and 302.6 of this Ordinance.

l.	Compliance with IDOT lighting standards for local roads.

310.5	Permits for Utility Services. Permits must be obtained from the governing body for the installation of communication, electric power, gas and other utility services, before any installation is started, and the City is to be informed in writing of above . Installation of all utilities must fully comply with all utility ordinances of the City.



311 IMPACT ASSESSMENT



311.1 Flood Hazard Area. If any portion of a lot falls within the boundaries of a Flood Hazard Area, as; identified by the Zoning Ordinance or other duly adopted maps or ordinances, or if a portion of a lot is traversed by an intermittent stream and/or waterway that portion of such lot shall be protected by a drainage easement and shall be excluded from the buildable area of that lot. When this situation results in the separation of the buildable area of a lot from the street to which it has access, provisions shall be made for the installation of an adequate drainage structure, and its constru ction shall be provided for as a condition of Plat approval.
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements




311.2	Critical Soils. If any portion of a lot falls within the boundaries of critical soils as identified by the Soil Standards Manual for Waste Disposal Systems, that portion of such lot shall be designated as restricted for use of septic systems unless evidence can be produced to demonstrate that the soils can be managed by appropriate common engineering practices which would render the soils suitable. Soils removal  and  replacement  and,  the  use  of curtain drains, are not generally considered a suitable management practice. See the McHenry County  "Groundwater  Resources Management  Plan" for additional standards.

311.3	Traffic Impacts. No subdivision plat shall be approved if its development will increase traffic to the extent that a lower level of service results, unless the proposal includes measures to mitigate such increased traffic. The maximum amount of traffic that will be permitted in the City shall be the Institute of Traffic Engineers' Level of Service C.

311.4	Snowplowing. The developer is responsible for plowing any street that the City  has not accepted into the street system. The developer is responsible for any damage that may occur as a result of such plowing.

312	CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS


The following specifications shall govern, subdivision street construction in the City of Marengo and its 1.5 mile planning jurisdiction. Wherever reference is made to Standard Specifications, it shall mean the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, adopted July 1, 1994 by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT), as amended. Whenever reference is made to the IDOT Local Roads Manual, it shall mean Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Administrative Manual (latest edition) . Wherever reference is made to Design Requirements, it shall mean the Schedule of Minimum Design Requirements for Subdivision Streets in the City of Marengo (Section 312 of this document) .

312.1	Excavation and Grading. Streets within the subdivision shall be excavated true to line and grade in accordance with applicable articles of Section 202 of  the  Standard Specifications. Whenever unsuitable material is encountered in the sub-grade, it shall be removed and replaced with granular sub base  material  furnished  and  installed  in accordance with the applicable articles of Section 311 of the Standard Specifications.  The City Engineer or City staff shall inspect and approve the  sub-grade prior to construction  of the base course.

312.2	Base Courses. Base courses shall be constructed of a type, width and  compacted
thickness shown on the Design Requirements and in accordance with the following:

A.	Bituminous Base Course shall be constructed in accordance with Section 355 of the Standard Specifications and the supplemental specifications referencing superpave mix design .

B .  Aggregate  Base Course Type B shall be constructed in accordance with Section 351 of the Standard Specifications, and the material used shall meet the requirements of Subsection 1004.04 of the  Standard  Specifications  gradation  CA-6  Crushed Gravel or stone .
 
Article 3 -Design Requirements



312.3	Bituminous Surface Courses. Bituminous surfaces shall be constructed of a type, width and compacted thickness shown on the Design Requirements and in accordance with the  following:

A.	Bituminous Concrete Binder Course, Superpave and Bituminous Concrete Surface Course sha l I be constructed in accordance with Section 406 of the Standard Specifications and the Supplemental Specifications  referencing  Superpave  Mix Design.

312.4	Bituminous Surface. Bituminous surface on an aggregate base shall not be constructed until the aggregate  base has been completed and in place on the street for one winter season. This requirement  may be waived by the City Engineer or City staff, and the bituminous  binder course  may be constructed  under the  following conditions:

A.	The aggregate base is sufficiently compacted as demonstrated by methods required by the City Engineer or City staff.

8.	The developer agrees to repair, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, any areas of the binder course which show evidence of distress or failure prior to construction of the  surface course .  In any case, immediately prior to placing the binder and surface courses, the aggregate base course  shall  be prepared  in accordance  with  Section 3 51 of the Standard Specifications.

The City Engineer or City staff shall inspect and approve the  base course prior to placement of the binder and surface courses. This may be accomplished by methods required by the City Engineer. Where  "Conservation Sections" are utilized, the bituminous surface course shall be edged with tapered aggregate shoulders, 4 feet in width, and constructed in accordance with applicable articles of Section  481 of the Standard Specifications.

The binder course or surface  shall  be applied only when the  minimum temperature is 40 degrees and rising, and when frost is not present in the ground.

312.5	Concrete Pavement. Concrete pavement shal I  be  constructed  to  a  width  and thickness shown on the Design Requirements and in accordance with applicable articles  of Section  420 of  the  Standard  Specifications.

312.6	Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks 1 foot in from right-of-way shall be installed with a minimum aggregate base of 4 inches of Type B 100 percent crushed,  with  4  inches  of Portland cement concrete, with a minimum 6 bag mix.  Sidewalk  ramps shall be constructed of the type and at the location approved  by the City Engineer and as required by the State. The developer may substitute, with the approval of the City  Council, an  off-site  pedestrian trail as an alternative to a sidewalk on local streets. See Sections 303 . 16 and 303.1 7 of this document  for  sidewalk  width  requirements.

312.7	Curb and Gutter. Except where  a proposed street would continue an existing street constructed with a conservation section,  and  the  City  determines  that  the  continuation  of that section is appropriate, all streets shall be improved with combination concrete curb and gutter as shown on the  Design Requirements, and it shall be constructed in accordance with Section 606 of the Standard Specifications .
 
Article 3 - Design Requirements




312.8	Drainage. Streets with a "rural section" will generally have an "open" drainage system, consisting of roadside ditches and culverts, while streets with a "urban section" will generally have a "closed" drainage system consisting of storm sewer and curb inlets. All ditches, culverts and storm sewers shall be sized and inlet spacing determined on the basis of calculations required in Article 8 of this Ordinance or as hereinafter specified. All drainage structures shall be in place before surfacing material is installed.

A.	Open Drainage System. Cross-road culverts  shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches or equivalent, with metal end sections, and-  shall  run  from  ditch  line  to ditch, line. Driveway culverts shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches or equivalent with metal end sections, and be of such, length so as to adequately span the driveway. Culverts shall meet the requirements of Appendix G of this Ordinance and shal I be installed in accordance with Section 542 of the Standard Specifications .

B. Closed Drainage System . Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 12 inches shall meet the: requirements of Appendix-G of this Ordinance  land shall be installed in accordance with Section 550 of the Standard Specifications. Inlets, manholes and catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with Section 602 of the Standard Specifications . These drainage structures shall be of such diameter so as to adequately accommodate the number and configuration of  pipes  entering  and leaving the structure. Frames and grates shall meet the requirements of Appendix G of this  Ordinance.

312.9	Topsoil and Seeding. Prior to acceptance of any street, topsoil shall be placed on all unpaved areas within the right-of-way , in accordance with Article 211 of the Standard Specifications . Prior to acceptance of any street, any disturbed area within the right-of-way shall be smoothed by dragging, and planted with a seed mixture appropriate to the time of year in accordance with the recommendations of the USDA, Natural Resource Conservation District, for example hydroseeding or straw covering.

312.10	Trench Backfill. Whenever the excavation is within 2 feet of existing, proposed or future street, parking areas, driveways, or other paved areas, the trench shall be backfilled with approved selected granular material, compacted in place. The top 12 inches of the backfill shall be filled with road gravel or crushed stone and maintained as a temporary surface for the normal use of the area. Trench backfill shall consist of selected granular backfill Type CA-6 (100 percent crushed), and shall be compacted in place to 95 percent of maximum density at optimum moisture as, determined by the Standard Proctor Test.
 
Article 4	 	
WATER AND WASTEWATER  SYSTEMS




401 WATER SUPPLY

	General. Any new development and any lot created pursuant to this Ordinance s hall be served with a properly approved and functioning water supply system. Any new development or lot created pursuant to this Ordinance and lying within the City, shall be connected to the City water system at the development's expense. Depending on the number of residential dwelling units proposed, residential subdivisions outside the City, but within the City's 1.5 mile planning jurisdiction , shall be connected to an existing public water supply system at the development's expense if public water  service is available within the following distances:

Table 3 - Public Water Supply





I

I	Community water sources are prohibited within the  1.5 mile jurisdi ction of the City.
Whenever a development is not required to connect to the City water system , and does
not propose to connect to the same, the developer shall provide service from individual wells in accordance with the McHenry County Department of Health regulations and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Any development that lies within the 1.5 mile planning jurisdiction, and which is not connected to the City water system, shall provide through restrictive covenants that property owners will connect to the system when City water is available to any portion of the tract as it was constituted prior to its subdivision at their expense. Any proposals to extend or connect to the existing public water system, or to use private wells, shall be approved by the appropriate governmental entities.

	Capacity. The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow based on the completed deve lopment. The demand rates for all uses shall be considered in computing the total system demand. Where fire protection is provided, the system shall be capable of providing the required fire demand plus the required domestic demand . The average daily residential and nonresidential demand shall be computed in accordance with Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code. Fire protection shall be furnished at the developer's expense for any developm ent connected to the municipa l water supply system.
 
Article 4 - Water and Wastewater Systems


401.3	System Design.

A.	General. Except as provided below, system design and placement shall comply with the construction specifications set forth in the Standard Specifications  for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, May 1996 (or latest addition), as amended, by Illinois Society of  Professional Engineers (ISPE), Illinois Municipal League and AGC of Illinois, referred to in this Article as the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer. All testing and disinfection shall be in accordance with current American Water Works Association  (AWWA) standards or such other standards as may be imposed by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) or ISPE.

B. Specific. The water distribution system shall be designed to provide water meeting or exceeding the standards set out  in Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code. Water mains shall have a minimum diameter of 8 inches. Water mains shall whenever practical be located between the sidewalk and the curb on the north or west side of the street with the top of pipe at least 6 feet from the finished grade. Watermains shall be extended the entire length of each street and connected to the existing water distribution or terminated with a line valve and hydrant. Dead end watermains within a development shall be looped as directed by the City Engineer. Valves (open left) shall be located no further apart than 800 feet in residential areas and 600 feet in other areas. Two valves shall be provided at every "T" intersection of water main. Three valves shall be provided at every "X" intersection of a watermain. Valves shall be placed so that the closure of a maximum of three valves is necessary to shut down any point in the system. Air release valves shall be provided at high points. Valve vaults, of a type specified in the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer, shall be provided for all valves except fire hydrant auxiliary valves. The word "Water" shall be permanently imprinted on the face of the valve box, and valve vault covers. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the size, type and installation of any water main materials shall meet the specifications set out in the City of Marengo Water Main and Sanitary Sewer Materials List, in Appendix G.
I	C.   Water  Services.  Water  services  shall  use  the  size  and  materials  set  out  in
Appendix G ., In the event the City approves service using a larger size than.
provided therein, the connection: shall be made by use of  proper fittings to protect the main. Services greater than 2.5 inches shall be of ductile iron and shall be tapped under pressure, with a tapping sleeve and vault. Multiple taps and the  use of a branch gooseneck  or "tree connections":  are not allowed.
J	Customer  water  service  lines  shall  be  stubbed  from  the  water  main  to  the nearest  private  property  lot  Iine. Water  services  shal I  have  at  least  5  feet  5
inches, but no more than 6 feet, of cover. Every building on a lot served with water shall have. its own separate water service with curb stop/curb box, and taps should be directly into the respective mains.

D.	Tapping Requirements. New mains shall be directly tapped into the water  main by way of pressurized tap using all cast iron fittings with the valve being located inside a manhole encompassing the entire valve, tap connections and main. The main will be tested by the developer and witnessed by  either  the  Fire Department	Inspector, Building Commissioner, or Superintendent of Water/Sewer  Department.
 
Article 4 - Water and Wastewater Systems



E.	Permits . No water system construction may begin without a va l id public water supply construction permit issued by the !EPA. No water  system  improvement may be operated without a valid operating permit issued by the !EPA.

401.4 Fire Hydrants. Hydrants shal I be spaced to provide necessary fire fl ow. Hydrants shall be placed not more than 300 feet apart. Hydrants shal I be located at the ends of line. Valves of full line size and a 10 foot section of pipe with a plug shall be provided after hydrants at the end of all dead end lines that may be extended in the future. Fire hydrants shall have a 6 foot bury with final landscaping grade being not more than 2 inches higher or lower of the bury line on each hydrant and the minimum distance from the landscaping grade to the center of the: steamer nozzle being 18 inches and 24 inches maximum . Notwithstanding anything to the- contrary, the size, type and installation of any hydrant shall meet the specifications set out in the City of Marengo Water Main and Sanitary Sewer Materials list in Appendix G .


1	402    SANITARY   SEWERS 	

402.1	General. Any new development and any lot treated pursuant to this Ordinance shall be served with a properly approved and functioning wastewater disposal system . Any new, development or lot created pursuant to this Ordinance and lying within the City shall be connected to the City sanitary sewer system at the development's expense . Depending on the number of residential dwelling units proposed,  residential subdivisions outside the City but within the City's 1 .5 mile planning jurisdiction shall be connected to the City sanitary sewer system at the development's expense if sanitary
sewer service is available within the following distances:

Table 4 - Sanitary Sewer Service

Size of Development	Distance
1 unit	200 feet
1-4 units	400 feet
5-15 units	800 feet
16-50 units	1,500 feet
More than 50 units	2,500 feet

In determining whether City sanitary sewer service is available, the City will consider the costs of upgrading existing mains and constructing or replacing lift stations, and the extent to which any excessive costs can be recaptured within a reasonable period of time . Whenever a development is not required to connect to the City sanitary sewer system, but proposes to comply with this Ordinance by service from  a community sewer source, the system shall be designed consistent with this Article. Whenever a development is not required to connect to the City sewer system, and does not propose to connect to the  same or provide service through a community sewer system, the developer shall provide an individual subsurface disposal system in accordance with the McHenry County Department of Health regulations. All proposals for new public sanitary, sewer systems, or extensions to existing public sewer systems, or the use of community sanitary sewer system or individual subsurface disposal systems, shall be approved by the appropriate government entities.

402.2	Sanitary Design and  Placement.
 
Article 4 - Water and Wastewater Systems




A.	General. The sanitary  sewer system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow based on  complete development in accord with the  standards  set out  in Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code . System design and placement shall comply with the specification set forth in the Standard  Specifications for Wat e r and Sewer. The sewers shall be designed in such a way as to insure a minimum velocity of flow of 2 feet per second and a maximum velocity of flow of 8 feet per second. Future extension of sanitary sewers to serve adjacent property must be addressed. This includes sewer depths and sizes.

B.	Sanitary Sewer Materials. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, sanitary sewer materials shall meet the standards set out in the City of Marengo Water Main and Sanitary Sewer Materials list (See Appendix G).

C. Sanitary Sewer Alignment. The sanitary sewer manhole frames are to be located in the center of the street or be located as close to the property lines as practical.

D.	Manholes. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in direction or pipe size and be not more than 400 feet apart . Manholes shall be as specified in Appendix G . Drop manholes shall be required where the elevation of the invert pipe is hydraulically required to be a minimum of 2 feet above the invert of the manhole. In all other cases, the influent pipe invert shall be no more than 6 inches above the manhole invert.  The manhole cover shall have the word "Sanitary" permanently imprinted on the face of the cover.

E.	Lift Stations. Whenever a development proposes to use a lift station to serve part or all of the  lots in the development, the lift station shall be designed to the satisfaction of the City and offered to it for dedication. The City may refuse to accept the dedication where it finds that the development will probably  be served without the use of the lift station at some time during the planning period. Any lift station shall be housed in a building which is compatible in, design with the nearby uses and which is large enough to accommodate any required equipment. Each lift station shall, include a flow meter approved by the City Engineer. Every lift station shall include an emergency backup power supply using diesel or natural gas, and an extra pump. Each station shall be connected to the City: in such a manner that the City is electronically notified if the pumps are not functioning.

F.	Service Lines. Sanitary sewer services shall be a minimum diameter of 6 inches and constructed with  material as specified  in Appendix  F. The  minimum slope for any diameter service line shall meet or exceed the State of Illinois Plumbing Code. Services constructed as part of a new main sewer extension shall be connected to the main sewer  using a wye.  Eight  inch diameter  services  or larger may be connected at a manhole when approved by the Superintendent  of Water/Sewer. Department clean outs shall be required for all sanitary services: located just outside of the building foundation and at all bends greater than 22.5 degrees and brought to the final grade of each location.

 403 OVERSIZING WATER AND SEWER FACILITIES 	
 
Article 4 - Water and Wastewater Systems



The City may require the developer to size water and sanitary sewer facilities to address future development consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Where appropriate, the City may enter into an agreement with the developer to provide reimbursement from future developments for any required increase in size.














I

I









1
 
Article 5  	
STORMWATER   MANAGEMENT





501PURPOSE



Stormwater   Management   requirements   are   set  forth   in  the   McHenry   County   Stormwater Ordinance as amended by the City under Chapter 29 of the Marengo Municipal Code.






I I I
 
Article 6  	
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



601 DEDICATION  OF  SCHOOL  SITES,  PARK,  MUNICIPAL,  FIRE  PROTECTION,  RESCUE  SQUAD  ANO LIBRARY LANDS OR CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF


601.1 Legislative Intent: As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a planned development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to dedicate land for library, park, recreational, fire/rescue and school purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or shall be required to make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the City with the concurrence of (or at the request oO the affected district or districts, which concurrence shall be obtained in writing. However, the City shall have the final decision making power in this regard. Dedication of land may be made to the City or to the applicable district at the discretion of the City Council. The dedications and cash contributions required hereunder shall be made in accordance with the criteria and formulae herein.

 602 CRITERIA FOR THE DEDICATION OF SCHOOL, PARK, AND PUBLIC LANDS 	



602.1	Criteria for  Requiring School Site Dedications:

A.	Requirement and Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or planned development shall bear directly on  the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of (a) estimated number of children to be served in each school classification (as described in Paragraph B, below) from the subdivision or planned development over the (b) maximum recommended number of students to be served in each such school classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to (c) the appropriate number of acres for a school site of each such school classification as stated herein . The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increase in number of students for each such school classification.

8. School Classifications and Size of School Site: These requirements for acreage are based upon a review of available data studies and literature on the  subject , including but not limited to, information  provided  by the  State  Board  of  Education and the unique characteristics of the  City, including its general rural character and open spaces, and the  desire of the residents to maintain this character and open space in future school  sites. These requirements for acreage shall be presumed as the appropriate acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating any  cash  in lieu of land  dedication herein unless  timely objected to  as  provided  herein. Objections to these acreage requirements for any particular development  shall  be made in accordance with Section 609 herein to the  Planning  and  Zoning Commission. Failure to timely object to these acreage  requirements  in accordance with  Section  609  herein shall  thereafter  waive  any  right to  raise an  objection  at a

 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordbumce
 
May 9, 2005
 
Article 6 -Land Development Ordinance


later time.

C.   School classifications and size of school  sites within the City shall be determined  in accordance  with  the  following criteria:

Table 5 - School Size and Classification

SCHOOL DISTRICTS #154, 165 and 18

School Classification by	Maximum Number of	Appropriate  Number of Acres of Grades	Students for Each Such	Land for Each School Site of
School Classification	Such Classification

Elementary Schools,	500 students	16 acres
Grades kindergarten
through 5th or 6'h

Junior high schools, grades	600 students	25 acres
6'h through 3th or 7'h and
3th

 
High schools, grades 911
 
1,500 students	75 acres
 
1	through  1 th

]
D. Location: The Comprehensive School Plan and/or the standards adopted by the
affected School District shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. School sites shall be located in accordance with plans heretofore or hereafter adopted by the school  district.

I	602.2 Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreational Land Dedications:
A.	Suitability: The land for park and recreational dedications shall be suitable for the
purpose for which it is intended . Land set aside by developers for parks and recreation purposes shall not be merely what has been "left over" after residential, commercial  and  industrial  development.

J	B.     Requirement  and  Population  Ratio:  The  ultimate  density  of a  proposed  development
shall  bear directly  on  the  amount  of  land  required for  dedication  for  park  and
recreational purposes. The total requirement shall be 10.5 acres of land per 1,000 of ultimate population and may be allocated by the City Council at its discretion based upon the following criteria:
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance



Table 6 - Requirement and Population Ratio Criteria for Park


Type of Recreation Area	Minimum Size	Park Acreage per 1,000 Persons

Play Lot	
8,000 square feet	< 1

Neighborhood Park	
3 acres	2 acres

City-Wide Park for Active Sports	
10 acres	
4 acres

City-Wide Community Park	
15 acres	
4 acres

These requirements for acreage are based upon a review of available data studies and literature on  the subject, including but not  limited to,  the  National  Recreation and Park Association's Recreation, Park and Open Space Standards  and  Guidelines, 1990 and the District's own internal examination of service needs  and  utilization. These requirements shall be presumed as the appropriate acreage  requirements and shall be used in calculating any cash in lie u of land dedication herein unless timely objected to as provided herein . Objections to these acreage requirements for any particular development shall be made in accordance with Section 609 herein to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to timely object to these acreage requirements in accordance  with Section 609 herein shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection at a later time .

C. Location: The Marengo Park District Comprehensive Plan or the park and recreat ion plans as adopted by the City's Comprehensive Plan shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A central location that will serve equally the entire development or a location that is adjacent to existing park and recreational land is most desirab l e. In large developments, these sites can be located throughout the development according to established standards for park area distances .

I	602.3 Fire and Rescue Capital Facilities Contributions and Site Dedications:
A.	Requirement  and  Population  Ratio:  The  development  of  new  subdivisions  and
planned developments increases the demands upon the existing fire and rescue protection service provided to the City in a proportionate and ascertainable manner and creates the need for additional fire and rescue facilities and training sites. Studies reveal the need to develop additional fire and rescue protection services. Therefore, as a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a planned development, each developer or subdivider shall be required to dedicate land for fire and rescue facilities to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development or shall be requ ired to make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedications.

The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly on the amount of land required for fire and rescue site dedications.  The City hereby finds that the total requirement shall be as follows:
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance



Table 7 - Requirement and Population Ratio Criteria for Fire

Marengo  Fire  Protection  District:	2 acres of land per 10,000
of ultimate population.
Marengo Rescue District:		2 acres of land per 10,000
of ultimate population.


This contribution and/or dedication is based upon a review of available data, studies and literature, including, but not limited to, the requirements of  surrounding communities and the  respective  fire  and  rescue districts'  own  internal  examination of service utilization and needs. They shall be presumed to be correct and accurate and shall be used in calculating cash contributions herein unless timely  objected to as provided herein. Objections to this Section 602.3  shall  be made  in accordance with Section 609 herein. Failure to timely object to these requirements in strict accordance with Section 609 herein shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection at a later time.

The Fire and Rescue Capital Facilities Contributions shall be held in trust by the City or other public body designated by the City and shall be used for the purpose of assisting in providing additional facilities for municipal purposes. The City may contract with other units of local government for the provision of fire/rescue services. Funds obtained pursuant to this Section may be transferred to those entities for the purpose of assisting in the provision of additional facilities which will benefit the City.

B.	Location:  The location of any new fire or rescue facility and/or training sites shall
be determined by the appropriate district in consultation with the City.



602.4  Criteria for Requiring Library Site Dedications:

A.	Requirement and Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a  proposed development shall bear directly on the amount of land required for dedication . New development and increased population create greater demands for adequate and efficient library services to meet the educational, cultural and recreational needs of the citizenry. They create the need for additional library facilities. The City hereby finds that the total requirement shall be 2.5 acres of land per 10,000 of ultimate population.

These requirements are based upon a review of available data, studies and literature on the subject, including but not limited to Building for the Future:  an assessment of library service goals, space needs and use strategies for  the  Marengo  Public Library District prepared by Library Planning Associates, Inc. and dates May 21, 2002 as well as the Library District's own internal examination of library utilization and needs. They shall be presumed as the appropriate acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land contribution herein unless timely objected to as provided herein. Objections to these acreage requirements for any particular development shall be made in accordance with Section 609 herein. Failure to timely object to these acreage requirements in accordance with Section 609 herein shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection at a later time.
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance




B.	Location: The location of any new library facility shall be determined by the Library in consultation with the City.

603. CRITERIA  FOR REQUIRING A CASH  CONTRIBUTION  IN LIEU OF DEDICATION OF SCHOOL,  PARK, LIBRARY, FIRE AND RESCUE SITES.

603.1 Criteria. When the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical, or when the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes, school, fire, rescue or library sites, or is in conflict with the approved standards or plans of the affected district, the City, with the concurrence of the affected District, shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication.

A.	The cash contribution in lieu of school land dedication, and any and all interest earned thereon , shall be held by the benefiting school district or other public body designated by the benefiting school district and shall be used for the acquisition of land as classified above and its improvement for school sites to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or development or for the improvement to any existing school site that already serves such needs, or for the construction of school buildings or additions thereto in accordance with Public Act 93-0330 or for any purpose defined by agreement with the subdivider or developer in accordance with Section 603 and  Exhibit B-3 of Appendix B of this ordinance.

B.	The cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be held by the benefiting Park District or other public body designated by the benefiting Park District and shall be used for the acquisition of park and recreation land as classified above and its improvement , which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the expansion of other existing local park and recreation lands that already serve such needs or for any other lawful park purpose or for any park purpose agreed to by the subdivider or developer at the time of platting.

C. The cash contribution in lieu of a library site dedication shall be held by the benefiting Library District or other public body as designated by the City and shall be used for the acquisition of library land as required herein and its improvement, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the expansion of existing or proposed library faci Iities that al ready serve or wil I serve such needs or for any other lawful purpose provided by law or agreed to by the subdivider or developer at the time of platting.

D.	The cash contribution in lieu of fire sites shall be  held  by the  benefiting  Fire Protection District or other public body as designated by the City and shall be used for  the acquis ition of land and its improvement for  fire  protection  facilities  or training  sites to serve the immediate  and future  needs of the  residents of that subdivision  or development or for the expansion of any other existing fire station or training site  that already serves  such needs or for any other  lawful fire purpose provided by law or agreed to by the subdivider or developer at the time of platting.
 
Article 6 - land Development Ordinance

E.	The cash contribution in lieu of rescue sites shall be held by the benefiting Rescue District or other public body as designated by the City and shall be used for the acquisition of land and its improvement for rescue service facilities or training sites to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the expansion of any other existing rescue facility that already serves such needs or for any other lawful rescue purpose provided by law or agreed to by the  subdivider or developer at the time of platting.

603.2	Refunds. If any portion of a cash contribution is not expended for the purposes stated above within 13 years from the date of Final Plat  approval (if paid at plat approval) or from the date of building permit (if paid at building permit), it shall be refunded without interest to the present owner of the property for which the contribution was made. Refunds shall only be provided when the payee presents a written request addressed to the affected government body holding the money within the 14th year following such payment. If such request is not made during the fourteenth year, at the commencement of the fifteenth year the affected government body holding the money shall be authorized to declare such funds abandoned and use the money for any legitimate purpose.

603.3	Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in Iieu of land shal I be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area that otherwise would have  been dedicated as park and recreation, library, fire, rescue and school sites. In calculating the fair market value, on a per acre basis, unless determined otherwise pursuant to Section 609 herein, the following assumptions about the land shall be made: (a) that it is zoned in a one-family dwelling residential zoning district; (b) that  it  is  subdivided  with appropriate frontage on a dedicated street or road, stubbed with municipal sewer  and water and has all appropriate utilities available; (c) that it is improved as set forth  in Section 608 herein, and (d) that it is otherwise property capable of being used for residential development. Based upon a study of comparable real estate transactions,  it has been determined that the present "fair market value" of such improved land in and surrounding the City is, as of the effective date of this Ordinance "04-9-2," as follows:

A.	$80,000.00 per acre for purposes of locating an elementary or junior high school within School Districts 165 and 18 and locating a high school within School District 154.

B.	$60,000.00 per acre for purposes of locating a park1 •

C.	$300,000.00 per acre for purposes of locating a fire or rescue station2




D.	$300,000.00 per acre for purposes of locating a new library facility and/or adding



1 Land suitable for park and recreational purposes may have a lesser value depending upon location, buildability, and whether the site is used as an active or passive park site.  This fair market value reflects these considerations.

2  Fire and Rescue stations must be strategically located to maximize response time and have access to major arterial roads.  This fair market value reflects these considerations.
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance

on to the existing Library3

These figures shall be adjusted by the City Council from time to time, but no less frequently than once every three years, with appropriate study and documentation. The fair market value as defined above shall be used in calculating any cash contribution in lieu of land dedication required herein unless timely objected to as provided in Section 609 herein. Objections to the fair market value as defined above shall be made in accordance with Section 609 to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to timely object to the fair market value as defined above in accordance with Section 609 herein shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection at a later time.

603.4 Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Contribution: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned developments when a combination of land dedication and a cash contribution in lieu of land are both necessary . These occasions will arise when (a) only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a library, park, municipal, fire, rescue or school site (that portion of the land within the subdivision falling within the library, park, municipal, fire, rescue or school location shall be dedicated as a site as stated above, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated); or (b) a major part of the local library, park, municipal, fire, rescue or school site has already been acquired by the particular district or City and only a small portion of land is needed from the developer to complete the site (the remaining portion shall be required as a cash contribution in lieu thereof).

604. CONSUMER PRICE INDEX.

The  fair  market  values  identified  in Section  609.A  above  shall  be  subject  to  a  "CPI Adjustment" which shall be calculated on January  1, 2005 and on the first day of January  in each year thereafter . Annually, the fixed charge shall be adjusted to an amount  equal to the fixed charge multiplied by a fraction,  the  numerator  of  which  is the  "All  Items"  Consumer  Price  Index  for  Urban  Consumers (1982-84  =  100) for Chicago, 11 linois, published by the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of  Labor  Statistics  ("CPI")  for  the  month  of  December  preceding the  year  of  adjustment  and  the denominator  of which  is the CPI for the month of  December  preceding the  month of adjustment.  If any  index is calculated from a base different from the base period 1982-84  =  100, such index shall be converted  to a base  period  of  1982-84  =   100 by  use of a conversion  factor  supplied  by said Bureau of  Labor Statistics . If  the CPI is discontinued or replaced, such other governmental  Cost of Living Index  or computation  which  replaces the  CPI  shall  be used  in order to  obtain  substantially the same result as would be obtained if the CPI had not been discontinued or replaced.


 605. DENSITY FORMULA. 	


The Table of Estimated  Ultimate Population  Per  Dwelling  Unit (the "Density Formula") , prepared by Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., Naperville, Illinois, in 1996 and as updated from time to time by the consulting firm, contained in Appendix B herein, constitutes projections of anticipated population density and is generally indicative of current and



3 An addition to the existing library would entail purchase of property adjoining the existing library.  A new library must be strategically located to accommodate the maximum number of patrons, and in the tradition of the existing library . be accessible and visible.
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance

short-range projected trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer pursuant to Section 609 herein. The City recognizes that the Density Formula may be updated from time to time and will, as a result, adopt these updates periodically by amending this Ordinance accordingly.

605.1	Bedroom Definition. A bedroom as used in this Section 605, shal I include any room which may be used for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room located on any floor in a dwelling unit which may be convertible into a sleeping area and is not clearly identified for some other specific purpose such  as  a kitchen  (one per  unit), dining room (one per unit), living room (one per unit), bathroom(s)  and family room (one per unit).

605.2	Objections.The Density Formula, as updated, shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication herein unless objected to as provided in Section 609 herein. Objections to the Density Formula shall be made in accordance with Section 609 to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to object to the Density Formula in accordance with Section 609 shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection at a later time.

A.	In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the Density Formula listed above, he shall submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event final determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with Section 609 herein.

606. RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:

When the Comprehensive Plan or the standards of the City cal I for a larger amount of park and recreational land, library, school or fire and rescue sites in a particular subdivision or planned development than the developer is required to dedicate pursuant to this Article 6, the land needed beyond the developer's dedication shall be set aside and reserved by the developer for subsequent purchase (at a price determined at the time of reservation) by the City or  other public body designated by the City, provided that such acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final plat.
I	607. COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS: 	

Combining with Adjoining Developments: Where appropriate, a public open space or a school site that is to be dedicated should, if possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable  recreation areas and/or school sites without undue hardship on a particular developer.



608. SITE REQUIREMENTS:


	Topography and Grading. The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purpose. Wetlands and flood plains may be accepted for City ownership and maintenance, but shall not serve as a credit toward any required site dedication. Storm water detention areas shall not be accepted for City ownership and maintenance, and the portion of a detention area designed to function primarily as a component of the Storm water control system shall not serve as a credit toward any required site dedication. A park site shall be not less than one acre in area . The

 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance
 
M(/y 9, 2005
 
Article 6- Land Development Ordinance

City Board reserves the right, however, in its sole discretion, to accept in whole or in part, certain areas such as, but not limited to, tree massings, prairie remnants, high quality or unique wetlands, or other natural features as all or part of the required park site dedication in furtherance of open space preservation that may be unique to a given parcel or development. Wetlands, flood plains, detention areas, retention areas and areas of steep slope shall not be accepted as school, park, fire, rescue or library sites and shall not serve as a credit toward the required school, park, fire, rescue or library site cash contribution in lieu of land dedication.

In addition, the following site conditions and preparation standards shall be met:


A.	Slope:

(1)	Should not vary greatly  in appearance from existing and adjacent slopes;

(2)  Optimum slopes range from two percent minimum to five percent maximum.
No less than two percent slope is acceptable under any circumstances;

(3)  Maximum allowable slope is 10 percent, except under special conditions where
greater slopes are desirable to enhance the use of the site; and

(4)	On-site drainage patterns shall be designated and constructed to:

a.	Ensure flow toward swales; and

b.	Ensure drainage away from active areas.
I	8. Grading:

(1)	Rough grading shall be completed at time of rough grading of adjacent
contiguous area;

(2)	Grading shall comply with City approved plans;

(3)	Sub-grade shall be graded and compacted so it will parallel finished grade;

J	(4)   Sub-grade  material  shall  be loosened and fine  graded to a depth of two to four
inches. All stones over four inches in size, sticks, debris, rubbish and other
foreign substances shall be removed; and
J
(5)  Finished grades shall be uniform in slope between points for which elevations
have been established.

c.	
Soils:	
	
(1)	
Soils shall not differ from those naturally occurring;
	
(2)	
Soils shall not offer any restriction to the ultimate use of the property;
 
Article 6 - land Development Ordinance

(3)	Topsoil shall be spread evenly and lightly compacted to a minimum depth of six inches over the entire site;

(4)	Topsoil must be good, friable soils with good tillage and shall be without any admixture of subsoil, clay, gravel , stones, debris, refuse, sand or other subsurface elements;

(5)	Topsoil shall not be placed in a muddy or frozen condition;

(6)	Topsoil shall contain no toxic substances which may be harmful to plant growth; and

(7)	Topsoi I shall be spread no later than the placement of topsoi I on the first lot adjacent to the site.

D.	Seeding:

(1)	All proposed library, park and recreational and school sites shall be seeded and
J	an acceptable stand of grass or vegetation established prior to dedication of the
area to the City;
]	(2)  City-approved ground covers and grasses shall be used for all park and
recreational areas suitable for the nature of the activity planned to occur thereon;

(3)	Seeding shall be completed during the fall or spring planting times, depending upon the recommended seed planting specifications;

(4)	Seeding shall be on moderately dry soil on a seed bed which will easily accept
and nurture germination of seeds;
I	(5)  Seeding shall be watered sufficiently so that the vegetation becomes reasonably
established; and

(6)  The developer shall be responsible for making necessary reparations to the site caused by erosion or other damage.  Reparations shall be completed prior to acceptance of the site.

	Improved Sites
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television , water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter, where applicable), as applicable to the location of the site,  and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of the City ordinances and codes . The landscaping normally included within the definition of "improved" sites under  said  ordinances  and codes may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any such school site and the construction of school facilities thereon, except for groundcover as required in Section
608.1  04 herein. The site shall have direct access to a fully  improved street across at least
20 percent of the distance of its perimeter. School , park and library sites should ideally be accessible by a bicycle/pedestrian trail, and any such access route onto the property shall be at least 30 feet wide. Such access routes should normally be dedications and not easements, depending on which entity of government is to be responsible for said routes. Any vehicular access  route leading to or on the site shall  be of sufficient  size and good geometry  to
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance

properly accommodate vehicles that will access and traverse the site, including but not limited to good principles of traffic circulation, accommodation of one-way and/or two-way drives for school buses, separation of bus traffic from passenger automobile traffic, bus drop­ off areas separate from publicly-dedicated streets, guest and employee parking areas, and the like Such off-street access routes, drives, drop-offs and parking areas will not be dedicated rights-of-way and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the site to maintain.


608.3	Environmental  Risk Audit
Prior to the conveyance of any land to the City, Iibrary district, park district, fire protection district or school district, the intended grantee shall be furnished with an environmental risk audit prepared by an environmental professional meeting the minimum requirements of 415 ILCS 5/22 .2(j) (6)(E)(iii), certified to and acceptable to the grantee, assuring the grantee that there are no hazardous substance(s) (as defined hereinafter) on, under, to or from the land. Said environmental audit shall be what is commonly referred to as a Phase I Environmental Audit, which shall meet the minimum requirements for a pre-acquisition audit as set for in 415 ILCS 5/22 .2(j)(6)(E)(i i i)(v).

In the event the Phase I Environmental Audit does  not conclude  there  is no  presence  or likely presence of a release or substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) or pesticide on, under, to or from the land, the grantee shall furnish a Phase II Environmental Audit as set forth in 415 ILCS 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii)(vi), including a soil toxicity analysis and recommendation  from  said environmental  professional,  meeting the  minimum  requirements of 415 ILCS 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii),  which concludes that there  is no presence or likely presence of a release or substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) on, under, to or from the land, and certifying that, in the judgment of said environmental professional, there is no reasonable probability that the land contains any hazardous substance(s} in violation of any federal or state environmental standards.

In the event said Phase II Environmental Audit and/or soil toxicity analysis discloses the presence or likely presence of a release or a substantial threat of a release of any hazardous substance(s) at, on, under, to or from the land to the conveyed, the grantor shall first cause al I such hazardous substance(s) to be removed at its sole cost and expense in accordance with all federal, state and local environmental laws, rules and regulations and furnish the intended grantee with a "No Further Remediation Letter" from the governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the clean up prior to conveyance of any of the land to the intended grantee.

Prior to the conveyance of the land, the subdivider or developer, as the case may be, and the owner of the land to be conveyed, shall execute and deliver to the intended grantee an Environmental Indemnification Agreement, which form has been approved by the City Attorney, agreeing to defend , indemnify and hold the City, its corporate authorities, officers, officials, employees, agents, successors and assigns, and the appropriate benefiting governments, as the case may be, and its respective officers, officials, employees, agents, successors and assigns, harmless from and against any and all liability, claims, damages, causes of action and expenses arising out of the presence of any hazardous substance(s) in, under or upon said land to be conveyed prior to the date of conveyance.

Hazardous substance(s) includes without limitation:

A.	Those substances included in the definitions of hazardous substances, extremely
hazardous substances, hazardous materials, toxic substances, toxic chemicals, toxic
 
Article  6 -Land  Development  Ordinance

wastes, hazardous chemicals, hazardous wastes, solid waste and pesticides in CERLA, SARA, RCRA, HSWA, TSCA, OSHA, FWPCE, Illinois Pesticides Act (415
ILCS 60/1 et seq.), Illinois Responsible Property Transfer Act (765 ILCS 90/1 et seq.) and the  Illinois Hazardous Materials Transportation  Act  (430  ILCS 30/1  et seq .), 49
U.S.C. Section 1801 et seq., as amended, and as they may be amended in the future, and in the regulations promulgated pursuant to said laws.

B.	Those substances defined in Section 603 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and   in the regulations promulgated  pursuant  to  said  act  or  other  Illinois  laws pertaining thereto.

C.	Those  substances  listed  in the  U.S.  Department  of Transportation  Table  (49 CFR
172.101 and amendments thereto) or by the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (or any successor agency) as hazardous substances (40 CFR Part 302 and amendments thereto).

D.	Such other substances, materials and wastes which are to become regulated under applicable local, state or federal law, or which are classified as hazardous or toxic under federal, state or local Jaws, ordinances or regulations.

E.	Any material waste or substance which  is  (a)  asbestos,  (b)  polychlorinated biphenols, (c) designated as a hazardous substance pursuant to Section 311 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq. (33 U.5.C. Sec. 1321) or listed pursuant to Section 307 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sec .  1317,  (d) explosives, or (e) radioactive materials.

F.	For purposes of this Article 6, hazardous substances shall include petroleum or its byproducts as regulated under RCRA and any applicable state law or regulations.

608.4	Suitability of Solis at Site
The subdivider or developer, at its own cost or expense, shall provide to the City, library district, park district ,fire protection district, rescue district or school district soil boring data, soil compaction test results  and such other engineering studies , data and information pertaining to the proposed school, library, fire, rescue or park and recreational site, which the City, library district, park district , fire protection district, rescue district or school district may request to enable it to determine the suitability of the proposed land dedication for library, fire/rescue or school sites or park and recreation purposes . The City, library district, park district, fire protection district , rescue district or school district shall have the right to reject any site which the City, library district, park district, fire protection district, rescue district or school district determines , in accordance with sound engineering practices, is not suitable for library site, fire, rescue site, park and recreational site or school site purposes.

608.5	Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats
Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats: Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the City, library district , park district, fire protection district, rescue district or school district shall be accompanied by:

A.	A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in the state to insure the grantee's title  to such real estate in an amount equal to the value computed pursuant to Section 603 herein, with extended coverage over the general exceptions to title and subject only to:
 
Article 6 -Land Develop111e/1f  Ordinance

(1)	real estate taxes not yet due and payable,

(2)	covenants, conditions and  restrictions  which  do  not  prohibit  the  use  of  the subject property for its intended library, school, fire and rescue or park  and recreational  use,

(3)	utility easements located within 20 feet of the boundary lines of the subject real estate (except where approved on the final engineering plans approved by the City Engineer),

(4)	drainage ditches, feeders and laterals.

(5)	underground pipe or other conduit,and

(6)	acts done or suffered by or judgments against the grantees.

B.	A  current ALTA  boundary  line survey, certified to the grantee  by a licensed  Illinois Land Surveyor to be in compliance  with  the  American  Land  Survey  Standards, showing no encroachments;  and

C.	Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot in a recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in a form acceptable to the appropriate authorities so the land to be conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number (PIN) for exemption purposes.

In addition, monuments must be established and the land staked immediately prior to dedication of the property. The subdivider or developer shall pay for the cost of the owner's title insurance in said amount, the ALTA survey, the assessment plat and any and all costs in connection with the tax division.

608.6 Real Estate Tax Escrow: The developer shal I pay the general real estate taxes on the land not yet due and payable as of the date of transfer, and shall depos it a sum of money in escrow with the intended grantee's attorney or a title company licensed to do business in the State of 111 i nois,which is prorated as of the date of transfer on the basis of 110 percent of the tax assessor's latest assessed valuation, the latest known equalization factors and the latest known tax rate on the land. In the event the previous tax information or the previous tax bill includes other property, then the amount to be deposited in escrow shall be adjusted ratably based on the net acreage of the land compared to the net acreage of the other parcels covered by said tax bills. After the land has been divided for real estate tax purposes and has been conveyed to the intended grantee, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to apply for a real estate tax exemption on the land.



609 OBJECTIONS


All objections relating to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair market value, the Density Formula or any other application of this Article 6 to a particular subdivision or planned development, shall first be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a hearing. An objection must be made, if at all, prior to the approval of the final plat of subdivision by the City. A failure to object by such time shall constitute a waiver of the right to object to the provisions of this Article 6.    All developers submitting a plat of subdivision or resubdivision or a plat of a planned
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance

unit development to the City shall be given a copy of this entire Article 6, including the procedures for objecting to such an assessment as prescribed by this Section 609 . Upon receipt, the developer must sign an accompanying document acknowledging that the developer has received notice of the existence of such a procedure for objections. This document entitled Acknowledgment of Notification of Rights is attached as Appendix D to this Ordinance and is incorporated herein by reference. The procedure for a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be as follows:

609.1  Duties  of  the  Planning  and  Zoning  Commission:	The   Planning   and   Zoning Commission  shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall have the following duties:

A.	Advise and assist the City in resolving objections regarding the Density Formula, the
size of the library, park, fire, rescue and school sites in Section 602, respectively , the fair market value of the land used to calculate the cash contribution in Section 603, or any other application of this Article 6 to a particular subdivision or planned development.

B.	The City shall adopt procedural rules to be used by the Planning and Zoning Commission in carrying out the duties imposed by this Section 609.

609.2	Information and Services to be Used: the City shall make available to the Planning and Zoning Commission all professional reports relating to the Density Formula, the size of the library, fire, rescue, park and school sites and the fair market value of land used in calculating these cash contributions . The Planning and Zoning Commission may also retain the services of professionals (attorneys, appraisers, statisticians, etc.) to assist in its review of issues raised by any objection.

609.3	Procedure for Resolving an Objection.

A.	. Upon receipt of an objection, the City Administrator  shall place the same on  the next regular meeting agenda of the City Council. Thereafter the City Council  shall refer the objection to the Planning and  Zoning  Commission  and  by  resolution establish a hearing date.

B.	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide public notice of the hearing date to consider the objection and shall notify the affected library, fire protection, rescue, school and park districts by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the filing of the objection and of any hearing regarding same.

C.	The Objector shall publish notice of the hearing date once each week for three consecutive weeks, at least 30 days before but no more than 60 days before the scheduled date of the hearing. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the corporate limits of the City. The notice of public hearing shall not appear in the part of the paper where legal notices or classified ads appear. The notice shall not be smaller than one-quarter page of a standard size or tabloid-size newspaper. The objector shall send a copy of said notice to any person who has requested said notice by certified mai I (stamped at a U.S. Postal Service facility showing the date of mailing) at least 30 days prior to the hearing date.

D.	The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)	The  headline shall  read: "NOTICE OF PUBLIC  HEARING ON OBJECTION TO
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance

APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE REQUIRING THE DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES, PARK LANDS, FIRE AND RESCUE LANDS AND LIEBRARY LANDS OR PAYMENT OF CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF AND FIRE AND RESCUE CAPITAL FACILITIES CONTRIBUTIONS.

(2)	The date, time and location of the public hearing.

(3)	A statement that the purpose of the hearing is to consider the objection to a component	of the application of the ORDINANCE REQUIRING THE DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES, PARK LANDS, FIRE AND RESCUE LANDS AND LIBRARY LANDS OR PAYMENT OF CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF AND FIRE AND RESCUE CAPITAL FACILITIES CONTRIBUTIONS .

(4)	A general description of the parcel(s), service area. or areas within the City that
are the subject of the hearing.

(5)	A statement that the City shall make available to the public, upon request, an easily understandable and detailed map of the parcel(s}, service area or areas to which the Ordinance applies, and any other available information about the objection.

(6)	A statement that any member of the public affected by the Ordinance or the parcel(s) or service area shall have the right to appear at the public hearing and present testimony and/or evidence in support of or against the objection.

E.	A public hearing shall be held for the consideration of the objection . In addition to the City, any affected library district, school district, park district, fire district and rescue district shall be allowed to participate in such hearing as a party thereto to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and make arguments to the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding the issues raised in the objection. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to adopt, reject in whole or in part, or modify the objection presented at the hearing, by written report to the City, within 60 days after the hearing. The City shall then have at least 60 but not more than 120 days to approve, disapprove or modify, by ordinance or resolution, the findings in this ordinance as it pertains to the development in question.

609.3 Costs and Fees. The objector shall bear all costs of the hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission, including, but not  limited  to  attendance  fees  paid  the  Planning and Zoning Commission members, publication costs, professional consultants and any other expenses of the City.


610.  CONDITION TO ANNEXATION:


The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required by this Article 6 shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the City, and provisions therefore shall at a minimum be incorporated in any annexation or pre-annexation agreement governing such land. However, the City reserves the right to negotiate dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu of land or a combination thereof different than those set forth herein.
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance

611. INDEMNIFICATION:


As a condition to the City distributing land dedications and/or cash contributions in lieu thereof, the appropriate district shall execute an indemnification agreement in the form set forth in Appendix A of this Article 6. This agreement shall be executed on or before June 1st of each year. Following execution of this agreement by the appropriate district, this indemnification agreement shall be furnished to the City. In the event the appropriate district fails to execute and/or  furnish the executed agreement as required in this Article 6, the City reserves the right to refuse to impose any land dedications and/or cash contributions in lieu thereof.



612. DISTRIBUTION:


The cash contribution in lieu of land dedication imposed by this ordinance shall be collected and
held by the benefiting district to be used for the purposes set forth in this ordinance.

As a condition of distribution of these  land dedications  and/or cash contributions in lieu of land dedications, the City shall require that the school district, library district, park and recreation district, fire protection district or rescue district benefiting from such land dedications and/or cash contributions conduct a needs assessment and adopt a comprehensive or long range plan for acquisition of land and capital facilities needed to accommodate growth.

612.1 Needs Assessment;  Land  and  Capital  Facilities  Acquisition  Plan.  A  needs assessment shall contain the following information for each district (school,  library, fire, rescue and park):

A . A description of the nature and location of existing park , Iibrary, fire, rescue and school lands and existing park, school, library, fire, rescue facilities within each district.

B . An identification of the capacity of each school building, fire protection facility, rescue facility, library facility or park site within the particular district and of the number of students then enrolled in each school building.
]	C.    A  projection of the character  and  location of  new development  that  is expected to
occur within each district or City during the succeeding 10-year period. The district
may obtain the information necessary to make this projection from sources such as but not limited to: municipalities, other units of government, agencies and consultants.

D.	An identification of the amount of lands that will be necessary within the district in order to accommodate the demands of such projected new development, and an estimate of the public grounds acquisition costs that will be incurred or have been incurred by each district in acquiring such lands.

E.	A general description of each  classification  of  capital  facilities  (including construction, expansion or enhancement of any public facilities and the land improvement, design, engineering and professional costs related thereto) that will be  necessary within each district  in order to  provide adequate  capacity  for the projected new development , and an estimate of the capital facilities costs that will be incurred by each district in constructing such capital facilities.
 
Article 6 - Land Development Ordinance

612.2	Based upon the needs assessment, the school district, fire protection district, rescue district, park and recreation district or Iibrary district shal I provide the City an acquisition plan for lands and capital facilities . This acquisition plan shall:

A.    Project for  a planning period of at  least five years,  the  need for  lands and capital
facilities within the district or City;

B. Set forth a schedule for the acquisition of such lands and facilities to meet the projected need (which schedule may be conditioned upon the availability of financing);

C.  Indicate the size and general location of the needed lands and facilities;

D.	Identify the estimated or incurred costs of acquiring such needed lands and facilities;

E.	Set forth the anticipated funding sources for the acquisition of such needed lands
I	and facilities;
F.	Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed land and facilities based upon the
I	district's current financial condition;
G.	Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed land and facilities based upon the
district's or City's estimate of the revenues (including, without  limitation, cash 1n lieu of land dedication required by this Article 6) pursuant to the plan.

H.	The impact on property taxes in the City assuming the plan is implemented.

612.3	If the City deems it necessary , it may require an updated needs assessment and plan for acquisition of land and capital facilities from the district annually. The  failure to  require said assessment update shall not invalidate the requirements of this Section 609.





613.  TIME OF PAYMENT:


All land dedications and cash contributions imposed by this Article 6 shall be due and payable upon final plat approval. For any lot which received final plat approval prior to the enactment of this Ordinance and which remains vacant at the time this Ordinance is enacted, all dedications and fees imposed by this Article 6 shall be calculated and shall be due and payable at the time a building permit is issued. At the time of payment (at time of final plat approval or at time of building permit issuance), the subdivider or developer shall receive a copy of this Article 6 and shall execute an acknowledgment that a copy of Article 6 has been received. The executed acknowledgment shall be maintained and filed along with documents evidencing proof of land dedication or payment of cash contributions in lieu of land dedication by each subdivider or developer.

613.1 Payment at Time of Platting. In calculating the cash contributions to be paid at the time of platting, the City will  assume the maximum density permitted under the zoning classification approved pursuant to the Density Formula. For example, if the subdivision in question  is zoned  single  family, the  City will  assume  for  purposes  of calculating cash
 
Article 6 -Land Development  Ordinance

contributions payable, pursuant to this Ordinance, that all houses will have four or more bedrooms. The benefiting district will then hold sufficient funds pending issuance of the building permit to enable it to refund without interest any overpayments resulting from the fact that houses with less than four bedrooms are constructed. The City will direct the benefiting district to refund any overpayments resulting from the fact that houses with less than four bedrooms are constructed. Refunds bearing no interest shall be made at time of issuance of the building permit. The City will not issue any refunds for any residences platted but never built.

613.2 Payment at  Time of Building  Permit  Issuance.  The City may agree that the payment of the cash contributions may be made at the time of building permit issuance in consideration of which the subdivider or developer shall execute an Agreement, similar in form and content to Exhibit B-3 (Appendix B) of this Ordinance.  The Agreement provides:
(a) that the cash contributions payable will be adjusted in accordance with the requirements herein; (b) that the cash contributions may be expended for the purposes described in Exhibit B-3; and (c) to accept the validity of this Article 6 and the cash contributions as calculated. This Agreement , or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded along with the Plat of Subdivision upon approval by the City.

In the event the City agrees to delay the payment of fees and cash contributions required herein to the time of building permit issuance, the fees and cash contributions owed shall be those that are in effect at the time the building permit is issued.





I





I
 







Article 7  	
ADMINISTRATION  AND ENFORCEMENT




701 General



	Authority to Review. The City of Marengo City Council grants the City Engineer, the City Attorney, the Building Commissioner, Chief of Police, and other City staff the power and authority to review and recommend approval or disapproval of plats for the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction.

	law Compliance. All laws of the State of Illinois are made a part hereof, the same as if fully set forth herein, and all officers and employees of the City are directed to compel compliance with such laws of the State of Illinois.
1	701.3  Plat  Approval.   No Plat of  Subdivision  shall  be approved  which  does  not comply
with all of the provisions of this Ordinance .

701.4	Recording of Plat. The City Clerk shall not record any subdivision plat within the City or its 1.5 mile planning jurisdiction unless it has been approved by the City of Marengo City Council.

701.5	Plat Violations. Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the City Clerk that any provisions of the State law governing plats have been violated, it shall be the City Clerk's duty to notify the City Attorney, who shall take appropriate action.

701.6	Ordinance Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Engineer, City Attorney, the Building Commissioner , and other City staff to enforce this Ordinance; to bring to the attention of the City Council any violations or lack of compliance with this Ordinance; and to take appropriate action in the case of violations.

701.7	Cost of Compliance. Unless otherwise provided, the costs of complying with any of the standards in this Ordinance shall be at the owner's expense .



702 Violations and Penalties



702.1 Illegal to Transfer. No owner or agent of the owner of any land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer, sell, lease or offer for sale or lease any such land before a Final Plat of such  subdivision has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and recorded. Whoever shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease, any lot or block in any subdivision before complying with all of the requirements of these shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of $100 for each lot so disposed or offered. Each day that sales or leasing or offers to sell or lease, continue in violation of these regulations shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the penalty of

 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance Teska Associates, Inc.
 
Muy 9, 2005
Page7-1
 
Article  7-Administration and Enforcement



this Subsection. The City shall seek such injunctive relief as is available under the laws of the state.

702.2 No Metes and Bounds. The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds descriptions for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease, with the intent of evading these regulations, shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements in this Ordinance.



703 Variations and Exceptions


The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend variations from these requirements in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the intent of this Ordinance . Such recommendations shall be communicated to the City Council or the governing County authorities in writing with the reasons therefore. The City Counci I or the County authorities may then approve variations from these requirements in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the intent of this Ordinance .

l	704                                                   Separate                                                   Publication 	 This Ordinance shall be published in pamphlet form by and under the authority of the City of Marengo .


705  Engineering Drawings and Guarantees


	Engineering Drawings. Prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission's approval of the Final Plat, the developer shall submit Engineering Drawings in accordance with Appendix A demonstrating that any proposed street, water or sewer line and related facility, stormwater drainage facility and/or other engineered facility complies with the standards in this Ordinance and with good engineering practices.

	Construction Supervision. The developer shall employ a registered professional engineer who shall be responsible for overseeing the project to assure that construction of the engineering improvements substantially complies with the approved plans and specifications. No improvements shall be started until the Final Plat has been approved by the City, guarantees posted, the Plat recorded, and sufficient copies supplied to the City Hall and all Department  heads,  and approved Watershed Development Permit issued by the Building Commissioner and Public Works Director, a pre-construction meeting held with all applicable parties and erosion control measures installed and inspected by City Staff.

	Maintenance of Improvements. The developer shall  be  responsible  for maintaining all improvements until they are accepted by the appropriate governmental entity. Maintenance shall include snow plowing of streets to ensure adequate access to any Jots that have been sold.

	Estimate of Costs. Prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission's  approval of
the  Final  Plat, the  developer  shall  prepare  an  estimate  of costs  of any  improvements
 
Article 7- Administration and Enforcement



proposed or otherwise related to the Final Plat, including off-site improvements. These improvements shall include any streets, water or sewer facilities, storm drainage facilities, park and recreation facilities, landscaping, and other facilities which will be dedicated or  set aside for a public or quasi-public use. Such an estimate will be provided by a person or persons qualified to design the facilities and be approved by the City Engineer. The estimate for street, water, sewer and stormwater facilities shall be provided by a registered professional engineer.

	Amount of Performance Guarantee. The developer shall provide a performance guarantee in a manner as set out below in an amount sufficient to address 125 percent of the estimate of costs. The purpose of the performance guarantee is to ensure the adequate completion of the improvements in a manner shown on the Final Plat and Engineering Drawings. In the event that some or all of the improvements will be covered by a performance guarantee to another government agency, no guarantee wi 11 be required for such improvements. Any guarantee shall be in effect for one year. Additional renewals may be allowed with the consent of the City Council.

	Partial Release. Upon substantial completion of part or all of the required improvements, as certified to by the developer's engineer, the developer may request in writing a release from those improvements . The City Engineer and City staff shall inspect the improvements of which such notice has been given and shall determine whether the improvements were completed in accordance with  approved  plans.  The  City  Council shall review the City Engineer and City staff's recommendations and shall determine whether to allow the guarantee to be reduced by the amount in the estimate which is reflected by the successfully  completed  improvements.

	Complete Release. Upon completion of all the improvements, the developer shall submit to the City, City Engineer, and City staff "as-built" plat and engineering drawings certified to by the developer's engineer. The "as-built" drawings shall be provided in digital format compatible with the City's GIS system . The City Engineer shall review the same and determine whether the improvements are consistent with the engineering drawings . The City Council shall review the same and determine whether to accept or, in the case of facilities not dedicated to the public, approve the facilities. If the City Council accepts or approves the improvements, the City shall either allow the guarantee to be reduced to 10 percent of the guarantee amount, the remaining amount constituting a maintenance guarantee for a period of two years, or al low a new maintenance bond for 10 percent of the guarantee amount, for a period of two years.

	Types  of   Guarantees.	Performance  and   maintenance   guarantees   shall   be provided by a variety of  means  including, but not  limited to, the  following:

A.	Letter of Credit. The developer may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from
a bank or other reputable institution.

B.	Escrow  Account.  The  developer  may  deposit  cash  or their  instruments  readily
convertible into cash at face value with the municipality.
 
Article 7- Administration and Enforcement




	Completion  of  Improvements.  All  improvements  proposed or otherwise  related to the Final Plat, including off site improvements, except for bituminous surface improvements and seeding, shall be completed within  one year  after  approval  of the Final Plat by the City. The bituminous surface improvements and seeding, shall be completed within 10 months after approval  of the Final  Plat.  Time  is of the essence. Only under extreme conditions may the letter of credit be extended  by the  City  in its sole discretion. Any  extension  must first  be approved  by the City Council.  It shall  be the obligation of the developer to request such an extension in a timely manner, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the guarantee, if any.














I
 
Article                                                                     8  	 PLAT CERTIFICATES, TAX SEARCH, RETAINED PERSONNEL FEES AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS   REQUIREMENTS



801  General Requirement


Every Final Plat will include those certificates necessary to demonstrate compliance with this ordinance and as required for recordation by the County in a form suitable to both the City and the  County.

	State Plane Coordinates. All  Plats of Subdivision shall be submitted to the City on a 24" by 34" mylar for recording purposes. It shall also be submitted by to the City Engineer in electronic format on a 3 Vi diskette or CD Rom which can be read by an IBM compatible computer in DWG (AutoCAD)  format.  All  coordinates  shall  be based upon State Plan Coordinates and U.S.G.S. Datum and shall tie into at least two of the six ex isting monuments as set by the City Engineer and referenced  on  Control  Diagram dated June 12, 1997, prepared by Smith Engineer ing  Consultants,  Inc.  Specific electronic layers are required, and the City Engineer should be contacted for more information before surveying and plat preparation takes  place .

Every final plat shall include those  certificates  necessary  to  demonstrate  compliance with this Subdivision Ordinance and as required for recordation by the County  in a form s uitable to both the City and the County.





802 Required Certificates - Preliminary Plats


	Preliminary Plat Approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Preliminary Plat must be approved by the  Planning  and  Zoning  Commission.  A certificate indicating such approva l, to be signed by the Chairperson, shall be placed on the  Plat. The following wording  is required:

PLAN COMMISSIONER'S  APPROVAL

 
J	STATE OF ILLINOIS	)

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 


)SS
 

Preliminary Plat app roved by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Marengo this day of month (month), 20(year) .

802.2 City Engineer's Approval. All Preliminary Plats must be approved by, the City Engineer. A certificate indicating such approval shall be placed on the Preliminary Plat. The following wording is required:

CITY  ENGINEER 'S  APPROVAL
 
Article 8 -Plat Certificates and Other Requirements


 
STATE OF ILLINOIS COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 
My signature, as City Engineer for the City of Marengo, indicates that, to the best of my knowledge, this Preliminary Plat meets all the requirements of City Ordinances.
Signed this __ day of (month), 20(year).

 	(signature) 	
City Engineer


802.3	Soil Classifier's Certification. The signature of the Soil Classifier who did the on­ site investigation and prepared the soil map shall be affixed to both sheets of the Preliminary  Plat. The following wording  is required:


SOIL CLASSIFIER 'S CERTIFICATE


I,	(name)	hereby certify that the soil mapping represented on Sheet 2 was done by me in accordance with the City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance.   I further certify that my qualifications to do that work comply with the requirements of Subsection
608.4 of the City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance.


 	(date)			(signature) 	




802.4	City Council's Approval. When a Preliminary Plat has been approved by the City Council, the following statement will be placed on the Plat, dated and signed by the
I	Mayor:
APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT


Preliminary Plat approved by the City Council of the City of Marengo this day of month (month),
20(year).




By ---------
MAYOR


Note: This approved Preliminary Plat must be submitted with the Final Plat on or before the day of month  (month),  20(year).	Failure to submit the Final Plat for one or more phases of the subdivision within one year from the above date will void this approval of Preliminary Plat.


803 Required Certificates - Final Plat



803.1 Certificate Indicating Final Plat Approval by  Planning and Zoning Commission. The Final Plat must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. A certificate



 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance
 
May 9, 2005
 
Article 8- Plat Certificates and Other Requirements



indicating such approval, to be signed by the Chair person, shall be placed on the Plat. The following wording is required:


APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION

Approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Marengo this
__ day of (month), 20(year).

(signature) Chairperson


803.2 Owner's Certificate and Notary Certificate. A certificate shall be placed on the Final Plat indicating the ownership of the land being subdivided. A notary certificate shall be placed beneath the owner's certificate in witness of the owner's signature . The following general wording of these two certificates is required:


 

l	STATE OF ILLINOIS
 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE


)SS
 
COUNTY OF MCHENRY)



This is to certify that the undersigned,	(list names)	, is [are] the legal owner[s] of the land described on the Plat hereon drawn and shown hereon as subdivided; that he [they] has [have] caused said land to be surveyed, subdivided, staked and platted as shown hereon, for the purpose of having this Plat recorded as provided by law; and to the best of my [our] knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or part thereof, or that if such surface water drainage will be changed; reasonable provision has been made for the collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally
accepted engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.

In witness whereof I [we] have hereto set my [our] hand[s] and seal[s] this	day of (month)	, 20(year).

 	(Seal)

 	(Seal) NOTARY'S   CERTIFICATE
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 

I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid, do hereby certify that		of	personally known to me to be the same person or persons whose name or names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as,	respectively appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed and delivered the said instrument as their own free and voluntary act of sa id company for the uses and purposes therein set forth and said secretary

 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordi11ance
 
May 9, 2005
 
Article 8 - Plat Certificates and Other Requirements



did also then and there acknowledge that he or she as custodian of the corporate seal of said company did affix the said corporate seal of said company to the said instrument as his or he r own free voluntary act, and as the free and voluntary act of said company for the uses and purposes set forth.

Given under my hand and notarial seal, this __ day of	(_m_o_nt_h )- 20{year).

 
(Seal)
 


Notary Public
 


803.3	School District Certificate. Pursuant to Section 1 of the Illinois Plat Act, an owner shall submit simultaneously with the subdivision plat a notarized statement indicating to the best of the owner's knowledge, the school district in which each tract, parcel, lot or block lies. This submission can be on a separate paper accompanying the plat or on the plat. If submitted as a separate certificate, the following wording is required:

SCHOOL DISTRICT CERTIFICATE

I	This  is to  certify that  I,	, as owner of the property described  in the
-------,----,----Subdivision and legally described on the plat of the same name, have
determined to the best of my knowledge the school district  in which each of the following
lots lie:

 
Lot
I	Number(s)
 
School Districts
Elementary	High School 	


Signature of Owner
 
I	SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me This	day of	, 20 	
I
Notary Public


803.4	Surveyor's  Certificate.  The  suNeyor  who  prepared the  Final  Plat shall  place thereon a certificate with the following wording:

SURVEYOR'S  CERTIFICATE

 
STATE OF ILLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 


)SS
 

I,	, an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor do hereby certify that I have surveyed and subdivided the following described property, and that the Plat hereon drawn is a correct representation thereof , all distances are shown in feet and decimal parts thereof.
{Insert Legal Description)
Containing total area, including R.O.W.'s: (in square feet and acres)
 
Article 8 -Plat Certificates and Other Requirements



This is also to certify that upon completion of construction, concrete monuments, as shown, and iron pipes at all lot corners and points of change in alignment will be set, as required by the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.). This is also to certify that the property, as described in the annexed Plat, lies within the corporate limits of the City of Marengo, Illinois, which has adopted a comprehensive plan.

Given under my hand and seal at	, Illinois this	day of	(_m_o_n_th_)_ 20(year).

Illinois Registered Professional Land Surveyor No.	_



803.5	Certificate Regarding Flood Hazard. In accordance with the Recorder's Act {55 ILCS 5/3-5001 et seq.) the surveyor shall determine if any part of the proposed subdivision lies within a flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. An appropriate certificate shall be placed on the  Plat and signed by the surveyor. The following wording  is required,  depending  on  which  situation exists.


FLOOD HAZARD CERTIFICATE

I certify that none of the above described property is located in a flood hazard area as
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
)		(signature) 	
Illinois Registered Land Surveyor
I	OR
I certify that none of the above described property as subdivided is located in a flood hazard
area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency except as indicated on
]	FEMA Floodway Map, McHenry County, Illinois, Community  Panel  Number  	
effective date	_

Given under my hand and seal at		, Illinois this	day of -- (m_o_nt_h )
1	20(year).
Illinois Registered Professional Land Surveyor No.	_

803.6	McHenry County Department of  Health Certificate. The Plat Act, as amended January 1, 1988, requires the local health department, if one exists, to sign a Plat with respect to sewage disposal systems if any lots will not be served by a public sewer system . The following wording is required:

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CERTIFICATE

No public sewer system exists to serve this subdivision . Septic system suitability has been determined for all platted lots in accordance with the pertinent sections of the McHenry County Subdivision  Ordinance.

 		(signature) 	 Public Health Administrator

803.7	County Clerk's Certificate. The County Clerk shall make a tax search of the land being  subdivided  (See  Section   804).     A  certificate  is  required  on  all  Final  Plats,
 
Article 8 - Plat Certijic(ltes and Other Requirements



indicating that  any  back taxes and the  required tax  search  fees  have been paid.   The following  wording  is required.

COUNTY  CLERK 'S  CERTIFICATE

 
STATE OF ILLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 

I,	1  County Clerk in McHenry County, Illinois do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid current general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable tax against any of the land included in the Plat.

I further certify that I have received all statutory fees in connection with the  Plat.

Given under my hand and seal of the County at Woodstock , Illinois, this	day of (month)	, 20(year).

 		(signature) 	 McHenry County Clerk

803.8	City Engineer's Certificate.   A certificate shall be placed on the Final Plat to indicate the approval of the City Engineer. The following wording shall be used:



CITY  ENGINEER 'S CERTIFICATE

 
STATE OF ILLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 
I	The undersigned, as City Engineer for the City of Marengo, and relying upon the following
certification of the City Clerk:
I	I certify that an irrevocable letter of credit for completion of this subdivision's
 
improvements has been deposited with my office on
20(year).
I	City Clerk
 
day of	(month)
 

Hereby confirm that to the best of my knowledge, this Plat of Subdivision meets al! the requirements of the ordinances of the City of Marengo as of this	day of
(month) 20(year). The City Engineer shall not sign the Plat until notification is received from the City Clerk that the subdivision improvement financial guarantee has been received by the City.


City Engineer
 
A11icfe 8 -Plat Certificates and Other Requirements



803.9	McHenry County Stormwater Management  Certificate.  A  certificate  shall  be placed on the Final Plat to indicate the approval of the City Enforcement Officer. The following wording  shall  be  used:
MCHENRY  COUNTY  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CERTIFICATE

 
STATE OF ILLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 

The undersigned, as City Engineer for the City of Marengo, and relying Upon the following certification of the City Clerk:

The undersigned, acting as the City's Enforcement Officer ,do hereby certify this Plat of Subdivision  complies with the McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance, as modified by the City of Marengo.

 		Date:------------
Enforcement Officer

803.10	City Council's Certificate. A certificate shal I be provided to indicate approval of the Final Plat by the City Council. Space for the signature of the Mayor and the Clerk shall be provided. The following wording is required:

CITY COUNCIL 'S APPROVAL

 
STATE OF llLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 
I	This Plat and dedications shown hereon are hereby approved by the City Council of Marengo,
 
Illinois, at a meeting held on the

I	City Mayor
Attest:	 	
City Clerk
 
day of	(month)	, 20(year).
 
I
803.11	Recorder's Certificate. A certificate shall be placed on the Final Plat to  indicate
the  date  and  time  of  recording,  and  the  book  and  page  on  which  recorded.  The following wording is required:

RECORDER 'S CERTIFICATE

 
STATE OF ILLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 

This instrument filed for record in the Recorder 's office of McHenry County , Illinois, on this
day of	(month)	, 20(year), at	o'clock _ M. and recorded as Document
Number	_


County Recorder

803.12	Easement Crossing Certificate. A certificate shall be placed on the Final Plat to allow easement crossings. The following wording is required:
 
Article 8 - Plat Cettificates and Other Requirements




EASEMENT CROSSING PROVISIONS

All easements indicated as road construction and maintenance easements adjacent to road right-of-ways on this Plat are reserved for and granted to the City of Marengo,  their successors and assigns, for road construction and maintenance including maintenance of drainage ditches and slopes.  Said easements may be crossed perpendicularly by driveways and utilities and drainage or retention/detention easement with the consent of the granter. Said granter reserves the right to cut, trim, or remove trees, bushes and roots as may be reasonably required incident to the rights herein given, and the right to enter upon said property for all such purposes.


 
Owner


803.13 City Treasurer. A certificate shall be placed on the final Plat indicating that there are no delinquent or unpaid obligations to the City. In the absence of the City Treasurer, the City Administrator can sign the following certificate. The following general wording is required:

CITY TREASURER'S CERTIFICATE

My signature, as Treasurer of the City of Marengo, certifies that there are no delinquent or unpaid, current or forfeited special assessments or any deferred installment thereof that has been apportioned against the land included in this Plat of Subdivision.


 


City Treasurer
 
Date:   	
 

I		803.14 Road Certificate(s). If interior subdivision streets or roads access upon a county, township or state road, the following certificate(s) shall be included on the Final Plat:
I	ROAD CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS
 
I	COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 
)SS
 

Approved this	day of	(month)	, 20(year), as to roadway access to
(County/State/Township) Highway No.	also known as	_

 		(Signed) 	 County Engineer
and/or
Illinois Department of Transportation
and/or
Township Highway Commissioner



803.15	State of Illinois Certificate. In accordance with the 11 I inois Regulation of Rivers, Lakes and Streams (615 ILCS 5/7), if a subdivision borders upon or, includes any public waters  in which the State of Illinois has any property rights or property  interests, it must
 
Article 8 - Plat Certificates and Other Requirements



have a boundary line indicated between the  private  interests and  the  public  interests. The proposed boundary line must be reviewed and approved by the  Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources for the special certificate  that must be placed on the Final Plat to indicate that the boundary line has been approved .

STATE  OF ILLINOIS CERTIFICATE

 
STATE OF ILLINOIS

COUNTY OF MCHENRY)
 

)SS
 

Approved by the Department of Transportation of the State of Illinois insofar as this Subdivision Plat, showing lands bordering upon or including public waters of the State of Illinois, relates to the provisions of Section 7 of An Act in Relation to the Regulation of
Rivers, Lakes, and Streams of the Scace of 1/linois approved June 10, 1911, as amended,
requiring review and approval by said Department as to the boundary line between private
interests and public interests.

I further certify that I have received all statutory fees in connection with the annexed Plat. Dates at Springfield, Illinois, this	day of _	( m_o_n_th)- 20(year).
Approv al recommended:   	
Director, Division of Water Resources

State of Illinois, by its Department of Transportation

By:   	
Secretary



803.16	Developer Contribution.  The following notice shall be placed on all Final Plats of Subdivision:


NOTICE
All of the property described herein and platted in lots, blocks and other parcels of units may be subject to a dedication of land or a payment in lieu of land pursuant to Article 6 of  the Marengo Subdivision Ordinance at the time of application for building  permit.

803.17	Compliance with Approved Building Plans.	The  following  notice  shall  be placed on all Final Plats of Subdivision:



NOTICE

All building plans and architectural elevations for structures to be built in the subdivision as presented to the City of Marengo and approved as part of the Final Plat of Subdivision shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the Recorder's Office of McHenry County, Illinois and recorded together with either the declaration of covenants or homeowners association bylaws for the subdivision, or recorded as a separate document. All final building plans submitted to the City for construction approval shall conform to the plans and elevations as contained  in the recorded
 
Article 8 - Plat Certificates and Other Requirements



documents.	Changes  to  building  plans  and  elevations  may  be  permitted   upon approval  by the City of Marengo.



804  Tax Search


Before a Final Plat may be submitted to the City Council, the owner shall make all payments of any and all taxes and special assessments levied against the property being platted by him. In vacating subdivisions previously platted, the petitioner shall submit evidence of the payment of all taxes and special assessments levied against the property in the same manner as is required for subdividing (see Subsection 803.7).


805  Retained Personnel Fees


The developer shall pay and reimburse the City for any and all ex penses it incurs and for any fees directly or indirectly incurred or charged to the City by virtue of the review of any Concept, Preliminary, Final Subdivision Plat, Engineering Drawings, and any inspection fees or charges relating to services provided to confirm that subdivision improvements  conform  to  the requirements of the Marengo Subdivision Ordinance ,  including  without  limitation  copying expense, recording fees, publication expenses and expenses of retained personnel. Retained personnel shall be defined as any engineer, planner, attorney, or other technical professional, or paraprofessional person, firm, or corporation utilized by the City to assist or  advise  the  City directly or indirectly in planning, reviewing, or evaluating, advising, approving, accepting, or inspecting any subdivision of the City. The City shall require the  developer to deposit into an account , under the control and authority of the City, fees found  in Appendix  H.

No proceeding shall occur until required fees are paid in accordance with this Ordinance.
I	The money deposited pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance shall be retained by the City as
security  to guarantee  that  all fees  and  expenses  will  be paid by the developer.  Retained
personnel shall issue bills or invoices for services rendered in conjunction with a particular subdivision to the City. The developer shall pay invoices directly to the City.

If at any time the City Clerk receives notice from an of the City's retained personnel that an invoice for services rendered, with respect to a particular subdivision and with respect to which a copy of said invoice has been forwarded to the particular developer, is unpaid and outstanding for a minimum of 30 days, the City Clerk shall be authorized to pay said invoice directly from the escrow account and shall contemporaneously send notice to the developer that all further proceedings shall be stayed until the original amount of the escrow is reestablished. Notice to the developer may be by regular mail.

Upon approval and recording of the Final Plat, the Clerk shall confirm that all ex penses and fees directly or indirectly incurred with respect to the subdivision have been paid without expenses to the general fund of the City, and shall provide an account of any fees or ex penses directly paid from the escrow. Thereafter ; the escrow shall be retained at 50 percent of the amount originally ,established and shall be held as security to confirm that on-site review and inspection from the City Engineer or other retained personnel is paid in ac cordance with the procedure outlined above in this Section. Upon final acceptance of subdivision improvements, any balance retained in the escrow shall be paid forthwith to the developer . Funds deposited  in
 
Article 8 - Plat Certificates and Other Requirements



escrow  as established  pursuant  to this  Section  shall  not accrue  interest  for  the  benefit of the
developer.



806 Filing Fee: Preliminary Plat


The developer shall pay to the City at the time of the filing of the preliminary flat a filing fee (see
Appendix  H  for fee amount)












l l










J














 
City of M11re11go Subdivision Ordinance
 
May 9, 2005
 
Article 9  	
DEFINITIONS



901 General


For the purposes of uniform interpretation of this Ordinance, certain terms and phrases shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section. The words "shall" and "must" indicate mandatory items, while the word "may" indicates optional items.

902 Listing of Definitions



ADVERSE IMPACTS. Any deleterious impact on water resources or wetlands affecting their conditions or beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, quality, and quantity.

ALLEY. A  public or private improved  roadway  intended to provide supplementary  pubI ic access
to the rear of a lot.

AWWA. American Water Works Association.


APPLICANT. Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out construction of a development from the City of Marengo.

AUTHORITY.  The appropriate  reviewing authority  as set out  in this Ordinance .

BASE  FLOOD  ELEVATION.  The elevation  at  all  locations  delineating the  level  of flooding
I	resulting from the 100-year frequency flood event.
BUFFER.    An area that  preserves, provides access to, or otherwise  serves as a  necessary adjunct
to natural areas by protecting streams, lakes, wetlands, soil, air, and habitat. Land that includes, but is not limited to, areas with predominantly deeply rooted native vegetated land adjacent to channels, wetlands, or lakes for the purpose of stabilizing banks, reducing contaminants including sediments in storm water that flows to such areas.
J
Buffer Area












An example of a buffer (with berm) between residential and natural areas
 
Article 9 - Definitions





BUILDING.   Any  structure  having a roof supported  by columns  or walls which  is built, used, or
intended for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.

BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The person approved by the City Council as the building official for the City of Marengo.

BYPASS FLOWS. Stormwater  runoff from  upstream  properties tributary to a property's drainage
system but not under its control.


CABLE TELEVISION (CATV) COMPANY. A person, firm or corporation who has obtained a franchise from the appropriate unit of local government to provide television signals for subscriber use via permanently installed coaxial cable.

CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage , slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into which-surface or groundwater flows perennially or intermittently.

CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. The alteration includes, but is not limited to damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or I woody rooted vegetation. An alteration that  does  not  include  the clearing of debris or removal of trash .

CHIEF OF POLICE. Person approved by the City Council as department head of the Police Department.

CITY. The City of Marengo, McHenry County, Illinois.

I	CITY ADMINISTRATOR.   The City Administrator of the City of Marengo.
CITY ATTORNEY. The current City Attorney of the City of Marengo.


CITY CLERK. The duly appointed Clerk of the City of Marengo; also sometimes referred to as the Clerk .

CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Marengo .


CITY ENGINEER. The current City Engineer of the City who shall at all times act as an adviser to the Planning and Zoning Commission and to the City Council.

CITY STAFF COMMITTEE. A committee composed of selected City administrative and technical staff including the Building Commissioner, City Clerk, Chief of Police, Superintendent of Streets Department, Superintendent of Water/Sewer Department, and retained personnel.
 
Article 9- Definitions



COMMUNITY WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM. A system serving more than one dwelling unit, principal use or lot and owned and operated by a utility,  homeowners  association  or  similar entity.

COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the floodplain.

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The City of Marengo Comprehensive Plan, 2004, as amended.

CONCEPT PLAN. A graphic exhibit which shows basic resource features,  proposed lot divisions, roadway layout and general drainage features of a proposed subdivision. The purpose of the Concept Plan is to explore  alternative  subdivision  arrangements  prior  to  investing time and money on detailed drawings of an arrangement which may not be acceptable.

CONDUIT. Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert, etc., used for the conveyance or movement of
J	water, wastewater, electric, telephone, gas or other  utilities, whether  open or closed.

CONGRESSIONAL SURVEY TOWNSHIP.  An area approximately 6 miles square identified by
1	its  unique  township  and  range  numbers  With  respect  to  a  designated  principal  meridian  and
base line.

CONVENTIONAL PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: An individual system employing a septic tank and the soil treatment system, commonly known as seepage trenches  that  are partially  or wholly  in original soil  material.

COUNTY. McHenry County, Illinois.

I	COUNTY CLERK. The elected or appointed County Clerk of McHenry County, Illinois.
COUNTY  ENGINEER  (SUPERINTENDENT   OF  HIGHWAYS).  The  appointed  head  of  the
]	McHenry   County   Highway   Department.

CRITICAL SOIL. Earth materials that have been disturbed and/or have natural limitations extensive enough to require alternative systems or are perhaps so limited  as to preclude the practicality of on-site wastewater  treatment.

CUL-DE-SAC. A publicly dedicated, minor residential street with a single outlet which is permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround and which meets the standards set out in Section 303.2 of this Ordinance.

DATE OF COMPLETED APPLICATION. The date the applicant submits the application, or the date the applicant submits the last item of substantial supporting data, whichever date is later.

DAYS. For the purpose of this Ordinance shall mean business days, not including state and federal ho! idays.
 
Article 9 - Definitions



DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION STREETS. The Schedule of Minimum Design Requirements for Subdivision Streets in the City of Marengo (Section 303 of this Ordinance, sometimes referred to in Article 3 as merely Design Requirements).

DETENTION BASIN. A facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff-and the controlled release by gravity of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.

DETENTION  POND.   A permanent  natural or man-made structure for the temporary  storage of
run-off, which consists of a permanent pool of water.


DETENTION TIME. The mean residence time of stormwater  in a detention basin.


DEVELOPER. The owner or entity proposing to develop the property.

I	DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to real estate, including:
A.	Preparation of a Plat of Subdivision;


B. Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building;


C.  Installation of a  manufactured  home on a site,  preparing a site  for  a  manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days;

D. Construction of streets, bridges, or similar projects;


E.  Redevelopment of a site;


F.  Filling,  dredging,  grading,  clearing,  excavating,  paving,  or  other  non-agricultural
alterations of the ground surface;
I	G . Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste; and
H. Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency, deviation, direction, or
I	velocity of stormwater  flows from a property.
DRAINAGE PLAN. A plan including engineering drawings and supporting calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage system and environmental features, as well as the drainage system and environmental features which are  proposed  after  development  of  a property.

ORY BASIN. A detention basin designed to drain completely after temporary storage of stormwater flows and to normally be dry over the majority of its bottom area.

EASEMENT. A right to the use of land by the pub\ ic, a corporation , or persons for specific purposes such as the construction of uti I ities or roadways.

EROSION. The general process whereby earth is removed by flowing water or wave action.
 
Article  9 -Definitions



EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF. The volume and rate of flow of stormwater discharged from an urbanized drainage area which is or will be in excess of that volume and rate which pertained before urbanization.

FEE IN LIEU. A cash contribution paid by a developer instead of providing facilities required of development under this Ordinance.

FINAL PLAT.  See Plat, Final.

FIRE DEPARTMENT.  The Marengo Fire Protection  District.


FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.

FLOODPLAIN. That land adjacent to a body of water  with  ground  surface  elevations  at  or below  the  base  flood  or  the  100-year  frequency  flood  elevation . (also  known  as the  Special
1	Flood   Hazard  Area   (SFHA)).
FLOODWAY.  The channel and that portion of the floodplain  adjacent to a stream or water
course which is needed to store and convey the anticipated existing and future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage and no more than a 10 percent increase in velocities.

HALF STREET. A street with less than a full pavement width .

HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The McHenry County Department of Health.

HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT. The McHenry County Highway Department.

)		HIGHWAY   ROAD  COMMISSIONER.   The  elected  or  appointed  Highway  Commissioner  of  the Township  Road  District.


HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. A group of property owners, whether residential or nonresidential, formed to address the ownership and maintenance of facilities owned in common or jointly by persons who own lots in the subdivision.

HYDROGRAPH. A. graph showing a given location on a stream or conduit, the flow-rate with respect to time.

IDNR. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources.

I	I DOT. The 11 linois Department of Transportation .
IEPA. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.


INFILTRATION. The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.


ISPE. The Illinois Society of Professional Engineers.
 
Article 9 - Definitions



LOT. A parcel of land, occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in the Zoning Ordinance, which is designated by subdivision plat, approved by the City of Marengo, and recorded with the County Recorder's Office.

LOT, CORNER. A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two or more streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.

MAJOR  DRAINAGE  SYSTEM.  That  portion  of  a drainage  system  needed to  store  and convey
flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system .


MAYOR. The duly elected or appointed Mayor of the City of Marengo.


MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM. That portion of a larger system designed for the convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers , small open channels,and swales.

MITIGATION. The action to correct or prevent an undesirable condition, including, but  not limited to compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, channel restoration, and wetlands.
l	MUNICIPAL  UTILITY  EASEMENT.   A  right to the  use of  land for, but not limited to, water,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer and stormwater.


NATURAL. Conditions resulting from physical, chemical and biological processes without intervention by man.

NATURAL AREA. An area of land, not necessarily undisturbed,which either retains or has been substantially restored to its original nature or native character.

NATURAL RESOURCE  CONSERVATION  SERVICE.  A division of the  United States  Department of Agriculture which provides technical assistance in soil-related matters to, individuals, units of government,  etc., through the  local Natural Resource Conservation  Service  District office.
I	NATURAL RESOURCE INVENTORY (NRI) REPORT. A report prepared by the McHenry County
Soil and Water Conservation District which describes the soils, as shown on the official McHenry County . Soil Maps, surface geology and
other  natural  features  of  a  parcel  of  land,  and
evaluates   in  general   terms   its  suitability  for  a
particular use.
 


NET BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of  a  lot, within which a structure can be  built,  after required setbacks, yard  areas,  landscape,  and open space areas are met.

NET SITE ACREAGE. The gross acreage minus the acreage devoted to street right-of-way, storm water retention and detention basins,  bodies of water, public parks, school sites, municipal sites,
 
Net Site Acreage = gross
acreage - (ROW, storm water retention, conservation areas, public parks, etc.)
 
Article 9 - Definitions


conservation areas, and areas with slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%).


NONCRITICAL SOIL. Undisturbed soil materials, as determined by on-site comprehensive soil survey, that can support a conventional private sewage disposal system, where at least the lower portion of the soil absorption part of the system can be installed in original, uncompacted soils. Another term: having the same meaning for purposes of this Ordinance can be "suitable soil."

100-YEAR EVENT. A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one percent, chance of occurring in
any given year.


OPEN SPACE. Open space  is an area lacking in any man-made structures and surfaces, other
than those used for public park and recreational uses .


ORDINANCE. The City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance.

OWNER.  The proprietor of a piece of property (or the beneficiary if title is held in a trust) and
his designated representative such as developers, engineers, surveyors and other agents.

l	PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water-at a given point in a channel or conduit.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City
I	of Marengo.
PLAT, FINAL.  The official graphic depiction of a subdivision which is ultimately filed for the
record in the Recorder's Office. It shows  all lots, easements, streets and other dedicated areas and also indicates items such as building setback lines, restricted areas for septic systems and any ingress and egress restrictions.

PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A graphic depiction of the proposed lot lines, streets and other engineering improvements of a proposed subdivision superimposed on a map of the existing topography. Where septic systems are to be used for subsurface waste  disposal,  it will  also indicate soil classifications and wetness categories used to determine suitability of various areas for the septic systems {also known as "Tentative Plat").

PLAT ACT. An act to revise the law in relation to plats, approved March 21, 1874, as amended
(765 JLCS  20510.01  et seq.) .


POLICE DEPARTMENT. The City of Marengo Police Department.


POLITICAL TOWNSHIP. A unit of local government organized under an act to revise the law in relation to township organization, approved March 4, 1874, as amended (60 lLCS 5/1-1  et seq.). It may or may not coincide with a Congressional  Survey Township.

POSITIVE  DRAINAGE.   Provision  for  overland  paths  for  all  areas  of  a  property   including
depressional areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.


PRELIMINARY PLAT. See Plat, Preliminary .


PROPERTY.   A parcel of real estate.
 
Article 9- Definitions



PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT. A right to the use of land for, but not limited to telephone, gas, cable, and electric. This is distinguished from a municipal utility easement.

RECORDER. The elected or appointed County Recorder of McHenry County, Illinois.

RECORDER'S ACT. An act to revise the law in relation to Recorders, approved March 9, 1874,
as amended (55 ILCS 5/3-5001 et seq.} .

REGIONAL  SUPERINTENDENT  OF SCHOOLS.  The elected head of the McHenry County
Educational Services Region.


REGISTERED  PROFESSIONAL  ENGINEER  (LICENSED  PROFESSIONAL  ENGINEER).  A  person
who is licensed to practice  Professional  Engineering by the State of Illinois, or who,  is allowed to practice by the State of Illinois under a reciprocity agreement with another state (see 225 ILCS 655/1 }.
1	REGISTERED	PROFESSIONAL	LAND	SURVEYOR	(LICENSED	PROFESSIONAL	LAND
SURVEYOR).  A  person who  is licensed to practice professional  surveying by the State of  Illinois
(see 225 ILCS 330 14 [g]}
1
REGULATORY  FLOODWAY.  The channel,  including on-stream  lakes, and that portion of the
floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by the U.  S ... Department  of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage and no more than a 10 percent increase in velocities. The  regulatory  floodways  for  selected water  bodies, for areas  in the City and within its planning jurisdiction, are designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps prepared  by  the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), panel 170482 0001C, dated January 2, 1992, and   parcels   170732   01758,   170732   03008,   170732   01508   and   170732   02758   dated
September 30, 1981, as amended. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, topographic elevations should be used where they are recited, otherwise, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation  is needed to determine the exact  location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources should be contacted for the interpretation.

RESUBDIVISION.  The further  division  of  lots or the  relocation  of  lot  lines of any  lot or  lots
within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to law.


RETENTION BASIN. A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation, infiltration, emergency bypass or pumping.

REVIEWING AUTHORITY. The person or board responsible  for  approving  or  recommending the approval of the development under this Ordinance, namely the Development Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council.

SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris, and other  materials  either  on  other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater drainage systems.
 
Arlicle 9 - Definitions



SEPTIC SYSTEM (CONVENTIONAL). An individual, conventional on-site sewage system employing a septic tank and the soil treatment system commonly known as seepage trenches, that are partially or wholly  in original  soi I material.

SOIL CLASSIFIER. A certified member of the Illinois Soil Classifiers Association and/or a certified professional soil classifier member of ARCPACS who, by reason of his special knowledge of the physical, chemical and biological sciences applicable to soils, and of the methods and principles of soil classification as acquired by soils education and soil classification experience in the formation, morphology , description and mapping of soils,   is  qualified  to practice soil classifying.

SOIL  STANDARDS  MANUAL  FOR  ON-SITE  WASTEWATER   DISPOSAL  SYSTEMS.  A  book
prepared by the McHenry County Department of Health which details  requirements  for  the design and installation of septic systems in various types of soi I conditions.

STAN DARD  SPECIFICATIONS.  The  Standard  Specifications  for  Road and  Bridge Construction
adopted July  1, 1994 by the  Illinois Department of Transportation  (IDOT), as amended. STATE PLANE COORDINATES. The Illinois Coordinate System Act, 765 ILCS 225/1 et. seq. STATE'S ATTORNEY. The elected or appointed State's Attorney of McHenry County, Illinois. STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected , stormwater .
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or man-made , used for conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet from a Property . The stormwater drainage system includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenance   features,    canals,   channels,   ditches,   streams,   culverts,   streets,   storm   sewers,
I	detention basins, swales and pumping stations.
STORMWATER RUNOFF. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground, or are collected in channels or conduits.

STREET.   The  term   "street"   and  "road"   are   used  interchangeably   and   mean  the   same.
Classifications are set out in Section 303.

STREET FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting a public or dedicated street right-of-way to which it proposes to have direct ingress and egress.

SUBDIVISION. A division of land into two or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future , of transfer of ownership or building development including all public streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, or other public grounds , and all the tracts, parcels, or blocks, and numbering of such lots, blocks, or parcels by progressive numbers giving their precise dimensions.

The following shall not be considered  a subdivision  and shall be exempt  from the  requirements of this code:
 
Article 9- Definitions



A.	The sale or exchange of parcels of land between: owners of adjoining and contiguous
land;

B. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;

C. The conveyance of land owned by a rai Iroad or other pub\ ic uti Iity which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;

D.	The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use; and

E.	Conveyances  made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances .

F.	Conveyance of  a two-family dwelling resulting in title to each dwelling unit being held by different owners where the  document  of  conveyance  includes  a  condition  precedent  that the conveyance is subject to an agreement between the  parties  setting  forth  the  relative rights and obligations of the parties, and that  said agreement be recorded and otherwise  be in a form acceptable to the City subject to the following limitations:

i.	That the two-family lot be at least 74 feet in width.

ii.	That the two-family unit is a "side by side" unit with a single common wall and no
common floors or ceilings.


iii.	That the lot be zoned R-2 at the time of said division.

iv.	That the two units of the dwelling be essentially of an equal size.


v.	That the agreement setting forth the relative rights and obligations of the parties meet
the following criteria:


a.	That the agreement be approved as to form by the City prior to its recording.

b.	That the agreement  provide that all exterior surface areas of the building shall
be of a like architectural design, color and construction.

c. That the agreement provide that in the event of a dispute between the owners as to any matter, that the Circuit Court of McHenry County shall have  the authority to resolve any such disputes.

d.	That the agreement provide that no common surface shall be  repaired, altered, constructed  or removed without  the written  consent of both owners .

e.	That the agreement provide that the City has the right, but not the obligation,
to enforce the provisions of the agreement.
 
Article 9 - Definitions



SUITABLE SOIL. Undisturbed soil materials as determined by an on-site comprehensive soil survey that can support a conventional private sewage disposal system, where at least the lower portion of the soil absorption part of the system can be installed in original, uncompacted soils. Another term having the same meaning for purposes of this Ordinance can be "Noncritical Soil."

SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS. The current Superintendent of Schools for the applicable schoo I district.

SUPERINTENDENT  OF  WATER/SEWER.  The  person approve d by the  City Council  as the
department head of the Water and Sewer Department.

TIME OF CONCENTRATION. The elapsed ti me period for stormwater to flow from the most hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of interest in that watershed.

I	TRIBUTARY WATERSHED. All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a given point.
2-YEAR EVENT. A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a 50 percent chance of occurring in any
given year.

UTILITY COMPANY. A person, firm or corporation who owns, controls, operates or manages any equipment, plant or property furnishing telephone, cable television, electric, light, heat, power, water, sewerage, gas (by pipeline) or similar service for                             ',, .
public use.
 


WET BASIN. A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water after the temporary storage of stormwater  runoff.

YARD.     An  open  space  on  the  same  zoning  lot  with  a
principal building or group of buildings.

YARD, FRONT. An area reaching across the full width of the lot, extending from the front line of the main building to the lot line.

YARD,  REAR.   An  area  extending the  full  width  of the  lot
between the rear line of a main building and the rear lot line.


YARD, SIDE. That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the principal building and a side lot line, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.

ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person authorized under the City of Marengo Zoning Ordinance to undertake enforcement of that Ordinance.

ZONING   ORDINANCE.   The   City   of   Marengo   Zoning
Ordinance.
 
,.
 




























front	rd
 
Appendix A
ENGINEERING  PLANS




A-1	General


All street and utility plans submitted in conjunction with a Final Plat shall include Engineering Drawings consistent with this Appendix.

A-2	Signature and Seal of Engineer Required


All street land utility plans shall be certified by a registered professional engineer and bear his signature, seal, and date of license expiration.

A-3	Minimum Data Required


Street plans must be complete in all respects and must include at least the following minimum
data:
•	Specifications (IDOT Standard Specifications and ISPE Standard Specifications} for Water and Sewer.
•	Plan and profile (to suitable scale} of all roads to be improved.
•	Cross-sections (to suitable scale} at 100 foot (minimum}.
•	Size, length, material type and invert elevation of all drainage structures. (Calculations
must be furnished to justify all structures 24 inches and larger.)
•	Plan and profile (to suitable scale}, cross-sections (if appropriate) and typical section of all off-site drainage within 300 feet and all on-site drainage in drainage easements.
•	Typica l road section or sections as appropriate.
•	Details of all structures and specia l construction of any nature. Typical or specific details
at road intersections, cul-de-sacs , "t" turn-arounds, etc.
•	Street construction and maintenance easements, drainage easements and lot lines.
•	All plans to the same topographi c datum as the Preliminary  Plat, and two permanent benchmarks.
•	Street lighting as required by Subsection 301.7 and 302.6.
•	Sidewalks as required by Subsection  301.6 and/or302.7.
•	Plan and profile of any water and sanitary sewer  lines.
•	Plan showing existing and proposed contours and storm sewer outfall structures related
to detention and retention basins.
•	Erosion control plans.


A-4	Cost Estimate


A complete and detailed estimate of cost, prepared and signed by a registered professional
engineer, must accompany the plans.
 
Appendix A - E11gi11een·ng Plans


A-5	Certificate of Insurance


A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the City.

A-6	Preconstruction Requirements


A preconstruction conference with the representatives of the developer and the City-will be required before the contractor proceeds with construction. The contractor will notify the City Engineer and the City of Marengo 48-hours in advance of any work being started.

A-7	Best Engineering Practice and Compliance with Ordinance Required


Review and approval of street and uti I ity plans does not relieve the design engineer of the responsibility for an adequate design  in accordance with best management practices and
]	meeting the  requirements of this Ordinance.


1









I


1
 
Appendix	B
Land Development Exhibits



 B-1 TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT 	



Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit






]


1









I I



Source:  lflinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.  Naperville, IL   1996.
 
Appendix B - Land Development Exhibits









8-2	AGREEMENT REGARDING THE RECEIPT OF DEVELOPER SUBDIVISION CONTRIBUTIONS



AGREEMENT REGARDING THE RECEIPT
OF DEVELOPER SUBDIVISION CONTRIBUTIONS

WHEREAS, the City of Marengo, Illinois, on behalf of itself, its officers, employees and independent contractors (the "City"), through its ordinances or through the provisions of its annexation agreements has required that developers make contributions to the City, that the City, in turn, may make available for other government bodies that are affected by the subdivision improvements; and

WHEREAS, such contributions may be in land or in money and, when transferred or paid over to those government bodies, inure to the benefit of those government bodies and not entirely to the direct benefit of the City; and

WHEREAS, from time to time within the City, and within other municipalities, disputes have arisen regarding the validity and amount of such contributions; and

WHEREAS, the City is willing, at its discretion, to continue seeking the contribution of land or money but wishes to procure a commitment from other government bodies benefited by the receipt of such contributions that those government bodies will: (a) acknowledge that the requirement that such subdivision contributions be made are totally within the discretion of the City as to their existence, manner and amount; (b) pay the cost of defending any lawsuit that is filed challenging the appropriate amount of the contributions, the time at which they are to be made or any other aspect of the contributions; and (c) comply with the terms of a final and nonappealable judicial determination by a court of competent jurisdiction rendered in connection with the lawsuit; and

WHEREAS, the City is willing, in its discretion, to pay over or require contributions only to other government bodies that execute this Agreement annually;

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration for the payment of money or the transfer of the land to the Benefiting Government, which the City from time to time may within its discretion cause to be made by developers that are subdividing property, IT IS AGREED between the City on behalf of itself and          its          officers,          employees,          and          independent          contractors,          and
1    a government  body within the State of Illinois (the
"Benefiting Government"),  as follows:

1.	The Benefiting Government  acknowledges  that,  except as otherwise  provided  in the City's ordinances and/or annexation agreements , the City is not obligated to cause the payment of money or the transfer of land to the Benefiting Government. The Benefiting Government recognizes that the City may, at its sole discretion, amend its ordinances or annexation agreements or its practices to discontinue the payment of contributions to the Benefiting Government.
 
Appendix B -Land Development  Exhibits


2.
A.	In the event a lawsuit is filed against  the  City,  the  Benefiting  Government, and/or others by a developer that is subdividing property or any other person, corporation or entity that challenges the appropriateness, amount, timing or any other aspect of a contribution that,  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  City's ordinances or annexation agreements, has been paid or is due to the Benefiting Government, then the Benefiting Government does agree to pay the costs and litigation expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees)  incurred  in defending such lawsuit. The costs and expenses shall be  paid  by  the  Benefiting Government  when  and as incurred by the  City but in no event more than once a month. As a condition precedent to the payment of these costs and expenses, the City shall submit to the Benefiting Government copies of the original statements reflecting the costs and expenses, together with the non-prlvileged supporting documentation that may be reasonably requested by the Benefiting Government.


B.	The City covenants and agrees that upon consulting with the benefiting government, it shall employ competent and skilled legal counsel to represent the Benefiting Government and the City, and further covenants and agrees that it shall keep the Benefiting Government fully advised as to the progress and status of the litigation. In particular, the City shall provide to the Benefiting Government copies of all pleadings filed in the litigation and shall consult regularly (and shall cause its attorneys to consult regularly) with the Benefiting Government or its attorneys, as applicable, as to the strategy for defending the lawsuit. In no event may such litigation be compromised or settled by the City without at least 30 days' prior written notice to the Benefiting Government.

C. In the event that the Benefiting Government decides that it would prefer to be represented in the litigation by legal counsel of its own choosing, then the Benefiting Government shall be free to retain its own legal counsel for that purpose, to intervene in the litigation and to ask the City to terminate its representation of the Benefiting Government under Section 2 of this Agreement. The Benefiting Government  shall  notify  the  City,  in writing,  to  that  effect  In that event, this Agreement shall remain in full  force  and  effect  regarding  all other provisions of this Agreement, and the Benefiting Government shall remain liable to the City for all sums that have accrued under this Agreement up  until the date that such written notice is  received  and for  all sums that  remain due and owing from the Benefiting Government to the City relating to the defense of any lawsuit under the terms of this Agreement.

3.	. The Benefiting Government shall further indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all liability arising from Article 10 of the City's Subdivision Ordinance including but not  limited to the general administration  and handling of funds  required  by the City and/or the Benefiting Government.

4.	In the event that a final and non-appealable judicial determination is made by a court of competent jurisdiction that contributions of land or  money received by the Benefiting Government are, in whole or in part,  excessive,  the  Benefiting  Government  shall promptly repay those contributions to the  person  who  procures  such  a  judgment, together with all other amounts judged by the court to be owing from the Benefiting Government. In the event that a judicial determination should require the payment of damages or payment of the attorneys' fees of the plaintiff's attorneys, the Benefiting Government shall pay all additional amounts.
 
Appendix B - Land Development Exhibits




5.	In fu11her consideration of the continued payment by the City to the Benefiting Government of the subject contributions of land or money, the Benefiting Government agrees that its obligations under this Agreement shal I extend to both past and future cash and land contributions.

6.	On or before September 1st of each year, every Benefiting Government that receives payments from the City under this Agreement shall submit a report to the City describing the manner in which the payments have been used and provide any additional information the City may require. When the money turned over to Benefiting Government is to be used for a specific purpose or within a specific time period, the report shall address those issues. If the Benefiting Government should fail to file such a report with the City, the City may delay the payment of any additional funds due the Benefiting Government until such time as a full report containing adequate information is transmitted to the City. The Benefiting Government understands that it will be asked to execute an indemnity agreement similar to this Agreement on an annual basis and that the City shall not pay any additional funds due to the Benefiting Government until such time as the City is in receipt of such annually executed indemnity agreement.

7.	This Agreement shall be terminable by either party for any reason or no reason at all upon 30 days' prior written notice to the other party evidencing the intention to so terminate this Agreement. But the termination of this Agreement shall not affect the continuing obligation of the Benefiting Government or the City with regard to claims or damages allegedly arising out of the City's efforts prior to termination to impose, collect or distribute contributions, or to the actual distribution of subdivision contributions.


DATED this_ day of _	_

City of		_	Benefiting Government:
I
Mayor
Title:----------
(SEAL)	(SEAL)

ATTEST:	ATTEST:



City Clerk	Secretary
 
Appendix B - Land Development Exhibits




B-3	AGREEMENT	BETWEEN   OWNER   AND   MUNICIPALITY   TO   DELAY    PAYMENT   OF   CASH CONTRIBUTIONS



AGREEMENT BETWEEN OWNER AND MUNICIPALITY TO DELAY PAYMENT OF CASH CONTRIBUTIONS

The City of Marengo (the "City") and                                       , ("Owner") agree as follows . For purposes of this Agreement, "Owner" is defined as the individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having a proprietary interest of record in the subject property, except that in the case of a trust the Owner shall be deemed to include the beneficiary or beneficiaries and the trustee thereof. The term "Owner" also includes the Owner's authorized agent or any person authorized by such owner to apply for City approval in connection with  a final  plat of subdivision,  building permit, or other  improvement or development  upon real
)	property.
1.	The City has approved a final plat of subdivision or a final plat of a planned development at the  request of Owner for the real estate legally described in Exhibit 1 attached hereto and made a part hereof (the "Land"). Accordingly, pursuant to the City's Subdivision Ordinance, certain  cash contributions in lieu of dedications for library, fire/rescue, park and recreation, and school  lands are immediately due the benefiting district from the Owner.

2.	Owner has, however, requested that the payment of the aforesaid cash contributions be delayed and that the same become due and payable on a per dwelling unit basis at the time the City issues a building permit for the particular dwelling unit.

3.	In consideration for the City agreeing to delay the required payment to the benefiting district of the cash contributions in accordance with Paragraph 2 above, Owner hereby agrees as follows:

(a)	The amount of cash contributions owed sh al I be calculated based upon Ordinance No.	or  as  provided for  in such  other  future  ordinance  amending or
J		replacing  Ordinance  No.	which  is in effect at the time of the  issuance of a building permit; and

(b)	Notwithstanding any present or future law, regulation and/or legal precedent to the contrary, the unit of local government or benefiting district that is the ultimate recipient of the subject cash contributions may expend such contributions for any of the following purposes intended to serve immediate or future needs of the residents and children of the Owner's subdivision or planned development: (T) for the acquisition of land; (2) for site improvements such as, by way of example, streets, curbs, gutters, stormwater control, and utility extensions; (3) for construction of capital facilities, including, by way of example, new buildings and structures, and the expansion or enhancement of existing buildings and structures; (4) for the acquisition of capital equipment which would qualify as a depreciable  property under Internal Revenue Service regulations; and (5) for so-called soft costs directly related to the foregoing items (2) or (3) such as architectural and engineering costs.

4.	Owner has reviewed all provisions of Article 10 of the City's Subdivision Ordinance regarding the dedication of land or sites or cash contributions in lieu thereof, as well as all of the  methodology,  formulae , calculations,  projections,  assumptions,  numbers  and  other
 
Appendix B - Land Development ExhibiJs



factors used to arrive at the land dedication requirements or cash contributions in lieu thereof that are the subject of the this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the "Ordinance and Attendant Calculations") and hereby acknowledges and agrees that:

(a)	Pursuant to the terms of the Ordinance, Owner has been offered the opportunity to raise in a hearing before the City, any objections relating to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair market value, the Density Formula, or any other application of the Ordinance; Owner has not raised such objection s; Owner has thereby waived the right to assert those objections;

(b)	Owner hereby waives any future  right to object to or to institute any  legal action
regarding Ordinance and Attendant Calculations .

(c)	Owner hereby acknowledges that Ordinance and Attendant Calculations have been properly passed, calculated and imposed.

5.	This Agreement constitutes a covenant that is appurtenant  to and runs with the Land. Either this Agreement or a memorandum thereof may be recorded against legal title to the Land by either  party  hereto;  provided,  however,  it shall  be a condition  of the City's  issuance  of the
first building permit for a dwelling unit on the  Land that Owner shall  provide satisfactory

evidence to the City that this Agreement  or a memorandum  thereof  has been  recorded
against legal title to the Land.

6.	Owner represents and warrants to the City that it is the sole holder of record fee title to the Land.


IN WITNESS WHEREOF , the City and the Owner have caused this Agreement to be duly authorized, executed and entered into as of the_ day of	_
I

 

Dennis Hammortree Mayor
 

Owner
 

 
I
Barbara Bigalke City Clerk
 
ATIEST:
 

[ATTACH EXHIBIT B-2, LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF REAL ESTATE]
 
Appendix B - Land Development Exhibits



 8-4 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  OF NOTIFICATION  RIGHTS 	



Acknowledgement  of  Notification  Rights

Developer hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of Article 10 of the City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance, that describes, in Section 1009, the developer's right to object to the imposition of dedication requirements or cash in lieu of land requirement s.


Developer further acknowledges that if it has any objection to such  imposition,  that it must follow the procedure set forth in said Section 1009. Failure to do  so by  the  developer  shall  constitute a waiver of th e developer's right to object to such imposition . Payment of the fees or tran sfer of land pursuant to Article 10 shall constitute a waiver of any right to such a hearing .


Signed:---------------­
Date:   ---------------------


Witness:-------------------
Date:   ---------------------
I
 
Appendix C
ENDANGERED  SPECIES  CONSULATION  ACTION   REPORT


 


Date Submitted: -------
 
(Office  Use Only) Project Code
Date Due
 

Agency    Name:   ----------------------
Contact   Person:  ----------------------
Phone:        -------------------------
Agency     Address:    ---------------------

DESCRIBE  PRECISE  LOCATION OF PROPOSED ACTION:
County(ies):        -----------------------
City!Town:    ------------------------
Township/Range/Sect    ion:-------------------
U.S.G.S Quad Map  Name (s): -----------------
Brief Description of the proposed action:



Please enclose a map delineating the location of the proposed action.
**********************************************************************
********************
 


I	QUADCODE(S):  	
 
For Natural Heritage Use Only

 	_
 
Are there any threatened/endangered  species or natural areas located within the vicinity of
the project? (Yes) (No)  If yes, the consultation process should continue.  If no, the consultation process is terminated.

 
Evaluation approved by:
I	Endangered & Threatened Species
Program Manager
 



Date
 

Submit to:	Natural  Heritage  Division, Ill. Department  of  Conservation 524 S Second Street, Room 485
Springfield, IL  62701-1787
 
Appendix D
SECURITY REQUIREMENTS



0-1 GENERAL


The following form is acceptable for meeting the guarantees  required by this Ordinance.

 D-2 LmER OF CREDIT 	


J	IRREVOCABLE    LETTER    OF   CREDIT

Date: ----

Irrevocable Letter of Credit No.: -------
 

Beneficiary
City of Marengo
132 East Prairie Street Marengo, IL   60152 Attention:  City  Clerk
 



Address
 

Applicant
(Party Requesting Letter of Credit)




Amount
USD $ (Amount)



Expiration Date	_
 


The undersigned, (Bank)           of           (City/State)         , hereby issues to the City of Marengo, Illinois 60152  (the "City"), this  irrevocable  Letter of Credit  in the  initial amount of
$     , which amount is subject to reduction in accordance with the provisions herof, and which the amount, as in effect on the date herof or as so reduced herafter, is herinafter referred to as the "Stated Amount." The undersigned represents and warrants that the undersigned has full power and authority to issue this Letter of Credit, and that all conditions precedent to the issuance of the Letter of Credit have been satisfied.
 
Appendix D - Security Req11irements



1.	Draws. Credit may be drawn by the City by means of presentation to the undersigned of the City's sight draft substantially in the form of Annex 1.

Draws on said Letter of Credit must also be accompanied by the certificate of the City substantially in the form of Annex 2 certifying either: (1) that said Letter of Credit is about to expire and has not been renewed; or (2) that work has not been completed in accordance with the plans, specifications and agreements (including any amendments thereof) for the following project (the "Project"):



(Description of Project)



Draws in an amount less than the Stated Amount are permitted.  There  is no limit on the
number of draws the City may take under this Letter of Credit.

2.	Reduction of Stated Amount. The Stated Amount may be reduced upon presentation by the City of this Letter of Credit and of a certificate substantially in the form of Annex 3. Such-certificate shall be appropriately completed, and shall be delivered  to  the undersigned at the address above along with the original Letter of Credit.  Upon receipt of the certificate and the Letter of Credit, the undersigned shall immediately note the reduced amount on the face of the Letter of Credit, or cancel this Letter of Credit and simultaneously reissue a Letter of Credit-identical to this Letter of Credit for the reduced Stated Amount.

3. Amendment of Project Description. The Project may be amended upon presentation by the City of this Letter of Credit and of a certificate substantially in the form of Annex 4. Such certificate shall be appropriately completed , and shal I be delivered to the undersigned at the address above along with the original Letter of Credit. Upon receipt of the certificate and the Letter of Credit, the undersigned shall immediately note the amendment to the Project description on the face of this Letter of Credit or cancel this Letter of Credit and simultaneously reissue a Letter of Credit identical to this Letter of Credit with the amended Project description.

4. Expiration. This irrevocable Letter of Credit shall expire on (Date/Year); provided, however, the undersigned shall notify the City, by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 35 days prior to said expiration date, that said Letter of Credit is about to expire. In no event shall this irrevocable Letter of Credit or the obligations contained herein expire except upon said prior written notice, it being expressly  agreed by the undersigned that the above: expiration date shall be and shall be required to comply with this notice provision. Notice, shall be made to the City of Marengo, 132 East Prairie Street, Marengo, IL 60152, Attention : City Clerk. The undersigned further agrees that this irrevocable Letter of Credit shall remain in full force and effect and pertain to any and all amendments or modifications which may be made from time to time to the plans, specifications and agreements for the project, with or without notice from the City of such amendments or modifications.

5. Payment. (Name of Bank} hereby undertakes and engages that all demands made in conformity with  this irrevocable  Letter of Credit will be duly  honored and payment  shall be  made  in  immediately  available  funds  upon  presentation.  If, within  10 days  of  the
 
Appendix D- Security Requirements



date any demand (made in conformity with this irrevocable Letter of Credit) is presented, the undersigned fails to honor same, the undersigned agrees to pay all attorney's fees, Court costs and other expenses incurred by the City in enforcing the terms of this Letter of Credit.

6. Governing Law. This Letter of Credit, and each provision hereof, shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (1983 Revision), International Chamber of Commerce, Pub Iication No. 400 (the "Uniform Customs"). This Letter of Credit shall be deemed a contract made under the
laws of the State of Illinois and shall; as to matters not governed by the  Uniform Customs, be governed by and construed in accordance with such  laws.  The undersigned  agrees  that  venue  for  any  actions  brought  with  respect  to  this  Letter  of
I	Credit shall be in the 19th Judicial Circuit, McHenry County, Illinois.
(Name of Bank)

 
By:	_ Title:  		
 
Attest:		__ Title:  --------
 


 





$ 	

At Sight of this Draft
 
Ann ex  I
Form of Sight Draft


 	_	_	,19
 

Pay to the order of City of Marengo, Illinois, as beneficiary under the Irrevocable Letter of Credit referred to below, $	Doilars for value received.

 
Drawn under (Bank)
 
----- Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. -------
 



To:	(Bank) (Address)


 
Attention:		_
 


City of Marengo, Illinois


By:		_
 
Appendix D - Security Requirements


Annex 2
Form of Certificate for Drawing

The undersigned, the Clerk  of the City of Marengo (the "City"), with full authority  to bind the City, as beneficiary (the "Beneficiary" under the Letter of Credit referred to below, herby certifies, with reference to  its  Irrevocable  Letter  of  Credit  No,	issued  by	(Bank)	(the "Bank", in favor of the Beneficiary (the "Letter of Credit"), that

1.	the Letter of Credit is about to expire and has not been renewed;

(or, in the alternative)
2.	work   has  not  been  completed   in  accordance  with  the  plans,  specifications,  and
agreements (including any amendments thereof) for the following project:
I	(Desc ription of Project)

INWITNESS WHEROF, the Beneficiary has executed and delivered this certificate as of the_ day of
1	(month	), 19 (year).

City of Marengo, Illinois

By:	_
Title: City Clerk



Annex 3
Form of Certificate for  Reduction of Stated Amount

The undersigned , the Clerk of the City of Marengo (the "City"), with full authority to bind the City, as beneficiary (the "Beneficiary" under the Letter of Credit referred to below, herby certifies, with reference to  its  Irrevocable  Letter  of  Credit  No,	issued  by	(Bank)	(the "Bank"), in favor of the Beneficiary (the "letter of Credit"), that

1.	Pursuant to the Agreement entered into by and between City and   (the "Company"), dated	(month)__, 19 (year), the amount available to be drawn under the letter of Credit (the "Stated Amount "), is reduced by$         , and effectiveyou're your receipt herof, the Stated Amount shall be reduced to $           , and such amount
I	shall thereafter constitute the entire Stated Amount of the letter of Credit.
2.	.   The unders igned herby certifies (1) that he or she is authorized to sign this  Certificate
relating to the Letter of Credit on behalf of the Beneficiary, and the (ii) that the Beneficiary has, with the written consent of the Company, reduced the Stated Amount of the Letter of Credit.

Capitalized terms used herein and not otherwise defined in the Letter of Credit.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , the Beneficiary has executed and delivered this certificate as of
the	day of (month)	,  20(year)_.


City of Marengo, Illinois


By: -------­
Titl e: City Clerk
 
Appendix D - Security Requirements




Annex 4
Form of Certificate for Amendment of Project Description




The undersigned, the Clerk of the City of Marengo (the "City"), with full authority to bind the City, as beneficiary (the "Beneficiary"  under the Letter of Credit referred to below, herby certifies, with reference to its Irrevocable Letter of Credit No,	issued by (Bank)	(the "Bank"), in favor of the Beneficiary (the "Letter of Credit") ,
that

1. Pursuant to the Agreement entered into by and between City and -----
(the ''Company"),  dated	(month)	, 19 (year), the description of the
project as contained in paragraph 1 of the Letter of Credit shall be amended upon the undersigned's receipt of this certificate and the original  Letter  of Credit. After giving effect to the amendment, the description of the Project shall be as follows:


and such Project description shal I constitute the Project description for  the Letter of Credit unless further amended.
Capitalized terms used herein and not otherwise defined in the Letter of Credit. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Beneficiary has executed and delivered this certificate
as of the	day of (month)	,  20(year)_.





City of Marengo, Illinois

By:			_ Title: City Clerk
 
Appendix	E
Retained  Personnel  Fees



Retained Personnel Fees Form Agreement

The  following form  of agreement  is approved  for purposes of  meeting the requirements  of this Appendix.

 

I

)	Owner :
 
CITY  OF MARENGO REIMBURSEMENT OF FEES AGREEMENT


City of Marengo Account No.	__
 
Name of Property Owner: ----------------------

Owner's    Address:        -------------------------


Telephone Number:	Days	Evenings PETITIONER :
Name of Petitioner:   	

Petitioner 's Address:    	
I
Telephone Number:	Days	Evenings
I	LOCATION OF PROPERTY:
General Location:   	



Total Acreage :	PIN:

Legal Description (attach as Exhibit A)



E-1 DEPOSIT


In the event that it-is necessary for the City to obtain professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planners, architects, surveyors, traffic or drainage experts, or other  consultants,  in  connection  with  any  Petitioner's  request  for  the  City  to  consider  or otherwise  take  action  upon any annexation,  zoning change, subdivision development,  other improvement or development upon real property, then the Petitioner and Owner of the property shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of such professional fees plus 5 percent to
 
Appendix E - Retained Personnel Fees



cover the City's administrative expenses. At the time the Petitioner requests action from the City he will be required to deposit a sum, in accordance with Article 9 of the Marengo Subdivision Ordinance , with the City as an initial deposit to be credited against fees and costs incurred for the above described services.

E-2  INVOICES

The City shall send a petitioner regular invoices for the fees and costs and the petitioner shall reimburse the City within 30 days of said invoice. At all times the petitioner shall maintain a balance equal to his initial deposit with the City .

E-3 WITHDRAWAL OF PETITION


A petitioner who withdraws a petition for annexation, zoning change, subdivision development, other implement, or development upon real property, to the City may apply in writing to the City Clerk for a refund of his initial deposit. The City Council may, in its discretion, approve the refund application less any actual fees and costs which the City has already incurred relative to the petition for annexation.
1	E-4    PROFESSIONAL   FEE


Any professional fees incurred as a direct or indirect result of the petitioner, owner or their agent requesting a professional opinion or otherwise requesting relief or assistance from the,  City, whether or  not related to  real property, shall  be reimbursed  in accordance  with  this Ordinance if, in the discretion of the City, a professional opinion  is desired.

E-5	DEFAULT
I	Upon the  failure  of  the owner  or  petitioner  to  reimburse the  City  in accordance  with  this
Subsection, no action on any request made by the owner or petitioner will be undertaken by the
City Council, or by any other official, quasi-official or deliberative individual or body, and such request shall remain in abeyance until all outstanding fees are paid in full. Upon any failure to reimburse the City in accordance with this Ordinance, the City may, in its discretion, elect to place a lien against any real property associated with the petitioner's request. Interest in the amount of 1 1/2 percent per month shall accrue on all sums outstanding for 30 days or more. Such lien shall be in an amount equal to the outstanding amount owed to the City.

E-6	ASSIGING AUTHORITY


The Mayor and City Council and the designated City staff members are hereby authorized to assign requests for professional services to the City staff or to consultants as the Mayor deems appropriate.

E-7 IN HOUSE STAFF


When any professional services required by the Ordinance are rendered by the City staff, then in such case the party making the request shall reimburse the City for its cost incurred in providing said professional services. Said reimbursement shall be at the rate of $30.00 per hour.
 
Appendix  E - Retained  Perso1111el  Fees




E-8 REMEDI ES


The remedies available to the City as set forth herein are non-exclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to limit or waive the City's right to proceed against any or all parties in a court of law of competent jurisdiction.

E-9 AGREEMENT

1	At  the  time  the  petitioner  requests  action  from  the  City,  he will  be  required  to  enter  into an agreement,  which  is  the  Retained  Personnel  Fees  Form  Agreement  of  Appendix   E  of  this
Ordinance.

E-10 REFUND


Any surplus funds in the account of the petitioner or owner shall be returned three months after approval by the City Attorney and City Engineer, upon written request by the  petitioner or Owner.

By signing this Agreement the petitioner and/or owner acknowledge that each of them has read the foregoing paragraphs and each of them fully understands and agrees to comply with the terms set forth herein. Further, by signing below, each signatory warrants that he/she/it possesses full authority to so sign. The owner and/or petitioner agree that owner and petitioner shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of fees referred to in applicable sections of the ordinances of the City of Marengo, and as referred to hereinabove.

City of Marengo

 

Petitioner
 
By:	­
City Administrator
 

ATTEST:
Owner



 
Date:
 


City Clerk
 
Appendix	F


F-1	RECOMMENDED   STREET TREES


CITY OF MARENGO
Recommended  Landscape  Planting Lists
prepared  by Teska Associates, Inc.



PARKWAY PLANTINGS
RECOMMENDED  STREET TREES  FOR  PARKWAY  PLANTINGS
for use where overhead wires do not exist
minimum mature height of 30 feet  or more

 
Botanical Name
Acer x freemanii
A cer platanoid es cultivars Acer rubrum 'Red Sunset' Acer saccharum
Acer saccharum  'Green Mountain'
Acer saccharum  'Wright Brothers'
Acer saccharum
Aesculus hippocastanum
Carya ovata
Ce/tis occidental is
Ce/tis occidentalis 'Prairie Pride'
Cory/us colurna
Ginkgo biloba (male only) Ginkgo biloba  'Autumn Gold' Ginkgo biloba  'Fairmount' Ginkgo biloba  'Lakeview' Ginkgo biloba  'Princeton Sentry'
Gleditsia triancanthos  inermis 'Creenglory' Gleditsia triancanthos inermis  'Halka' Gleditsia triancanthos inermis 'Shademas ter ' Gleditsia triancanthos  inermis  'Skyline'
Gymnocladu s  dioica jug/ans nigra Liquidambar styraciflua Liriodendron tulipifera Ostyra virginiana
Phellodendron amurense
Quercus alba Quercus  bicolor Quercus imbricaria Quercus macrocarpa
Quercus  muehlenb erg ii
 
Common Name Freeman Maple Norway Maple
Red Sunset Red Maple
Sugar Maple
Green Mountain Sugar Maple Wright Brothers Sugar Maple Sugar Maple
Common Horsechestnut Shagbark Hickory Common Hackberry Prairie Pride Hackberry Turkish Filbert
Ginkgo
Autumn Gold Ginkgo Fairmount Ginkgo Lakeview Ginkgo Princeton Sentry Ginkgo Greenglory Honey locust Halka Honeylocust Shademaster Honeylocust Skyline Honeylocust Kentucky Coffeetree
Black Walnut
Sweetgum
Tulip Tree, Yellow Poplar Ironwood
Amur Corktree White Oak
Swamp White Oak
Shingle Oak
Bur Oak Chinquapin Oak
 
Appendix F -Guide for Landscaping


 
Quercus robur Quercus rubrum Tilia americana
Tilia americana 'Fastigiata' Tilia americana 'Redmond' Tilia cordata  'Chancellor' Tilia cordata 'Glen/ even' Tilia cordata  'Olympic' Tilia x euchlora
Tilia cordata 'Creenspire'
Ulmus carpinifo/ia  'Accolade' Ulmus carpinifolia  'Homestead ' Ulmus carpinifolia  'Regal' Zelkova serrata
Zelkova serrata  'Greenvase'
 
English Oak Red Oak
American Linden
Pyramidal American Linden Redmond American Linden Chancellor Linden Glenleven Linden
Olympic  Linden Redmond Linden
Greenspire  Littleleaf  Linden Accolade Smoothleaf Elm Homestead Smooth leaf Elm Regal Smoothleaf Elm Zelkova
Greenvase Zelkova
 


RECOMMENDED  STREET TREES FOR PARKWAY PLANTINGS
for use where overhead wires exist
7 5-30  feet  maximum  mature  height

 
Botanical Name
Acer Cinnala Amelanchier canadensis Carpinus carolinia
Cercis candensis
Camus mas
Cornusmas alternifo!ia
Crataegus  phaenopyrum
J	Crataegus   crus-gall i
Hammamelis  virginiana Matus sp.
Ostrya virginiana
Syringa reticulati clutivar Viburnum lentago Viburnum prunifolium
 
Common Name Amur  Maple Serviceberry
Ironwood (American Hornbeam) Redbud
Corneliancherry  Dogwood Pagoda Dogwood Washington Hawthorn Cockspur Hawthorn
Witch  Hazel Flowering Crab Sp. Ironwood
Japanese Tree lilac "Ivory Silk"
Nannyberry Blackhaw Viburnum
 
Appendi..x  F -Guide for  Landscaping


F-2	STREET TREES NOT RECOMMENDED



The following tree forms are unacceptable for parkway plantings:
Espalier or topiary: geometrical plant form s achieved thorugh pruning  which are contrary to natural form
Dwarf or small scale: trees which grow taller than 3'-0" but ca nnol be undertrimmed to a minimum height of 7'-
O"
Topped or dehorned: trees wilh most of the crown removed, such that the main branches end abruptly in stubs

The following tree species and varieties are unacceptable;
conifers or needle evergreens are unacceptable
trees with thorns are unacceptable
trees which drop messy fruit s are unacceptable

 
Botanical  Name Acer  negundo Acer saccharinum Aesculus  spp.
Ailanthus altissima
Castanea spp. Catalpa spp.
Eleangus angustifolia Fraxinus spp.
Ginkgo biloba  (female)
Halesia spp. Madura pomifera Morus spp. Oxydendrum spp. Populus spp. Prunus spp.
Pyrus spp.
Rhamnus  spp. Robinia spp. Salix spp. Sorbus spp.
 
Common Name
Box Elder
Si Iver Maple Buckeye species Tree-of-Heaven Chestnut
Catalpa species
Russian Olive Ash species Female Ginkgo Silverbell species Osage Orange Mulberry  species Sourgum species
Poplar, Cottonwood , Aspen
Cherry, Peach , Pl um Flowering Pear species Buckthorn species Black Locust
Willow species
Mountain Ash
 




F-3	GUIDELINES FOR PROTECTING EXISTING TREES


To better ensure the survival of existing trees, the deve loper should follow standard horticultural and construction practices in the area for the protection of existing trees. The following guidelines are a minimum summary of those practices:

•	Protect trees with fencing and armoring during the entire construction period. The fence should enclose an area with a 10 foot radius with the tree at the center.
•	Avoid compacting the soil around existing trees with heavy equipment. Do not pile dirt
or construction materials or waste beneath the crown of the tree.
•	Keep fires and sources of extreme heat away from existing trees. Repair damaged roots and  branches  immediately.  Exposed  roots should  be covered with topsoil.  Severed
 
Appendix  F -Guide for   Landscaping



limbs and roots should be painted. Whenever roots are destroyed , a proportional amount of branches should be pruned so the tree does not transpire more water than it takes in. Injured trees must be thoroughly watered during the next year.

F-4	GUIDELINES FOR PLANTING TREES

The trees on the recommended list have minimal maintenance requirements. However, all trees must receive some care, especially during and immediately after planting. To ensure survival of newly planted, trees, the developer should follow standard horticultural and construction practices in the area for the protection of existing lines. The following guidelines are a minimum summary of those practices:

•	The best times for planting are early spring and early fall. Trees planted in the summer
run the risk of dehydration .
•	Dig the tree pit at least 2-feet wider than the root ball and at least 6 inches deeper than the ball's depth. Loosen the soil within another one foot of the pits circumference.
•	If the soil has become compacted, loosen the bottom of the pit with a pick ax or shovel.
•	Backfill with good soil. Water backfill as it is placed in the pit.
•	Completely cover all roots.
•	Immediately after planting support the tree with stakes and wires to hold it firmly  in place as its root system begins to develop. Remove support after one year.
•	Spread at least 3 inches of mulch over entire excavation to retain moisture and control weeds.  Add 3 more inches of mulch in a basin shape immediately around the tree.
•	Wrap the lower trunks of new trees with burlap or paper to prevent evaporation and sun
scald. Remove after one year.
•	Water  the tree during extended  dry  periods and  before the  first  hard frost  for the  first
year.

I
 
Appendix G	 	
Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List


City of Marengo Water Main Materials List

Water Main Pipe	Ductile iron pipe, Class 52 in accordance with AWWA
Standard C-157, C-111 and C-104, or the fol lowing: CL 150 C909 PVC Pipe with  12 gauge copper wire or
14" and larger SOR 18 C905 PVC Pipe with 12 gauge copper wire. Valvco Tracer Wire Access Boxes to be installed as required.

 
Gate Valve
(Less than  1 2" diameter)
 
Gate Valves shall be cast iron in accordance with AWWA Standard C-509, and as manufactured by Mueller  Company Model No. A  2360-20.   No alternates allowed.
 

 
Butterfly Valve
(12" diameter & larger}
 
Butterfly valves shall be cast iron in accordance with A WWA Standard C-504, and as manufactured by Mueller Company  Model B 3211-20, or Pratt Groundhog.
 

 
Valve Vault Frame: And  Lid
 
Pre-cast reinforced concrete in accordance with Article 602 .02 and 743.01 of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer.  Valve Vaults shall be provided with steps.
 

Fire  Hydrant		Fire Hydrants shall be Cast Iron in accordance with AWWA  C-502, and as  manufactured by Mueller Company, Model No. A423  Super Centurion  250.   No alternatives allowed.  Hydrants shall have a 6" M.J. connection with  18" separation  from  6" Mueller A2360 valve installed with Tyler 664S Valve Box and Adapter II Valve Box Stabilizer.   Hydrants shall have two 2-1/2" pentagon  operating nut opening counter  clockwise and
be pained red.  Standard depth of bury shall be 6'0" and no hydrants shall exceed 7'0" bury .  No more than one extension section shall be allowed.   Hydrants shall be furnished with weep holes.  Al hydrant parts and extensions must be original manufacturer's parts.
 
Appendix G - Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Stom1 Sewer Materials List


Appendix G (continued) City of Marengo
Water Main Materials List



Water Main Fittings	Water main fittings shall be ductile iron mechanical joint in
accordance with A WWA Standard C-153, and shall be manufactured in the United States.

1	Water Services	Water services shall be Type K copper , l" -2" diameter.
Corporation Stop	Corporation stops shall be brass, copper outlet, as
manufactured  by Mueller Company Model No. H-15008 (1'' diameter) or Model No. H-15013 (l-1/2" and 2" diameter) . No alternates allowed.

Water Service Saddle	Water saddles shall be manufactured by Smith Blair Model
No. 317 .  No alternates allowed.  Tapping PVC water main
shall use all Bronze Saddle as manufactured by Mueller Company, H-1300 series or approved equal by the Water Superintendent.

Curb Valve	Curb valves shall be brass, as manufactured by Mueller Company Model No. H  1504-2 (I" diameter) or Model No. B-25155 (1-112" and 2" diameter) . No alternates al lowed .
I	Curb Box	Curb boxes shall be cast iron , 6' bury and with a 39" rod, as
manufactured by Mueller Company Model No. H-10306 (1-
1/4" diameter) or Model No . H-10386 (1-112" and 2" diameter).  No alternates allowed .

Water Meters	Purchased through the City of Marengo.

Tapping Sleeve                Tapping sleeves shall be cast iron and mechanical joint, as manufactured by Mueller Company Model No. H687 or A 2360-16 (resilient wedge valve) .  No alternates allows.

Valve Boxes                               Tyler 664-5 cast iron two-piece box with American-made adopter II rubber valve box stabilizer. No welded threads allowed.
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List


Appendix G (continued) City of Marengo
Sanitary Sewer Materials List



Sanitary Sewer Pipe	PVC SOR 26, in accordance with ASTM D-3034 or
approved equal by Water Superintendent.

Sanitary Manhole	Precast reinforced concrete, in accordance with Section 32 of
the Standard  Specifications for   Water and  Sewer .

 
Sanitary Manhole Frame &
)	Lid  (In Pavement  or Parkway)
 
In accordance with Section 32 of the Standard  Specifications for  Water and Sewer and as manufactured  by Neenah Foundry  Co.  (R-1712 or R1713)  or East  Jordan  Irion Works,  Inc. (No.  1050HD), lids  marked  "Sanitary" and "Marengo".
 

 
Sanitary Manhole Frame Chimney Seal
 
Sanitary Sewer manhole secti.ons shall be sealed with Mac Wrap or approved equal.  Manhole chimneys shall be installed with Internal/External manhole seal as manufactured by Adapter, Inc . Cretex External manhole seal or approved equal.
 

Sanitary Sewer Fittings	03034 gasketed wyes with 45 degree bend .  Services deeper
than 6' shall use risers and riser adaptors .
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List


Appendix G (continued) City of Marengo
Storm Sewer Materials List


Storm Sewer Pipe		Reinforced concrete pipe in accordance with applicable Articles 550.03, 740.03, 740.05, and 740.07 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (Standard Specifications).

 
Storm Sewer Manhole, Type A
I
Storm Sewer Manhole Frame and Lid
 
Pre-cast reinforced concrete in accordance with Articles
602.2	and 743.01 of the Standard Specifications.




As manufactured by Neenah Foundry Company (R-1772) or East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. (No. 1622, Type Ml  cover) , lids marked  "Storm".
 

 
Curb Inlet Frame and Grate, Type 11
 
In accordance with Section 604 of the Standard  Specifications
and as manufactured  by Neenah Foundry Company (R0328 l­
A)	or East Jordan Iron Works. Inc. (No. 7210, Type Ml
grade).
 

Catch Basin, Type A or Type C	Pre-cast reinforced concrete in accordance with Articles
602.02 and  743.01 of the Standard Specifications.

 
Catch Basin Frame and Grate, Type 8 or Type 37M
 
In accordance with Article 604 of the Standard Specifications
and as manufactured by:
Neenah Foundry Co.	East Jordan Iron Works.
 

Inc. Type 8
Type 37M
 


R-4340-B R-4342
 


No. 6527
No. 6489
 

Pipe Culvert	Corrugated  steel pipe in  accordance with Articles  542.02 and 706.01( a)-of the Standard Specifications

Sump Pump Drains	All drains will be tied into the storm sewer using_6" diameter minimum , PVC SDR 26.

Trench Backfill		CA-6 crushed gravel, in accordance with Article 704.04 of the Standard  Specifications.

Note : All sections referenced above are from the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, adopted July 1, 1994.
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List


Water System Details






 



1





18"  (MIN.)
25'  (MAX.)


I
 
Frhydet
 

6' COVER  (TYP .) UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED ON DRAWINGS
 

COVER  W/  PLASTIC	3rJ'   MIN.	3rJ'    MAX.
J
/2 C.Y. (MlN)
3
 

VALVE   BOX
STABlUZER
 
/4"  S!ZE  OR  LARGER
WASHED   STONE	MECHANICAL   JOINT   TEE





MEC   ,ANlCAL    JOINT    ANCHOR F!Tf[NGS, FJELD LOK GASKCTS i;,, OR TIE RODS

-1!.QIL_  MECHANICAL   JOINT  ITTTINGS  ARE   NOT  REQUIRED WHERE   F!ELO   LOK  CASKETS  ARE  UTILIZED.

   STANDARD   FIRE   HYDRANT   INSTALLATION 	
NO  SCALE








6-24-02
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List






STANVAVT

NOTES:
1.	CONCENTRIC  CONE  REQUIRED
2.	USE 4'-0"  DIAMETER
FOR  WATER   MAIN  SIZES  4"  THRU
1()",  5'-0"  FOR SIZES  12" THRU  18"
6'-0"  FOR  2Cf'  OR  GREATER
 


FRAME  AND
COVER
 

F1NlSHED   GRADE

WATERTIGHT JOINTS
 





MANHOLE STEPS
@    lo C.  TO  C.

z
PRECAST	S1
CONCRETE	'o
MANHOLE	)
SECTIONS	"'





J






GRANULAR  PIPE
BEDDING    MATERIAL


STAt\IDARD   VALVE  VAULT   DETAIL
NO  SCALE
 
Appendix G - Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List









PCVAVT

NOTES:
1.	ECCENTRIC   CONE   REQUIRED
2.	USE 4'-0"  DIAMITTR
FOR  WATER  MAIN SIZES  4"  THRU  1o",
USE  5'-0"  DIAMETER
FOR  WATER  MAIN  SIZES  1'l'  THRU  20" ,
USE  6'-0"  DIAMETER
FOR  WATER   MAIN  SIZES   20"   OR   GREATER .

 

FlN!SHED  GRADE







MANHOLE STEPS
0 1 6"  C.  TO  C.
 
FRAME  AND   COVER
 

PRECAST CONCRETE
b	MANHOLE
(o	SECTIONS




WATER


J



 
PRECAST   CONG.   OR
f{ MlN. CAST-IN-PLACE
CONG.  BOTIOM
 

GRANULAR  PIPE BEDDING  MATERIAL
 


 	PRESSURE  CONNECTION  VALVE  VAULT   DETAIL 	

NO  SCALE
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Stomz Sewer Materials List







,...---------------------------·--·-.-----------------·--
Wm rel





















 
SOLID
SLITYE
 
VTIUZE  RES1RAINEO JOINT    FJTllNGS, REACTION  BLOCKJNG, OR   TIE   RODS .  (iYP)
 


NOTE:  1.  WATER  MAIN  RELOCATIONS  ARE  SUBJECT  TO INSPECTION  AT  NORMAL  SYSTEM  PRESSURE BEFORE   BURIAL.
2.	USE  ONLY  45  DEGREE  BENDS  UNU:SS  OTHERWISE
PERh!ITTEO  BY  THE  ENG NEER.
3.	CASING   MUST   EXTEND  A   MINIMUM   OF  10  FEET  BEYOND
OUTSJOE  EDGE OF SEWER  PIPE - ON  BOTH SIDES OF SEWER.

   WATER   MAIN   RELOCATION	DUCTILE   IRON 	
NO  SCALE














6-24-02
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List




















UNOISTURBEO     EARTH
TRE.JllCH   YIAU.  (TYP.)





 
I	.,NrG=H·WA"Ll '("N:P.J)	,

I





PLANS
 




SECTIONS

J!Qlli'. 	
1.	PROVIDE   PRECAST   OR   CAST-IN-PLAC£ CONCRETE THRUST  BLOCKS  OF ADEQUATE SIZE  ANO  THRUST  BEAR!NG  SURFACE  TO PREV£NT   MOVEMENT  OF  P!PEUNE   UNDER PilESSURE.

2..PLAC  THE   BASE  ANO   THRUST   BEARING SIDES  OF T\iRUST  BLOCK  DIRZCTLY  AC.oJl-<Si UNDISTURBED   £ARTH.

J, PLACE THRUST BLOCKING SO THE Fl !T;NC JOINTS WILL BE ACCESSIBI.£ FOR REPA'.R .
 

   TYPICAL  THRUST   BLOCK   INSTALLATIONS 	
NO  SCALE
I







6-24-02










City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance
 
Appendix G - Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List








Wsrv






I





   PLAN 	



SERVICE
BOX
z
5i
!--
WATER  MAIN	b
I
VARIABLE	6"	"'
{ONE  PIECE  OF   PIPE)
I
SERVICE  PIPE	PEENED END
CORPORATION   STOP	CURB  STOP

    SECTION 	


SERVICE
PIPE	
CORP. STOP	
CURB
STOP	
SERVICE SOX
3/4"	J/4"	J/{	z l/i	J
1"	1"	1·	z'li   -
11/,;	, ,/4"	1 1/4'	3"
1%"	11;..·•   x  11/,"	l1g	3"
2"	1 l/2"   x 2"	2"	3"
   WATER	SERVICE	INSTALLATION	·
NO   SCALE	I
L6-24-02	_J








City of Marengo Subdivision Ordilla11ce
 






,---------






l
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Stonn Sewer Materials List









Wsconnbb



\"°"'""" °"'"


\	10"
I	-i   1()"




NEW
WATER   MAIN
PLAN

PROVIDE NEW SERVICE aox, OR CONNECT TO EXJSTING SERVICE BOX IF DIRECTED BY ENGINEER / OWNER
 
VAR CABLE
(ONE  PIECE OF  P!PE}
I
REMOVE     EXIST.     SERVICE     1  •
EXlSTING	FROM   CURB   STOP   &
<  [ wAW<  '''" -'	"" mo '""'	!
 

,,	'\
\	.
 
\
.-"       ,.
-
 
1,	, -::::.---
\\...	,,
N .:-:­
WATER  111.AIN


NEW SERVICE P[P(
( StZE TO  MATCH  EXIST.

SECTION
I

I	,,1;.·-
 


NEW
CURB  STOP

EXJSTING   SERVICE  T
BUILDING   METER
 


EXISTING	WATER	SERVICE
   RECONNECTION    DETAIL
NO  SCALE

6-24-02





City of Marengo  Subdivision  Ordinance
Teska Associates , Inc.	May 9, 2005
 
- -





 



IAANHOLE  FRAME
AND  COVER











PRECAST  CONCRETE MANHOLE   SECTIONS
 







WATERTIGHT JOINTS


NOTE:
1.	ECCENTRlC  CONES  REQUIRED.   FLAT
SLAB  TOPS  PERMTITEO  ONLY  FOR
MANHOLES TOO SHALLOW FOR CONES .
2. USE  4'-o"  OlAMffiR  FOR
SEWER  SIZES  8"  THRU  21",  5'-o"
DIAMETER FOR SEWER  SIZES  24n THRU 3:f,
UNLESS  OTHERWISE  NOTED.

CONCRETE ENCASEMENT
 



SANMHDET
 
VI
:,:.:.i.
f.,.l.,I.
-<
Vl
:;:
....
(/}
-,<...
3
0
......
Vi
 

INVERT   CHANNEL TO  CONFORM TO  ELEVATION SHOWN   ON DRAWINGS

FLDGBLE
PIPE
CONNECTOR	'B'

NOTE;
 

"A" - DIAMETER OF INCOMING SEWER
"8" - DIAMETER OF DROP PIPE
WHEN: "A"=12-INCH  OR  LESS,
"ff="A"   BUT   NOT   SMAUER  THAN   8-INCH.
WHEN: "A =GREATER  THAN  12-INCH, BUT LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 1B-INCH,
"8"=12-INCH.
WHEN: "A"=GREATER   THAN   18-INCH,
•B"=2/3  •X'   MINIMUM.
 


k ' c;') I

.....


.:.=·
"§'
 


 	-	· 7     ·.
f	G ULAR · IPE
 
USE  OUTSIDE  DROP  WHEN  ANY  ENTERlNG SEWER   INVERT  DIFFERS   BY  2' -Cf   OR MORE  FROM  INVERT   OF  MANHOlE.   MATCH
CROWN  OF Oun.ET  PIPE WHERE  OUTLET  PIPE IS  30-INCH  DIA.  OR  SMALLER.  SEE  PLAN
SHEET'S  FOR  INVERT  ELEVATIONS  FOR  PIPE
SIZES LARGER THAN 30-INCH DIAMETER .
 
:::.·
<:>

v,

_"...'.
Vo
B'
 
BEDDING   IAATERIAL	OUTSIDE  DROP  DETAIL

SANITARY	MANHOLE	DETAIL
"'::!	NO     SCALE

,'O

N....V<,::,:>
 








----
 
:::!
;::
VJ
":;;':
"...'.
El.
s·
I:;"
("""
;.:.:..;.·
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer Materials List









wt-frm	cvr







l






 


I	CONC.
 
·--.,-- 1/z" OIA.  STN. SlL THRO.  ROD  - ,o. CHOR          TO PRECAST CONC. CONE SECTION
W/ S MlN. EM9£'.Dl!ENT USING
EPOXY AOHESM:
(TYP. FOR  4)

F1.EX!BL£    WAT"..RTIGKT    RUBBER.  CAsKET
 
PRECAST
AOJUSTINC    RING(S)
 
OR   PREFOfll.!ED   !llllJM!NOUS  PlASTIC   G."51<IT
aETW!DI  AU  LAYERS   Of   ADJ .  RINGS,
flWolE  .!: ADJ.  RING,  AND  ADJ.   RING
& CONE SECTfO
 




WATERTIGHT FRAME & COVER DETAIL
NC  SCAU:
I














6-24-02
 
Appendix G - Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Stonn Sewer Materials List








 


PROVIDE   PLUG  OR  END CAP  WITH  THRUST  BLOCK
WHEN  SERVICE  CONNECTION
lS  NOT  INCLUDED


BRANCH   FITTING








DRY   MIX
CONCRETE ___./

 	BUILDil\jG	SERVICE	DETAIL 	
FOR  SEWER  lNVERT  DEPTHS  TO  12  FEET


10  FOOT  MIN. WHEN  SERVICE CONNECTION
NOT  INCLUDED
 
Bldsrv
 


PROVIDE  PLUG   OR   END
CAP  WITH  THRUST  BLOCK WHEN    SERVICE    CONNECTION
IS NOT INCLUDED



TOP SECTION OF RISER SHALL  SE 2 '-0"  LENGTH
 

1/s"  PER   FOOT
:«
,ftf9'M't---=-n	-


CONNECT  TO  EXISTING PIPE OR  PROVIDE  PLUG OR  END CAP WITH THRUST BLOCK
 

SUPPORT   RISER  AGAJNST
SIDE   OF  TRENCH






CONCRETE

 	BU I L DING	SERVICE	RISER	DETA I L 	
 
Appendix G - Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Stonn Sewer Materials List


Storm Sewer System Details




- ··    --------------------·---·-

STMMHDET







 
MANHOLE   FRAME
AND COVER

PRECAST   CONG. ADJUSTING   RING
B" MAX .






INVERT   CHANNEL TO  CONFORM TO   ELEVATION SHOWN  ON DRAWINGS
 



WATERTIGHT
JOINTS









PRECAST CONCRETE MANHOLE  SECTIONS

SLOPE  1" -'L'  PER  FT.

NOTE:
1.	USE ECCENTRlC CONES UNLESS OTHERWISE INDICATED ON THE DRAWINGS . Fl.AT
SL.AB  TOPS   PERMITTED  ONLY  FOR MANHOLES  TOO   SHAl.l.OW   FOR  CONES.
2. USE 4'-Q"  DIAMITTR  FOR
SEWER  SIZES  B" THRU  21",  5'-0"
DIAMETER  FOR  SEWER  SIZES  24"  THRU
3.3".  UNLESS  OTHERWISE  NOTED.
 


STORM  MANHOLE  DETAIL
NO  SCALE
 
Appendix G- Water Main, Sanitary Sew er, Stonn S ewer Materials List







CBDET-A









 






FRAME
AND  COVER

PRECAST CONC .
ADJUsnNG  RING
8"  MAX .
 
NOTE:
1. USE  CONCENTRIC  CONES  UNLESS  OTHERWISE INDICATED  ON  THE  DRAWINGS.   FlAT
SLAB  TOPS   PERMITTED   ONLY   FOR
MANHOLES  TOO   SHALLOW   FOR   CONES.

2 .  USE  THE  TYPE  OF  FRAME  AND  COVER INDICATED  ON  THE  DRAWINGS.
 







INLET	.34"  UNLESS  OTHERWISE
NOTED   ON  THE   DRAWINGS

PRECAST  CONCRETE MANHOLE   SECTIONS



GRANULAR   PIPE
BEDDING  MATERIAL
   CATCH   BASIN	TYPE  A 	
NO   SCALE
 
Appendix G - Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, Stonn Sewer Materials List








Cbdet-c










USE FRAME &
covrn  INDICATED
ON  THE  DRAWINGS



PRECAST  CONC RETE
MANHOLE   SECTIONS










 	CATCH   BASIN	TYPE  C
NO  SCALE

















6-24-02
 
Appendix	H
FEES



FEES (TO BE MOVED TO SEPARATE ORDINANCE AT  FUTURE  DATE) FEE TABLE











$0.20 per lot with a minimum of
$10.00 .






I









I

I











 
City of Marengo Subdivision Ordinance Teska Associates, Inc.
 
May 9, 2005
Pag e H  - J
 
CHAPTER24 BUILDING  CODE

 
24.01
24.02
24.03
24.04
24.05
24.06
24.07
24.08
24.09
24.10
24.11
24.12
24.13
24.14
24.15
24.16
24.17
24.18
24.19
24.20
Exhibit A

24.01
 
Adoption of Building Code Exceptions
Building Permit Application
Professional Fees
Permit/Schedule  Construction Schedule Municipal Property Damage Deposits Excavation in the Right of Way Driveways
Grading, Seeding and Driveway Deposits
Remote Water Meter Readers Certificate of Use and Occupancy Local Rules
Unlawful Continuance of Building Activity
Swimming Pools
Architectural Design Requirements Elevator/Conveyance  Inspections
Permit and Reinspection, Added, Partial Inspection and Replacement Fees
Permit Application Appeals Violation Penalties
Rights Continued Fee Schedule

ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE Amended, 17-11-2, 09-12-6, 07-2-3
 

The following list of codes are hereby adopted and amended as part of the City Building Code for the control of buildings and strnctures as therein provided for each code. Except as provided in Section 24.02 of this Chapter, each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and tenns contained in each code described below  are hereby refened to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this Chapter.

1.	2015 International Building Code ("IBC");
2.	2000 Life Safety Code NFPA IOI
3.	Cunent Edition International Energy Conservation Code (Commercial  & Residential Projects)
4.	2015 International Residential  Code ("IRC");
5.	2015 International Prope1iy Maintenance Code ("IPC");
6.	2015 International Mechanical Code;
7.	2015 International Fire Code; ("IFC");
8.	2015 International Existing Building Code;
9.	2015 International Fuel Gas Code;
10.	2014 National Electrical Code ("NEC");
11.	Cunent Edition Illinois State Plumbing Code; and
12.	Cmrnnt Edition Illinois Accessibility Code.
 

All words contained in the codes which refer to the municipality or other words of similar meaning shall mean the City of Marengo. The words "municipal authority" or "govemment authority" or words of similar meaning shall, for purposes of this Chapter 24, mean the City Council. The words "enforcing officer," "hearing officer," "building inspector," "building official" or other words of similar meaning shall refer to the person or entity designated by the City Council to act in that capacity. Words which refer to permit fees shall mean those fees found in Exhibit A of this Chapter 24.

24.2	EXCEPTIONS Amended, 17-11-2, 07-2-3, 04-4-1

Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms contained in each code adopted in Section 24.01 herein are hereby referred to adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this Chapter 24, except as provided below:

Exceptions to the codes adopted in Section 24.01 of this Chapter are:

Building  Code Requirement	Code(s) Section/Table
General.  Title.  Insert  (second  line):	City  of  Marengo,  McHenry  County,
Illinois	2015 IBC 101.l
General. Plumbing. Delete:	Intemational Plumbing. Insert:	Illinois State Plumbing Code, Current Edtion.	2015 IBC 101.4.3
Permits. Work exempt from permits.  Insert: "Permits shall not be required for the following unless otherwise required by the Marengo Building Code."	2015 IBC 105.2
Board of Appeals. Delete: Sections 113.1 through 113.3. Inse1i: "Any person shall have the right to appeal to the City of Marengo on a decision of
the application and interpretation of this code by the code official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incmTectly interpreted or the provisions of this code to not fully apply."	2015 IBC 113
Automatic Sprinkler System. General.  Delete:  First paragraph. Insert:
Systems shall comply with this section. New construction activity (excluding the remodeling or alteration of existing buildings and structures and not involving a change in use) for all use groups having a fire area exceeding five-thousand (5,000) or more square feet shall be required to install an automatic sprinkler system as follows:	When additions are made
to an existing building or structure have an existing fire area of five-thousand (5,000) square feet or less, and when such additions result in the building or structure having an aggregated fire are of seventy-five-hundred (7,500) or
more square feet, an automatic sprinkler system is required and shall be provided.	2015 IBC 903.l
Doors, Gates, and Tumstiles. Delete Item 2	2015 IBC
1010.1.9.3
 
Accessibility.	Delete Chapter  11 and any reference to accessibility within	2015 IBC Chapter the  International   Building   Code.	All  accessibility  references   shall  be	11
defened to the Illinois Accessibility Code (cutTent edition)
Footings and Foundations (Timber footings & Permanent Wood Foundation	2015 IBC 1809.12, systems)  Delete all sections		1810.3.2.4, and
1807.1.4
Scope.   Delete: Provisions of the ICC Electrical Code Inse1t: Provisions of	2015 IBC 2701.1
  the National Electrical Code 2014 version
Scope. Delete: International PlUlllbing Code. Insert:  Illinois State Plumbing	2015 IBC 2901.l Code
Insert:  City of Marengo, McHemy CoUllty, Illinois	2015 IPMC  101.l
Delete:  Fee Schedule	2015 IPMC 103.5
Board of Appeals.  Delete:  Sections 111.1through111.8.	2015 IPMC 111 Insert: "111.1 Board of Appeals. Any person shall have the right to appeal
to the City of Marengo on a decision of the application and inte1pretation of this code by the code official.  An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been inconectly interpreted or the provisions of this code do not fully comply."
Weed Height.  Insert:  Eight (8) inches	2015 IPMC 302.4
Insect Screens. Insert:  April I and October 31	2015 IPMC 304.14

Heat Supply.  Inse1t:  September 1 and April 30	2015 IPMC 602.3,
602.4
General. Title.  Inse1t:  City of Marengo, McHenry County, Illinois	2015 IMC  101.l


Permits. Fee Schedule.  The cutTent language in this section is deleted and	2015 IMC 106.5.2 replaced with the following:  "The fees for mechanical work shall be as set
forth by the Marengo City CoUllciL"
Permits. Fee Refunds. Delete in its entirety	2015 IMC 106.5.3

Board of Appeals. Delete:  Section 109.1through109.7.	2015 IMC 109 Insert:  "109.1 Means of Appeal:  Any person shall have the right to appeal
to the City of Marengo on a decision of the application and inte1pretation of this code by the code official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incmTectly interpreted or the provisions of this code do not fully apply."
General. Title.  Inse1t  (second  line):	City  of Marengo,  McHemy  County,	2015 IFC 101.l Illinois
General.  Referenced codes and standards.   Insert:   "101.6 referenced codes	2015 IFC 101.6 and standatds.  Where the following codes and standards are indicated within
the International Fire Code, they shall be replaced as indicated:
I.	International  PlUlllbing  Code- replace with Illinois  State Plumbing Code (latest edition)
2.   ICC Electrical  Code- replace  with the National  Electric  Code  (the
 
edition as adopted by the City of Marengo)


Pe1mits. Permits Required. Insert: "Permits required by this code, or by the	2015 IFC  105.1.1 Marengo  City Code ..."
Maintenance. Test and Inspection Rep01is. Insert:  "...filed with the fire code	2015 IFC  107.2.1 official.	Contractors  conducting  required  periodic  testing  shall  forward  to
the City of Marengo Department of Building & Zoning, copies of required test and inspection records as follows:
1.	Within 10 business days following the required test and inspection if there are no impairments found during the testing and inspection of
the system or equipment.
2.	Within 3 business days following the required test and inspection if
the testing and inspection indicates any impairment(s) to the system of equipment. "
Board of Appeals. Delete:  Sections 108.l through 108.3.	2015 IFC 108 Inse1i:  "108. l Board of Appeals.  Any person shall have the right to appeal
to the City of Marengo on a decision of the application and interpretation of
this code by the code official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the trne intent of this code or the rnles legally adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted or the provisions of this code do not fully apply."
Definitions:    Fire Lane.   Insert:   "...other than  fire apparatus,  access roads	2015 IFC 502.1 shall be constructed of an asphalt or concrete surface capable of supporting a
vehicle weight of 75,000 pounds and shall be of a design approved by the City Engineer."
Key Boxes. Where required.  Delete: "...the key box shall be of an approved	2015 IFC 506.l type and shall contain keys to gain access as required by the code official.
Insert: "...in an accessible location. The key box shall be purchased from the Marengo Fire/Rescue District and shall be installed in a location approved by the fire district. Building mater and fire alarm system access keys shall be provided as requested by the fire department."
Fire Department  Access to Equipment. Identification  and Lighting.   Insert:	2015 IFC 509.1 "509.1 Identification and Lighting.
Delete:   Current verbiage.
Insert:  "All doors providing access to fire sprinkler riser control valve rooms
and the main fire alaim control panel room shall be labeled "fire sprinkler controls" and/or fire alarm controls" as appropriate. Illumination shall be provided within all fire sprinkler and fire alarm control rooms, and in the intmediate vicinity of all equipment not provided within a dedicated room, in accordai1ce with Section 1008.1."
Automatic Sprinkler System. General. Delete:  First paragraph.	2015 IFC 903.1 Inse1i:   903.1 General.   Automatic  sprinkler systems shall comply with this
section. New construction activity (excluding the remodeling or alteration of existing buildings and structures and not involving a change in use) for all use groups having a fire area exceeding five-thousand (5,000) or more squai·e feet  shall  be  required  to  install  an  automatic  sprinkler  system,  except  as



Chapter 24, Page 4	11/15117
 

follows: When additions are made to an existing building or structure having an existing fire area or five-thousand (5,000) square feet or less, and when such additions result in the building or structure having an aggregated fire area of seventy-five-hundred (7,500) or more square feet, an automatic sprinkler system is required and shall be provided.	
Doors, Gates, and Turnstiles. Locks and Latches.  Delete:  Item 2	2015 IFC
1010.1.9.3
General.  Title.  Inse1t (second  line):	City  of Marengo,  McHenry  County,
Illinois.	2015 IEBC 101.1
Board of Appeals.  Delete:  Sections 112.l through 112.3
Insert: "112.1 Board of Appeals. Any person shall have the right to appeal to the City of Marengo on a decision of the application and interpretation of this code by the code official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incoTI'ectly interpreted or the provisions of this code do not fully apply."	IEBC 112
General. Title. Insert:  City of Marengo, McHemy County, Illinois Pe1mits. Fee Schedule. Delete: CuTI'ent language
Inse1t:  "The fees for mechanical work shall be as set forth by the Marengo
City Council."	2015 IFGC 101.l
	2015 IFGC 106.6.2
Board of Appeals.  Delete:  Sections 109.l through 109.7.
Insert:  "109.1 Board of Appeals.   Any person shall have the right to appeal to the City of Marengo on a decision of the application and interpretation of this code by the code official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the ttue intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under has been incorrectly interpreted or the provisions of this code do not fully apply."	2015 IFGC 109








2015 ISPSC 101.l
General.  Insert:  City of Marengo, McHemy County, Illinois	
Permits. Fee Schedule. The cuTI'ent language in this section is deleted and replaced with the following: "The fees for Pool and Spa work shall be as set fmth by the Marengo City Council."	2015 ISPSC
105.6.2
Permits. Fee Refunds.  Delete in its entirety.	2015 ISPSC
105.6.3
Board of Appeals.  Delete:  Section 108.l through 108.7.
Inse1t: "108 Means of Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal to the City of Marengo on a decision of the application and inte1pretation of this code by the code official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incoTI'ectly interpreted of the provisions of this code do not fully apply."	2015 ISPSC 108
Amendments:  Annex H 80.5 Electric Board Delete:  Section 80.5
Insert: "80.5 Electric Board. Any personal shall have the right to appeal to the City of Marengo on a decision of the application and interpretation of this code by the code official. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder	2014 NEC 80.5


Chapter 24, Page 5	11115/17
 

has been  incorrectly  interpreted or the provisions  of this code do not fully apply."	
	
Services: Insert:  At the end of 230.1 above ground electrical services must be in galvanized rigid or intermediate metal conduit only, and installed in accordance with the height and location requirements set forth in the National Security Code.	2014 NEC 230
Armored Cable. 320.l 0 Uses permitted. Insert: Type AC cable, commonly referred to as "BX" wire, may be used in one and two family residential dwellings. Wiring in residential buildings greater than two family shall be in metal conduit.  All non-residential buildings shall be in metal conduit.	2014 NEC 320
	
Delete: Article 334
Insert: The use of non-metallic sheathed cable (types NM, NMC, and NMS), commonly referred to as "Romex wire" is not allowed within the City except in the extension of an existing circuit of the same material.	2014 NEC 334
	

24.3	BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION

A.	No building or structure shall  hereafter be erected or altered until  a building permit is issued by the Building Commissioner. A permit shall not be issued unless the proposed construction and use of the land comply with the ordinances of the City.

B.	When a complete building permit application is submitted to the Building Department, the Building Commissioner shall review the application for Code  compliance. Should the application comply with the provisions of this Code, a building permit  shall be issued. Inthe event a permit application is rejected, the reasons shall be put in writing.

C.	APPLICATIONS  FOR PERMITS:

1.	GENERAL PROVISIONS:

(a)	The application for a permit shall be in writing using forms provided by the City. A permit application is not considered complete until all applicable items of information on said forms have been provided, and all accompanying information as required in this Section 24.03 has been furnished.

(b)	A permit may be amended during the course of work according to the regulations provided for in this Chapter 24 and the payment of any applicable fees. However, any alterations or additions to be made after completion of the work shall require the issuance of another pe1mit.

(c)	The City may adopt reasonable administrative procedures for the processing of permit applications from time to time in order to better carry out the purposes, intent and regulations of this Chapter 24.
 

2.	INFORMATION  ACCOMPANYING  PERMIT APPLICATIONS:

(a)	Each building permit application shall be accompanied by the following material:

(1)	For multiple-family, commercial and industrial  buildings and build-outs, 4 full sets of drawings of the proposed construction. All pages of said drawings shall be signed and stamped by an Illinois licensed architect or engineer. Said signatory shall also certify that  the  submitted  plans  meet the minimum standards under all applicable building codes of the City.

(2)	A plat of survey of the lot showing the existing and proposed building(s ), structure(s), underground facilities, easements and driveways, as well as building footprints on all immediately adjoining lots.

(3)	For single family, 2 full sets of drawings of the proposed construction. It is recommended that all drawings be signed and stamped by an Illinois licensed architect or professional engmeer.

(4)	For   all  structures  proposed   to  be   constructed   over  an existing  structure,  2 sets of drawings  signed and stamped . by an Illinois licensed  architect or professional  engineer is required.

(5)	If the scope of the structural work is minor and limited in detail, the Building Commissioner shall have the discretion of modifying any portion of these requirements.

(b)	The applicant shall provide such additional descriptive information in drawn or written forms as to the location, use, materials and design of buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof, and interior or exterior fixtures, such as, but is not limited to, electrical fixhlrns, plumbing fixtures (supply, drain and fixtures), heating and air conditioning appliances, in addition to the return and supply air duct sizes and locations, smoke detection devices, light and ventilation	schedules, door and window schedules, truss certificates, manufacturers cut sheets or product specifications and MSDS sheets.
 
D.	UNLAWFUL ISSUANCE OF A BUILDING PERMIT: No building permit shall be issued to a person who has an outstanding expired building permit where the permitted work is incomplete; or who is indebted to the City due to building code violations.

24.4	PROFESSIONAL  FEES

Any person, firm or corporation, upon filing plans for a permit with the Building Department, shall bear the cost, including but not limited to the fees charged by an architect, attorney, engineer or other professional assistance when those fees are incurred by the Building Department regarding any plan submitted to it for review and comment. The permit applicant is required to complete the Re-imbursement of Fees Agreement pursuant to Chapter 20, Planning, Zoning and Development Review Fees, of this Code if required by the Building Commissioner.

24.5	PERMIT/SCHEDULE  CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE Amended,  07-1-10, 05-2-2

A.    BEGINNING  CONSTRUCTION:  Any person  or entity issued a building permit shall commence construction within 90 days of issuance of the building permit. Should construction not be started within 90 days of issuance, the permit shall be deemed null and void.

B.	PRELIMINARY EXCAVATION: No excavation or ground stripping will be allowed without the express written permission of the Building  Commissioner prior to issuance of a building pe1mit.

C.	SPOT SURVEY: Upon completion of the building foundation, a spot survey shall be submitted to the Building Department. The survey shall be certified by a licensed engineer or land surveyor and reflect the actual location and elevation of the structure. Completion of the structure shall continue only after the survey has been approved by the Building Department. If the foundation is found to be in violation of the approved grading plan, the Builder/Owner shall submit a revised grading plan acceptable to  the City or remove the foundation. All  fees and charges applicable to any proposal for a revised grading plan shall be paid by the Builder/Owner.

D.	EXPIRATION OF PERMIT: Building permits shall expire if work is  not completed within the following designated periods after a building permit is issued:

1.	New residential/commercial/industrial construction: 12 months

2.	Remodeling and additions; commercial build-outs: 6 months

3.	All others: 3 months

E.       EXTENSION  OF PERMIT: Prior to the date of expiration, a one time extension, not to exceed the original permit length, with the exception of new construction, for a period of 3 months, shall be granted. After such time, a new permit must be obtained to complete the project. For new construction, the plans require reviewing and payment of applicable permit fees except impact fees as such are defined in the Subdivision Ordinance and the ordinance regarding developmental  fees.
 


F.	LAPSE  IN  CONSTRUCTION:  If construction  activity  is  dormant  for  6 weeks . during the permit period, the site must be closed and protected  from risks to the satisfaction of the Building Department, to eliminate any health and safety risks until construction resumes. The City shall have the right but not the obligation to secure the construction site to ensure adequate safety to the general public. All costs of securing said site shall be the responsibility of the pennit applicant.

G.	FINAL INSPECTION: A final inspection by the Building Department will be required for each permit issued.

H.	PERMIT FEE REFUND: If, after  the purchase of a pennit and before any inspections have been done, the permittee requests a refund of permit fees, $50 shall be retained for administrative and plan review services. When the permit fee is less than $50, or the request is received more than 30 days from the pennit issue date, or inspections or other services have been rendered, no refund will be given.

I.	CONSTRUCTION/PROJECT  SITE REGULATIONS:

1.	APPLICABILITY:  Persons issued permits pursuant to this Chapter 24 and Chapter 29, McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance, of this Code  shall abide by construction/project site regulations  imposed in this Section  24.05-I,   Section  24.12  and  any  applicable  site  regulations  in Chapter 29.

2.	CONDITION OF PERMIT: It is a condition of a permit issued pursuant to this	Chapter 24 and Chapter 29, McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance, of this Code to  maintain  construction/project sites in a reasonably safe, clean and orderly condition as outlined in this Section 24.05-I.

3.	SITE REGULATIONS: Construction equipment, tools and materials may be placed, parked  or stored on private prope1ty subject to the following conditions:

a.	A valid permit pursuant to this Chapter 24 or Chapter 29, McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance,  of this  Code  exists for construction, building, grading or applicable work;

b.	The equipment, tools and  materials at issue are  actively  in operation and/or have been so utilized in the construction/project site in a continuous manner;

c.	The  equipment,  tools  and  materials   at  issue  are  stored  in  an orderly, compact manner or inside storage facilities pursuant to Section 24.05-Bfherein;
 

d.	The equipment, tools and materials at issue are secured;

e.	The storage of equipment,  tools and materials is to take place at least 300 feet from the nearest dwelling irrespective of the zoning classification of the building site. If the equipment, tools and materials are to be stored less than 300 feet from the nearest dwelling due to site size, conditions and/or configurations, the owner and/or individual or business using said equipment must present a storage plan for approval by the Building Department at the time of permit application. The owner and/or individual or business must comply with the terms of the plan as  approved during the term of the permit;

f.	For   purposes   of  this   Section  24.05-B,   equipment,   tools   and materials   may   be   stored   in  approved   trailers   and/or   storage facilities in compliance with ordinance,  annexation  agreement and/or project requirements;

g.	Constrnction, equipment, tools and materials shall not be placed, paTked or stored in a construction/project site for a period of 30 days or more following completion of a project; and

h.	For purposes of this Section 24.05-I,  equipment,  tools  and materials shall include, but not be limited to, machinery, trailers, vehicles, hand tools, formworks and any construction materials.

4.	VIOLATIONS: It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in work for which a permit has been issued to fail to comply with the regulations of this Section 24.05-I and to cause, maintain or permit the littering of any public or private property with mud, dust, brush, stumps, tree limbs, construction or other type of debris such as building excavation or ground piles; nor shall a person cause damage to any public street, sidewalk, alley, curb, gutter, sewage system or property.

5.	ENFORCEMENT: The Building Department is authorized and the pennit holder shall allow the inspecting officer to enter the property where the construction equipment, tools and materials are being stored for the purpose of inspection to determine the substance of any potential violation regarding	storage of such items and/or condition of the construction/project site. The inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the office  of  the Building Commissioner. If the inspecting officer determines  that  a violation of this Section 24.05 exists, the City shall serve notice of the violation to the property owner and/or individuals, contractor or  other acting for  and/or  on behalf  of the developer  and/or  owner.  Such notice
 

shall request the removal or abatement of said conditions within a period of7 calendar days. Ifthe violations and conditions are not cured within the 7 calendar-day period notice, the violation shall be deemed a nuisance.

6.	PENALTY: Violation of this Section 24.05 shall result in a fine of $50 per day for each day that the violation continues as well as other remedies found in Section 24.19 of this Code.

7.	COST OF ENFORCEMENT: In addition to  the  penalties  imposed pursuant to this Chapter,  the cost of abating the conditions by the City shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the condition pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13, 5/11-31-1 or other applicable section of the Illinois Municipal Code.

24.6	MUNICIPAL PROPERTY DAMAGE DEPOSITS

A. Before  commencing  any new  residential  or commercial  constrnction  for which  a building pennit is required and which  is  not  in  an  approved  project  covered  by  an  acceptable letter of credit or performance bond for which a building pe1111it is required  or  a project  that disturbs soil in the public right-of-way, the applicant shall  make  a cash deposit  with the  City to cover the cost of repairing  any damage which may be done to City property.  The deposit shall be in the  amount  of$1,000.

B.	The deposit shall be held by the City, at its discretion, for a period of not more than 2 years. If, after the 2 years, no damage has been incmrnd to City property, the total amount of the deposit shall be returned to the party making the deposit upon request. Any  deposit not claimed within 7 seven years shall be deemed forfeited pursuant to State Statutes.

C.	In the event the City property sustains damage, that portion of the deposit necessary to effect repairs shall be retained by the City; the balance shall be returned to the party making the deposit.    ·

D.	If the cost of repairs to the City prope1ty exceeds the amount of the deposit such additional costs shall be charged to the owner of the property and/or the person issued  the building permit and it shall become immediately due and payable upon the owner receiving written notice of the amount of which the cost of repairs exceeds the deposit.

24.7	EXCAVATIONS IN THE RIGHT OF WAY

Wherever any alteration, construction or disrnption of soil is done in any public right of way, the following conditions must be met:

1.		The applicant shall install, pursuant to Chapter 29, McHemy County Stormwater Management Ordinance, of this Code, soil and erosion control measures prior to the stmt of construction.
 
2.	All  disturbed  soils  shall  be  restored  by  the  applicant  with  sod  and/or  seed  blankets inspected  by  the  Public  Works  Department  and/or  Building  Department  prior  to  final approval of the project.

3.	A cash deposit shall be made to the City to insure restoration of the right of way. If the right of way is not restored to the City's satisfaction the City will use the cash deposit for the restoration. Deposits required are as follows:

a.	Street  opening,  which  is  required  any  time  it  is  necessary  to  cut  into  paved surfaces in streets and alleys, $1,500;

b.	Sidewalk, which is required  when  a sidewalk  is removed  or torn up, $1,000.

24.8	DRIVEWAYS

A.	SPECIFICATIONS: Driveways and driveway approaches  across sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete having a minimum thickness of 6 inches and a minimum compressive strength of 2,500 pounds per square inch in 28 days. All new driveway approaches shall have a surface material of either 2-inch thick bituminous concrete Class I, or 6-inch concrete in accordance with the preceding specification. Driveway construction, which shall have a gravel base thickness of not less than 6 inches and surfaced with at least 2 inches of asphaltic or bituminous concrete, shall extend from the garage to the street and shall be at least 12 feet in width.

B.	COST: All new driveway approaches, including the culvert, subgrade preparation and surface, shall be at the owner's expense. For any replacement or repair work the City shall, subject to prior approval from the City Council, reimburse the property owner for pennanent surface material meeting specifications up to a maximum surface area of 120 square  feet per platted lot. Reimbursement will be made on the basis of actual surface measurements and will be reimbursed at the lower of actual invoice cost or the prevailing retail price per ton of bituminous concrete, Class I, F.0.B. point of origin, or concrete per yard, F.O.B. job site.

All labor and materials, including driveway  removal, subgrade preparation and surface material installation, shall be at the expense of the property owner.

C.	CULVERT: A corrugated metal culvert shall be installed under the driveway, at the owner's expense, where curb, gutter and stonn sewers are not provided for the tract. The diameter and length of the culvert shall be approved by the City Engineer or Public Works Director. However, a culvert shall extend not less than 1 foot on each side  of the driveway. Flares shall be installed on each side of the culvert. The method of installation and material shall be approved by the Public Works Director. Maintenance responsibility of the culvert and pipe are that of the property owner.

D.	MODIFICATIONS: The Public Works Director may, at his/her discretion, grant exceptions or modifications  to this Section 24.08 if good engineering principles  are followed to
 

protect  the integrity  of the right  of  way  and  does  not  change  or restrict  the normal  flow  of stormwater.

24.9	GRADING, SEEDING AND DRIVEWAY DEPOSIT

A.	Should there be outstanding weather-related items to be completed, prior to final inspection for a Certificate of Use and Occupancy between November 1 and April 30, a cash deposit or letter of credit of $2,000 shall be deposited with the City by the permit applicant. Should the permit applicant have a good standing letter of credit on file, the cash deposit is not required.

B.	Grading, seeding and driveway work, guaranteed by a cash deposit or letter of credit, shall be completed by the following June 30.

C.	Inthe event the required grading, seeding and driveway are not completed by the following June 30 the City shall use the cash deposit or proceeds from the letter of credit to have the work completed and/or issue fines and violations pursuant to this Chapter 24. If the work is completed within the required time period the total amount of the cash deposit shall be returned to the pmty making the cash deposit or the letter of credit released.

D.	If conditions preclude grading and seeding between June 30 and October 30 and an occupancy is required in that period, a cash deposit may be made with the City for up to 45 days if approved by both the Building Commissioner and the Administrator.

24.10	REMOTE WATER METER READERS

A.	For all new construction, the water meter shall be installed no later than the rough inspection. The pennit holder is responsible to ensure the meter is protected from damage during construction. A metered reading of the water will be taken after the final inspection of the project and the permit holder shall be liable for payment of said metered water prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy. Prior to requesting a Certificate of Use and Occupancy, proof of payment in full for the water must be provided to the Building Department.

B. Additions or remodeling requiring the location or relocation of the customer's water service pipe and/or inside water meter shall require installation of one-half inch, U.L. listed conduit and 22 gauge, 2-conductor solid wire for connection to a remote meter reading device. Installation shall be pursuant to Water Depmtment regulations. If the conduit, outside location or wire do not conform to the specifications in this Section 24.10 a $100 installation fee and a $25 reinspection fee shall be chm·ged for each nonconfonning location before sealing the meter and issuance of the Certificate of Use and Occupancy for the premises.

24.11	CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY

A.	No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used in any way, until a Ce1iificate of Use and Occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner.  The Certificate  of Use  and  Occupancy  shall be  issued  only after the Building
 
Commissioner makes a finding that the building or structure has  been erected or structurally altered in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter 24 and other health and building laws and in accordance with the building permit.

B.	Prior  to  the  issuance  of  a  Certificate   of  Use  and  Occupancy  the  following conditions must be met:

1.	The builder/owner shall certify, by means of a professional engineer's or land surveyor's statement, that the elevations of the completed project are in accordance with the grading plan approved by the City.

2.	A cash deposit or letter of credit, if applicable pursuant to Section 24.09
herein, has been deposited with the City.

3.	The structure must be completed pursuant to this Code.

4.	Temporary use and occupancy pennits shall only be issued for a specific time to allow completion of work halted by weather-related conditions specified in Sections 24.08 and 24.09 herein.

5.	The issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall be subject to Section 6.19 and Section 24.03 of this Code.

24.12	LOCAL RULES Amended,  05-11-4, 05-8-2

A.	BUILDING  SITE RULES:

1.	All approved permits issued by the Marengo Building Department must have the permit cards visible and accessible for every inspection to be signed, dated and approved or not approved by each inspector. In addition to the foregoing, each new construction lot must have the address and lot number posted on weather resistant material not to exceed 2 square feet. Such posting shall remain on the lot until a Certificate of Use and Occupancy has been issued. In the case where such permit card is not accessible, the inspection will not be conducted and a reinspection fee will be incurred by the applicant. Reinspection fees are found in Exhibit A of this Chapter 24.

2.	In the case of the permit card, the weatherproof bag or clip issued by the Building Department has been lost, stolen, misplaced, or otherwise not in possession of the pe1mit holder, a fee will be charged for the replacement of such materials. Building permit replacement card fees are found in Exhibit A of this Chapter 24.

3.	Each lot shall be furnished with a proper container or containers  for the deposit of construction debris and refuse and if applicable, for recycling of
 
discarded construction materials. Such containers shall be secured so as to prevent the blowing or scattering of materials and shall be emptied regularly and not allowed to overflow. No container shall be located on a City right of way. The contractor shall be responsible for litter and debris pickup and containment on the property.

4.	Each lot shall be furnished with a proper portable toilet for use by construction workers which shall be regularly maintained by the toilet provider.

5.	Prior to beginning work, a temporary gravel drive must be installed from the street into the lot in order to provide access to the lot for inspections. Culve1is must be set in place in accordance with Section 24.08 before gravel is installed. The temporary drive shall consist of 6 inches of gravel base that extends at least half of the distance from the street towards the garage portion of the dwelling, or a minimum of 50 feet, and shall have a minimum width of I 0 feet.

6.	Property identification shall be posted on each lot prior to excavation and remain through final inspection. Materials used for said identification shall not fade and permit the attachment of inspection reports.

7.	Working hours for constrnction relating to any approved building permit shall comply with the provisions of Section 43.08-1 of this Code.

8.	All permit holders shall keep vegetation in compliance with the provisions of Sectionl2.08 of this Code and any applicable Constrnction/Project Site Regulations in Section 12.05.

B.	STREET SIGNS: Temporary street signs made of weather-resistant materials and lettering identifying the streets in a new subdivision shall be erected before beginning any construction activity on any lot.  Said signs shall remain posted and maintained in good repair until permanent street signs are erected as provided for in the Marengo Subdivision Ordinance.

C.	USE OF STREETS AND LOTS DURING CONSTRUCTION:

1.	It shall be prohibited to occupy any traveled pmiion of a paved street or right of way with constrnction materials, construction vehicles or construction material delivery or storage vehicles. Temporary blockage of a street by a construction vehicle shall be limited as governed by City traffic regulations.

2.	No construction materials shall be placed  so as to render inaccessible or subject to damage any fire hydrant, manhole, b-box, catch basin or similar structure,  or  so as to obstruct culve1is or street gutters to prevent the proper  flow of  stormwater.  Any  damage  caused  by  constrnction  and/or
 
landscaping activity to said structures shall be repaired at the applicant's expense. Said structures are subject to inspection at the time construction and/or landscaping is completed, and a Certificate of Use and Occupancy may be withheld by the City until repairs are properly made.

3.	Streets adjacent to building sites shall be regularly cleaned of dirt and mud deposits.

4.	The washing out of any waste material from trucks, including but  not limited to concrete and dirt, is prohibited in any City right  of  way  or public or private drainage swale, similar  stormwater  conveyance,  or  on any other private lot or public property.

5.	Driving over  swales or ditches to access lots is prohibited. Any damage caused   to ditches,  shoulders,  pavement  and  related  vegetation  from construction  activity shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  building  permit applicant to repair, and the City may issue a stop-work order in addition to its other remedies in order to achieve compliance with this rule.

6.	The City at all times reserves the right to stipulate and direct the manner and street network in which construction traffic may access a building site.

D.	OVERHEAD SEWERS: All new buildings and additions with basements, half basements or a room or a floor below the grade of the adjacent street shall have sanitary wastes discharged into a gas tight covered and vented sump from which the waste shall be limited and discharged into a sanitary waste drain by automatic pumping equipment. The building drain shall come through the wall above the floor and have a sealed ejector basin.

E.	SEPARATION OF STORMWATERAND WASTEWATER:

1.	LEGISLATIVE INTENT: The intent of this Section 24.12-E is to protect the public health and safety by requiring the separation of stormwater flows from sanitary sewer flows, as more specifically provided herein and in this Code. For the purposes of this Section 24.12-E, the term sump pump is used in connection with stormwater, and the term ejector pump is used in connection with wastewater, although it is common parlance to also refer to sump pumps as part of a sanitary sewer system.

2.	FOOTING	AND	FOUNDATION	DRAINS,	SUMP	PUMP(S),
DOWNSPOUT(S) EXTENSIONS: Sump pumps and  downspout extensions  installed to receive  and  discharge  groundwater  or stormwater
shall be connected to a storm sewer system or discharged to approved drainage ditches or swales. The sump pump/downspout discharge may be fitted with an extension, provided that (a) the outlet of the discharge must not be located nearer than 6 feet to the property line and (b) the flow from the discharge extension must be oriented in the direction  of the approved
 

drainage ditch or swale and not oriented to diseharge said groundwater or stormwater direetly onto adjacent properties. If an underground  storm sewer system is available, such discharge shall be to the system rather than to another option, except that the City may, at its discretion, upon application and review, approve discharges into stormwater detention or retention ponds, lakes, wetlands, streams or other conveying bodies  of water, subject to such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate or necessary to protect said conveyances.

3.	A  grease  trap,  if  required  by  the  Illinois  State  Plumbing   Code,  as amended, shall be installed in accordance with Section 25.38, Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors, of this Code.

24.13	UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE OF BUILDING ACTIVITY

Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop order,  except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $150 or more than $500, plus the City's costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.

24.14	SWIMMING POOLS

A.	OUTDOOR SWIMM.ING POOL REQUIREMENTS: An  outdoor  swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be provided with a barrier which shall comply with the following:

1.	BARRIER: The top of the banier shall be at least 48 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum ve1tical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool strncture is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool strncture, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the banier shall be 4 inches.

2.	NATURAL  BARRIER:  The  barrier  requirements   are  waived   for  the pmiion of the pool/spa/hot tub facing the natural barrier. On all other sides of the prope1iy, the banier must extend to the legal, where established, or normal water level.

3.	BARRIER OPENINGS: Openings in the banier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere.
 
4.	SOLID BARRIERS: Solid bmTiers which do not have openings, such as masonry or stone, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for nonnal constrnction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

5.	HORIZONTAL, VERTICAL MEMBERS: Where the batTier is composed of horizontal and vertical members, the distance between the top and bottom horizontal members shall not exceed 45 inches. The ve1tical members' maximum clearance shall not be more than 2 inches between the bottom of the ve1tical members and top of grade, measmed on the side of the bmTier that faces away from the pool.

6.	Where the bmTier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1% inches. Where there m·e decorative cutouts within ve1tical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1 : inches in width.

7.	Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 13 inch square; if a larger mesh of fence is provided slats fastened at the top or the bottom that reduce the openings to no more than 1 : inches shall be installed.

8.	Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such  as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than  1:" inches.

9.	Access gates shall comply with the requirements of this subsection and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device.  Pedestrian  access gates shall open outward away from the pool only and shall be self-closing with a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self­ latching device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate:

(a)	The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches below the top of the gate; and

(b)	The gate and barrier  shall have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism.

10.	ABOVEGROUND  POOL  STRUCTURE  USED  AS  BARRIER:  Where
an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then:

(a)	The ladder or steps shall be capable of being  seemed, locked  or removed to prevent access; or
 

(b)     The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of Sections 24.14-Al through 9 herein. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere.

11.		Where a moat  is used  to  obtain the 48-inch  clearance  from  ground  surface to the top of the pool, it shall also be 48 inches from the outside rim of the moat to the top of the barrier  (or rim of the pool).  ,

B.	BARRIER LOCATIONS: Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit pennanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers.

C.	EXEMPTIONS:

1.	A spa with a solid lockable safety cover which complies with ASTM ES 13-89   shall be exempt  from  the  provisions  of  this  Section  24.14. Swimming pools with safety covers shall not be exempt.

2.	Swimming pools/spas/hot tubs located greater than 500 feet from neighboring residences and that have been in existence prior to the effective date of this amendment (July 8, 1993) shall be exempt from all requirements in Sections 24.14-A and B herein.

D.	VARJANCES: It is the intent of this Section 24.14 that all swimming pools, spas and hot tubs have an effective barrier to discourage access of children (less than 5 years of age). However, it is recognized that unique circumstances may exist that would preclude immediate compliance with all pmis of Section 24.14 in existence prior to the effective date of this amendment. Variations from the regulations of this Section 24.14 may be granted in each of the following  instances:

1.	For the swimming pools/spas/hot tubs built prior to the effective date of this amendment and require measurement specifications as set forth in Section 24.14, they may be granted a variance provided that the "as-built" configuration	does not deviate by more than 15 percent of the measurement  specifications.

2.	A variance may be granted by the Building Commissioner or City Council where evidence is presented and demonstrates:

(a)	The swimming pool/spa/hot tub has been built prior to the effective date of this amendment.

(b)	The swimming pool/spa/hot tub is located 200 feet  to  500  feet from a neighboring residence or less than 50 feet from a natural barrier.
 
(c)	The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the prope1ty is located.

E.	SEPTIC FIELD: In the event the property is serviced by a septic field, in-ground pools mnst be located at least 50 feet from a septic field. On-site inspection may be required to verify septic system location. Variations may be given to a distance of 25 feet, depending upon the on-site conditions. A request for a variation must follow the procedure established in the Marengo Zoning Code.

24.15	ARCIDTECTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS  Ord. 09-4-1

A.	PURPOSE AND INTENT: The following standards are intended to enhance the appearance of buildings and promote a high quality of design in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The intent of these standards are to: (i) encourage greater design compatibility with surrounding areas and establish a precedent for high quality design in areas with no established character; (ii) achieve greater architectural variation and interest through standards for the design of roofs, exterior walls and the use of exterior finish materials; (iii) encourage greater architectural cohesiveness and compatibility within new developments of multiple buildings; and (iv) reduce the negative visual impact of features and site improvements such as mechanical equipment. These standards are intended to be applied together with other development standards including, but not limited to, the Marengo Subdivision Ordinance, City building codes and the Marengo Zoning Code.

B.	GENERAL  APPLICATION:

1.	NEW CONSTRUCTION: These standards shall apply to new constrnction of buildings and structures as specified in the following sections.

 
2.	IMPROVEMENTS	TO DEVELOPMENT  SITES:
 
EXISTING	STRUCTURES	AND
 

a.	These standards shall apply to existing buildings only when a proposed building expansion exceeds 25 percent of the  existing floor area measured on a cumulative basis starting from the date of adoption of this Section 24.15.

b.	It is intended that a building expansion  subject to these  standards be reasonably integrated with the existing strncture  or  site condition consistent with these standards.

c.	These standards shall not be construed to necess.itate improvements to existing buildings or site conditions beyond those necessary to integrate the proposed improvements with existing conditions in a manner consistent with these standards.
 

3.	DEVELOPMENT OF PERMIT APPLICATIONS: These standards  shall not apply to any complete development, zoning or building pe1mit application submitted or approved prior to the adoption of these standards.

4.	EXEMPTION FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS: These standards shall not apply to historical strnctures as designated by federal, state or  local historic preservation commissions for altered or restored structures. Such alterations shall be subject to review by the Marengo Historical Preservation  Commission.

C.	COMPLIANCE STANDARDS: Compliance with the standards set forth in this Section 24.15 is mandatory, unless a variance is granted pursuant to Section 17 of the Marengo Zoning Code.

D.	APPLICATION AND APPEALS: Persons shall submit an application to the Building Commissioner who shall review said application pursuant to the standards in this Section 24.15. The Building Commissioner will issue a decision either approving the building permit. Any applicant that has submitted an application for a building permit that has been denied due to non-compliance of this Section 24.15 may appeal the decision to the Marengo Planning and Zoning Commission. Such appeal shall be in writing to the Administrator and must accompany a complete formal application for a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission with all applicable fees associated therewith. Hearings shall be scheduled for the next regularly scheduled Planning & Zoning Commission meeting on the third Monday of each month, but shall be subject to agenda limitations. In the event of a full agenda, the meeting shall be scheduled for no later than the following meeting. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall reach a decision within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing.

E.	COMMERCIAL  (NON-INDUSTRIAL)  ARCHITECTURAL  STANDARDS:

1.	APPLICATION:
a.	The  following  standards  shall  apply  to  retail,  office,  institutional	j
and  other  commercial   buildings  located  in  business  zoned  or
designated  areas, including but not limited to the business zoning districts.  However,  business  or  commercially   designated   areas
developed  pursuant  to  a planned  unit  development  or  special  use	I
pe1mit may be subject to deviations from the standards prescribed
in this Section 24.15.
r
b.	It is intended that these standards apply to the primary fas;ade of
the building and that all sides of building, where visible  from public   rights-of-ways   and   private   roads   or   service   drives   or
adjacent residential neighborhoods, shall include design characteristics and materials consistent with those of the primary fas;ade,  except  as provided  in Section 24.15-D2.  Also,  standards
 
specified  in  Section  24.15-F  Industrial  Architectural   Standards, shall be limited to fas;ade and walls as specified in that section.

2.	DESIGN  COMPATIBILITY:

a.	Building design shall contribute to the special or unique characteristics of an area and/or development through the use of predominant	building massing and scale, building materials, architectural elements and color.

b.	Design compatibility shall be achieved through techniques such as the repetition of roof lines, the use of similar proportions in building mass and outdoor spaces, similar relationships to the street, similar window and door patterns, and/or the use of building materials that have color shades and textures similar to those existing in the immediate area of the proposed development.

c.	Where there is no established consistent neighborhood character or unifying theme, or where it is not desirable to continue the existing character because it does not reflect a design theme consistent with the architectural standards as described herein  and/or as reflected in the Marengo Comprehensive Plan, the proposed development shall be designed to establish an attractive image and set a standard of quality for future developments and buildings within the area.

3.	STANDARDS: All buildings shall be designed and maintained using the following building elements with a minimum of 1 item selected from 4 of the 5groups below (Group 4 is mandated to be a part of  one of the 4 selections):

a.	Group 1Exterior Wall Aliiculation:

(i)	Opening or elements simulating openings that occupy  at least 20 percent of the wall  surface  area  (excluding overhead or dock doors); or

(ii)	Building bays created by columns, ribs, pilasters or piers or an equivalent element that divides a wall into smaller proportions or segments with elements being at least L foot in width, a minimum depth of inches, and be spaced at intervals no more than 25 percent of the exterior building walls. For buildings exceeding 20,000 square feet in gross floor area, such elements shall be at least 18 inches in width, with a minimum depth of 12 inches, and spaced at intervals of no more than 20 percent of the exterior building walls; or
 


(iii)	A recognizable base treatment of  the wall consisting of thicker walls, ledges or sills using integrally textured and colored material such as stone, masomy or decorative concrete; or

(iv) Some other architectural feature that brealcs up the exterior horizontal and. vertical mass of the wall in a manner equivalent to (i), (ii) or (iii) above..

b.	Group 2 Roof Articulation:

(i)	Changes in roof lines, including the use of stepped cornice parapets, a combination of flat and sloped roofs or pitched roofs with at least 2 roof line elevation changes; or

(ii)	Some other architectural feature or treatment which breaks up the exterior horizontal and vertical mass of the roof in a manner equivalent to (i) above.

c.	Group 3 Building Openings, Walkways and Entrances:

 
(i)




(ii)






(iii)



(iv)
 
Canopies or awnings accenting or blending with the architectural design over at least 30 percent of the openings of the building; or

Covered walkways, p01ticos and/or arcades accenting, blending ·or incorporated into the structural design and compatible with the architectural design, covering at least 30 percent of the horizontal length of the front fac;ade; or

Raised cornice parapets over entries appropriate to the design of the principal building; or

Some other architectural feature or  treatment which adds definition to the building openings, walkways or entrances in a manner equivalent to (i), (ii) or (iii) above.
 

d.	Group 4 Building Materials: (The area of windows and doors, including overhead doors, shall be excluded from the wall area calculation for the following standards.)

(i)	At least 2 kinds of materials distinctively different in texture or masonry pattern, at least one of which is decorative  block,  clay  brick  or  stone,  with  .each  of  the
 
required  materials  covering  at  least  50  percent  of  the exterior wall of the building; or

(ii)	Clay brick or stone (including synthetic stone) covering at least 75 percent of the exterior walls of the building.

(iii)	Remaining exterior building materials include, but are not limited to, materials such as  concrete  masomy  units (block), glass block, fiber cement siding, glass, culture stone, calcium silicate  products, decorative precast panels and tilt-up panel construction.

(iv)	Exterior Insulation Finishing Systems (EIFS)/Dryvit (synthetic stucco) is permitted as a building material for architectural detailing only or as  an  accent  material  only and cannot exceed 15 percent (less window and door area) of the aggregate exterior wall.

(v)	Metal siding may be used as an exterior finish material as long as the amount used does not exceed 25 percent of the area of any single wall, exclusive of the roof, and provided it matches or compliments the  building  color  and/or material scheme. Further, such metal siding shall be a "standing	seam" type or equivalent quality, not a "corrugated" type. Architectural metals, such as bronze, brass, copper and wrought iron, may be used and may exceed the 25 percent area limit.

e.	Group 5 Other Architectural Definition:

(i)	Overhanging eaves extending at least 24 inches past the suppmting walls, or with flat roofs, cornice parapets or capstone finish; or

(ii)	Ornamental   lighting   fixtures   (excluding   neon)   for   all exterior building lighting; or

(iii)	A feature that adds architectural definition to the building, in a manner equivalent to (i) or (ii) above.

4.	ARTICULATION OF WALLS; STANDARDS: Facades and any wall of the building facing any road or public or private service drive, greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least 4 percent of the length of the fac;ade and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the fac;ade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed  100 horizontal feet.
 


5.	DELIVERY/LOADillG DOORS AND DOCKS: No delivery, loading, dock or trash removal  door shall be located on the main street facing fas:ade of the building. Any such door or facility located on the side or rear wall of the building shall be screened in accordance with Chapter 21, Landscaping Code, of this Code and this Chapter 24, as amended. For sites that have road frontage on multiple sides, these facilities shall be located in the least obtmsive manner, preferably on a non-road facing side of the building, or the road frontage that has the least public visibility.

6.	ROOFTOP	MECHANICAL	UNITS	AND	OTHER	RELATED
EQUIPMENT:  Rooftop mechanical  and other related  equipment  shall be
substantially screened from view from public rights of way  and  other public places. Screening materials shall be of the same or comparable materials used on the building. Roof-mounted  equipment  screening shall be constmcted as an encompassing monolithic unit; rather than several individual screens (i.e., multiple equipment screens or "hats," smTounding individual elements shall not be permitted). The height of the screening element shall equal or exceed the height of the stmcture's tallest piece of installed equipment.

7.	CART STORAGE AND VENDillG MACHINES: Overnight cart storage areas, vending machines and video and book return containers shall be placed in an accessory stmcture designed to compliment the principal building, or screened with walls and landscaping.

8.	MULTIPLE BUILDillG DEVELOPMENTS: Development with multiple buildings shall include predominant character in each building so the buildings within the development appear to be part of a cohesive, planned area, yet are not monotonous in design. Predominant characteristics may include the use of the same or similar architectural style, materials and color.

9.	BUILDillG ENTRANCES: Primary public entrances shall be  clearly defined by recesses and projected or framed by elements such as awnings, arcades, porticos or other architectural features.

10.	BUILDillG COLORS: Colors may be used to blend buildings into an area and to unify elements of a development. Color should be drawn from the surrounding area and, if in a new development area, shall be  selected to establish an attractive image and set a standard of quality for future developments	and buildings within the area. Monotonous or monochromatic color palettes are prohibited. Accent colors used to call attention to a particular feature of portion of a building, or to form a particular pattern, shall be compatible with the predominant building base colors and may be incorporated using such elements as shutters, window
 
mullions, building trim and awnings.  (Accent colors shall cover no more than 5 percent of a building fa<;ade).

11.	FRANCHISE ARCHITECTURE: Prototypical or franchise architectural designs must be modified to meet these architectural  standards.  Changes to prototypical franchise styles to meet these  standards may include, but not be limited to, modifications to roofs, windows, doors, building mass, materials, material colors, placement of architectural features and details, etc. Care should be taken to ensure that such modifications comply with Section 24.15-E2, Design Compatibility. Franchise architectural  styles found to meet these standards will not require any modification.

12.	ILLUMINATION: Illumination highlighting the entire fa<;ade of  a building, or significant portion of the building, or back lighted translucent awnings intended to function as signage, shall not be permitted as patt of the building design. This standard is not intended to preclude the use of lighting (including neon lighting) to accent limited portions of the building facade.

F.	INDUSTRIAL  ARCHITECTURAL  STANDARDS/PUD:

1.	PURPOSE AND INTENT: These standards are intended to apply to industrial buildings on sites adjacent to major roads (as defined in Section 24.15-F2) because of the visibility of such development and its impact on the image and character of the community. Industrial development that is not adjacent to a collector or local roads is not subject to these standards.

2.	APPLICATION: Standards within this Section 24.15-F apply to industrial buildings  located  in the M Manufacturing  District  and areas within  a planned development that are located on sites adjacent to a major or minor arterial road, as defined by the City Engineer or a state or federal highway.

a.	Sites adjacent to public or private service roads, where there is no developed or developable private land  between  the  service  road and the arterial road, shall be considered adjacent to such arterial roads or highways and shall be subject to these standards.  This shall include sites on service roads separated from the arterial or highway road by public or private commuter facilities or any other public facilities within the rights of way.

b.	However, industrial designated areas developed pursuant to a plauned unit development or special use permit may be subject to deviations from the standards prescribed in this Section 24.15.

c.	Section 24.15-A shall also apply to the standards of this Section 24.15-F.
 


3.	ARTERJAL/HIGHWAY  SITES:

a.	For any building abutting a major or minor arterial road  or highway, metal shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the exterior building finish material on walls (roof excluded)  facing such a road. Where walls on sites with frontage  on such roads do not face such roads, but are visible from such roads, such as side walls, these requirements shall extend to one-third of the depth of the wall measured from the wall facing such road.

b.	Metal siding includes any fonns of metal exterior finish material, including conugated or standing seam metal siding. The Building Commissioner may permit such metals such as bronze, brass, copper and wrought iron, in excess of the 25 percent limitation if a determination is made that such materials are equal or superior to the primary building materials.

G.	RESIDENTIAL  ARCHITECTURAL  STANDARDS:

1.	INTENT AND PROCEDURE: These standards are intended to apply to all attached or detached residential buildings containing 1 or more dwelling units. Design reviews shall be conducted by the Building Commissioner or the designated plan reviewer for the City.

2.	ARTICULATION	OF   WALLS:   All   building	elevations   shall   have projections, recessed walls or a window per level.

3.	ROOF: Roofs should not be the dominating  element of the structure.
There shall be a minimum of 2 ridges within the roof design. Architectural style shingles or materials of higher quality shall be used as a roofing material. Roof overhangs (eaves) shall project a  minimum  6  inches beyond the face of the wall.

4.	CHIMNEYS: All chinmeys constructed on any residential dwelling unit shall have exterior finishes consisting exclusively of clay brick or stone from the grade level to the caps thereof.

H.	RESIDENTIAL  DESIGN MONOTONY:

1.	SIMILAR DESIGN RESTRJCTED: No dwellings of similar front elevation or fac;:ade shall be constructed or located within 750 feet of the other in a residential zoning district;
 
2.	CRITERIA ESTABLISHED: The detennination of whether a building is of sufficient dissimilar design shall be made by incorporating a minimum of 3 of the following criteria:

a.	Number of stories;
b.	Roof design;
c.	Size and location of garage;
d.	Location of porches;
e.	Exterior finish consisting  of clay fired brick  or stone covering 25 percent  of the aggregate total area of the exterior walls, exclusive
of doors, windows and trim;
f.	Exterior building material color;
g.	Architectural style; and
h.	Special architectural details (i.e., dormers, cupolas)

24.16	ELEVATOR/CONVEYANCE  INSPECTIONS

Owners of all buildings having any elevators and/or conveyances shall be required to provide access to  the Building Commissioner or his designee for purposes of inspecting said elevator and/or conveyance. The City shall give notice of the inspection not less than 48 hours before the inspection. In the event access is denied the Building Commissioner is authorized to revoke the Certificate of Use and Occupancy for the building housing the elevator/conveyance. In the event the inspection reveals any material malfunction or deficiency in the operation of the elevator/conveyance, the owner shall immediately correct or repair it and restore it to a safe operating condition before it is placed in service.

24.17	PERMIT  AND REINSPECTION,  ADDED,  PARTIAL  INSPECTION  AND REPLACEMENT FEES Amended,  17-8-1, 05-8-2, 05-2-2

A.	PERMIT FEES: The total permit fee shall be payable in full prior to the issuance of the permit or service to be performed. Permit fees are found in Exhibit A of this Chapter 24.

The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition and for all work done in connection with or concurrently with the work contemplated by the building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that may be prescribed by law or ordinance for water connections, sewer connections, erection of signs and display structures and marquees or other appurtenant structures, both within and outside the jurisdiction  of the Building Department.

B.	REINSPECTION FEES: Re-inspection fees shall be charged under the following circumstances:

1.	When the permit holder has scheduled an inspection with the City and the work to be inspected has not been completed at the scheduled inspection time.
 

2.	The permit holder has failed to c01Tect items listed on previous inspection reports.

3.	City inspectors are denied access to conduct the inspection.

4.	City inspectors are prevented from conducting the scheduled inspection.

5.	Permit card is not accessible to inspectors for signing.

All re-inspection fees shall be paid prior to the final inspection or issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or issuance of a Certificate of Completion. Re-inspection fees are found in Exhibit A of this Chapter 24.

C.	ADDED/PARTIAL INSPECTION FEES: Added and partial inspections that are requested by the pe1mit holder that are not covered under the allotted number  of inspections within the original pe1mit cost shall be charged a fee for each requested plumbing, electrical and structnral inspection. The cumulative amount of all partial inspection fees for each pe1mit shall be paid prior to a final  inspection or the issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. Added and partial inspection fees are found in Exhibit A of this Chapter24.

D.	REPLACEMENT FEES: A replacement fee shall be charged if the pe1mit card, weatherproof bag or clip issued by the Building Depatiment has been lost, stolen, misplaced or otherwise not in possession of the pe1mit holder for the replacement of such materials. Replacement fees are found in Exhibit A of this Chapter 24.

24.18	PERMIT APPLICATION  APPEALS

Any applicant that has submitted an application for a building permit that has been denied may appeal the decision to the Marengo Plarming and Zoning Commission. Such appeal shall be in writing to the Administrator and must accompany a complete f01mal application for a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission with all applicable fees associated therewith. Hem·ings shall be scheduled for the next regulm·ly scheduled Planning & Zoning Commission meeting on the third Monday of each month, but shall be subject to agenda limitations. In the event of a full agenda, the meeting shall be scheduled for no later than the following meeting. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall reach a decision within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing.

24.19	VIOLATION,  PENALTIES

A.	Any constrnction that is started prior to the issuance of a building permit shall result in a double permit fee. In addition, a Stop Work order will be issued by the City and will not be removed until the required building permit has been issued.

B.	Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 24 or the Building Code or shall  fail  to  comply  with  any  of  the  requirements  thereof  or  who  shall  excavate  for,  erect,
 
construct, alter, repair or remodel a building or  structure  in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Commissioner, for of a permit or certificate issued under the provision the Building Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less that $150 nor more than $500, plus the City=s cost of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues hall be deemed a separate offense.

C.	Section R-106, Violations and Penalties of the International Residential Code, is amended to read as follows:

"Section R-106. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation whether as an owner, lessee, sublease or occupant to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any one or two-family dwelling in the City=s jurisdiction or cause or permit the same to be done,  contrary to or in violation of any of the provision of this Chapter 24.

"It is hereby declared that any violations of this Chapter 24 constitute a public nuisance and in addition to any other remedies provided by this Code for its enforcement, the City may bring civil suit to enjoin the violation of any provision of this Code.

"If for any reason one or more sections, sentence, clause or parts of this Code are held invalid, such judgment  shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining provisions.

"Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted and upon conviction of such a violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 or by imprisomnent, or by both such fine and imprisomnent as established by local applicable laws.''

24.20	RIGHTS CONTINUED

Nothing in this Chapter 24 or in the Building Code hereby adopted, shall be constructed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquitted, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance is hereby repealed as cited in this Chapter 24; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Chapter 24.
 
Exhibit A Fee Schedule
Amended,  17-8-1, 08-5-3, 06-6-4, 06-5-3, 05-8-2

 


RESIDENTIAL (ER, R-1, R2, R3)
 


$1750
$80 each
$80 each
$175 each
$200 each


Construction water for  buildings	$50 5,000 s  uare feet and under
Construction water for buildings	$75 5001 s  uare feet and   realer
 
FEE
 

Certificate of Occupancy	$50 each single family dwell-






 
Capital Development Fees For ER, R1, R2, R3

Backflow preventers are required and must be included in plans submitted for review.
Water and sewer connection fees are sub­ ject to Section 25.48, CPI Adjustment.
 



More than two attached units	$3008.90 + $455.85 per unit Water meter	225% of the direct charge to
the Cit

$2734.35 per unit
 


WATER AND SEWER
Capital Development Fees ForR5




(Backflow preventers are required and MUST be included in plans submitted for
review.)	$75





 





Sewer connection:
 
$2872.12
$3008.90 + $455.85   er unit Water meter	225% of the direct charge to
Cit
 




'-,,_'
These fees are based on a set number of inspections required per
 ro·ect 	
 


Fence	$60
Deck/ram	$100
Shed	$60
 
FEE
 
Electrical, fireplace, plumbing,
HVAC u  grade Pool, hot tub, spa

Garage
 
$80 Residential
$100 Commercial
$80   No Electric
$160 With Electric
 


Si ns
 
Without electric	$175 With electric	$225

Without electric	$100 With electric	$175
Demolition of structure	$75
 






FEES FOR PROJECTS BASED ON SQUARE FOOTAGE
For All Residential Zoning Districts
 
Miscellaneous: porches, roof, sid-	$60 ing, windows, doors, furnaces, hot
water heaters, water softeners,
etc.
 




.
per square foot
mum $25 for permit fee
 






 
DRIVEWAYS and OFF STREET PARKING I LOTS
 



Parking lots:
 




1 - 1000 s uare feet
 
1001 - 7500 square feet

 



STREET CUT, SIDEWALK CUT DEPOSIT
 
20,001 square feet and
a..'"' -
All areas of disturbed ground must be restored and approved prior
to release of de  osit.
 
Pursuant to Section 24.23 Excavation in f--
 
Sidewalk cut	$1000
--t--c-
 

---j
 
the   Right-of-Way.   (A   deposit   shall   be	Street cut	$1500
made to  the  City to  insure restoration  of the nqr1t-ot-w.






 
NEW CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATIONS,  ADDITIONS, REMODELED STRUCTURES

81, 82 and M Zoning Districts
 
Structures up to 20,000 square	$.50 per square foot feet
Structures 20,001 to 50,000	$9000 s  uare feet
Structures over 50,001 square feet	$12500 plus $.35 per square
foot over 50,000 square feet thereafter
HVAC	$250
Electric	$500 Plumbing	$300
Potable Water ins  ection	$50
 
FEE

Construction water for buildings	$50 under 5,000 s  uare feet
Construction water for buildings	$75 5001 s  uare feet and   realer
Plan review fee
 	Certificate of Occu

 
. WATER  AND  SEWER  FUND
Capital Development Fees
 
Water connection:
 


Less than 1 inch	$2507.42
 
Less than 1Y,inches	$3305.24
Commercial/industrial backflow preventers	Less than 2 inches	$5242.82
and reduced pressure zone valves (RPZ)	t--------  =cc2 i nc h e-s-1--;-$,c76 3=-6=-.=3 0	_,
MUST be included in plans submitted.	Water meter (larger than 2" and	225% of direct charge to City
compound meters must be quoted
  as the   are s  ecial order
Any connection larger than a 2- inch meter, the fee shall be based on:
Sewer connection:
Less than 1 inch		$2735.37 Less than  1Y, inches		$3685. 17 Less than 2 inches	$6040.64
2 inch	$8890.02
 
Any connection larger than a 2- inch meter, the fee shall be based on:
 
$1291.70 plus a unit charge of $3.63 per gallon per day for all gallons over 350 gal­ lons.
 
All sizes greater than 2-inch must be quoted for water and sewer connections

PRIVATE FIRE PREVENTION WATER LINE USERS







 
RE-INSPECTION  FEES
 
Fees are based on the following	$75 per re-inspection
•	Not correcting failed items listed on inspection report
•	No one home or at job site
•	Repeatedly failing the same
items.
Permit card not accessible  to in­ spectors for signing.  For all partial inspections (prior to scheduling the final inspection for occupancy, the number of partial inspections shall be totaled and permit applicant shall remit to Building Department such amount
 

ADDED I PARTIAL INSPECTIONS	For all partial inspections (prior to scheduling the final inspections
for occupancy, the number of partial inspections shall be totaled and the permit applicant shall remit to the Building Department
such amount .
 
FEE
HVAC and structural	$50 per partial or added in­
s  ection
Commercial added ins








 


Prior to the date of expiration a one-time extension (not to exceed the original per­ mit length, with the exception of new con­ struction, which shall be extended for a period of 3 months only) shall be granted; after such time a new permit must be ob­ tained to complete the project.
 
Permit cost per type of pro-
·ect.
Single, multi  le famil	12 months
Commercial/industrial	12 months Additions, remodeling, commercial	6 months build-outs
3 months
 

Watershed  Development Permit Fee
 

,,,
Pursuant to Section 29.03 of this Code.
 
Site Development Permit Fees	0-20 acres	$1200
 

20 plus acres
 

$2000
 
CHAPTER 25
WATER AND WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT


 
25.1	Creation

25.2	Superintendent

25.3	Duties of Department

25.4	Definitions

25.5	Billing Duties

25.6	Manner of Billing, Water Use and Wastewater Facilities

25.7	Multiple Connections

25.8	Disposition of Revenues

25.9	Accounts

25.10	Filing Regulations

25.11	Billing Procedures

25.12	Termination of Service, Notice, Hearing

25.13	Reinstatement of Service

25.14	Powers and Authority of Inspectors

25.15	Regulations Applicable

25.16	Shutting Off Water

25.17	Emergency Limitations on Use of Water

25.18	Meters and Samplers Required

25.19	Access to Equipment

25.20	Damage to Equipment and Property

25.21	Use of Water Facilities Required

25.22	Private Water Supply

25.23	Tapping Water Supply

25.24	Water Service Pipe

25.25	Building Service Pipe

25.26	Separate Services Required

25.27	Discontinuing Water Service
 
25.28	Fire Hydrants

25.29	Water Service Charge

25.30	Extension of Public Sanitary Sewers or Water Mains

25.31	Wastes

25.32	Use of Sewers Required

25.33	Private Wastewater Disposal

25.34	Connections	to	the	Wastewater Facilities

25.35	Building Sewers

25.36	Wastes	Admissible	to	the Wastewater Facilities

25.37	Wastes	Inadmissible	to	the Wastewater Facilities

25.38	Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors

25.39	Pretreatment

25.40	User Charges

25.41	Debt Service and Other Costs

25.42	Wastewater Service Charge

25.43	Water, Sanitary Sewer and Storm Sewer Uses Outside of the Corporate Limits of the City

25.44	Water, Sanitary Sewer and Storm Sewer Uses for Automobile Service, Repair and Fuel Dispensing Proper- ties

25.45	Limitations on Discharge of Wastewater

25.46	Surcharge for Illegal Connection or Uninspected Property

25.47	Well Setback Zone

25.48	CPI Adjustment

25.49	Penalties
 
25.1	CREATION

There is hereby established for the City a combined water and wastewater department hereinafter called the Department.

25.2	SUPERINTENDENT

The Public Works Coordinator shall be in charge of the Department and shall oversee the activities of that department.

25.3	DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT

The  Department  shall  be  in  charge  of  all  matters  relating  to  the  water  facilities  and  the wastewater facilities including the connection thereto and the extension thereof.

25.4	DEFINITIONS

In addition to the definitions in Appendix A of this Code, terms used in this Chapter 25 are defined in Exhibit A at the end of this Chapter 25.

25.5	BILLING DUTIES

It is hereby made the duty of the utility billing clerk to render bills for service and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all moneys due thereon.

25.6	MANNER   OF   BILLING   FOR   THE   USE   OF   THE   WATER   AND WASTEWATER FACILITIES

A.	BILLINGS: A bill shall be rendered for the use of the water and wastewater fa- cilities. Billings shall be made not less than quarterly.

Where charges are to be recomputed annually said charges shall become effective for all water purchased or wastewater treated during the period to which the rate applies.

B.	PENALTY: A penalty of 10 percent shall be added to each bill not paid within 30 days after the rendition of the bills.

C.	MULTIPLE METERS: Single users with multiple water meters or flow meters shall be rendered a single bill.

D.	LIABILITY FOR SERVICE: The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the City.
 
25.7	MULTIPLE CONNECTIONS

A multiple unit user is defined as any additional number of residential or commercial units located on the same premises and being served through a single water meter or sewer connection where there is no separate water meters for each such residential or commercial unit, such as an apartment building, mobile home court or commercial and residential units located within the same building. In all such cases, there shall be an additional debt service charge, as required in Sections 25.29 and 25.34 herein, for each additional unit provided with water service and/or sewer service and served by a single connection. The additional debt service charges for each unit shall be added to the quarterly billing.

25.8	DISPOSITION OF REVENUES

A.	WATER AND SEWER CHARGES: All revenues and monies derived from the water and sewer charges shall be held by the Treasurer separate and apart from all other funds of the City.

B.	TAPPING FEES: All revenues and monies derived from tapping fees shall be de- posited in the Water and Wastewater Improvement Fund. Said fund shall be used solely for the improvement, extension or the betterment of the water and wastewater facilities.

 


fund.
 
C.	METER FEES: Meter fees shall be deposited in the water and sewer  operating
 

25.9	ACCOUNTS

The Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the Department and at regular annual intervals shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the Department.

The Treasurer shall maintain such records as necessary to document compliance by the City with the Act for the user charge system.

25.10	FILING REGULATIONS

A copy of the provisions of this Chapter 25 relating to water and wastewater service charges shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the combined water and wastewater facilities of the City on their properties.

25.11	BILLING PROCEDURES

A.	Water and sewer user services charges shall be billed every three months. Despite the joint liability of property owners, occupants and users, the bills for such service shall be mailed to the property owners. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make
 
prompt payment of the bill without regard to any agreements the property owner may have with his tenant regarding payment procedures. Although the City shall also have the right to seek collection from, and take action against users and occupants for the non-payment of said bills, the City shall follow a policy of, in any event, demanding direct and prompt payment from property owners and shall take such action as is legal and appropriate to enforce and compel payment by said property owners, including exercise of the City’s legal right to terminate and shut off service.

Said bills shall be mailed to said property owners on or after the first day of the month succeeding the billing period for which the service is billed, and payment shall be due 30 days after the date of the billing. If payment of the entire amount of said bill for water and/or sewer charges is not received by the City on or before the 30th day after the billing date, then a late payment charge of 10 percent of the unpaid balance of the bill shall be added and become due and payable.

B.	The property owners, the occupant thereof and the user of the water and/or sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for such service to such premises, and such service is furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition that the property owner, occupant and user of such service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the City.

C.	In the event the water and/or sewer charges, including any late payment charges then due, are not paid within 30 days after the date of billing, such charges and late payment charges shall be deemed to be delinquent, and the City shall have the following remedies, which, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, shall be cumulative and not mutually exclusive:

1.	To terminate water service to any premises for which water and/or sewer charges are delinquent, upon notice to the property owner and occupant as provided in Section 25.12.

2.	To file a Notice of Lien with the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds against any premises for which water and/or sewer charges are delinquent, in the amount of said delinquent charges, and to foreclose on said lien in the manner provided in Section 25.12.

3.	To sue the owner, occupant or user of any premises for which water and/or sewer charges are delinquent in a civil action to recover monies due in the amount of said delinquent charges, plus court costs and reasonable attor- neys’ fees.

D.	The City may require that bills be paid in cash in the event two checks are re- turned to the City due to insufficient funds within a 12-month period.

25.12	TERMINATION OF SERVICE, NOTICE, HEARING Amended, 07-7-2

A.	DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS: In the event any sewer or water bill remains un- paid for 30 days after the charges have been billed, a penalty of 10 percent of the delinquency
 
amount shall be added to the charges. If after a period of 60 days from the original date of billing, any water and/or sewer charges plus the 10 percent penalty remain unpaid, or if an actual water meter has not been read for 12 consecutive months, the Water Department shall deliver personally, or mail notice, to the property owner, if known to the City, and any occupant being billed for services to the premises for which water and/or sewer charges remain unpaid, informing them of:

1.	The amount of the default, including a $30 administrative fee, the period of service for which said charges are claimed to be due; or

2.	The fact that an actual water meter reading has not been obtained in 12 consecutive months; and

3.	Advising them that they have the right to request a hearing regarding the delinquency claimed or failed attempt to read the water meter before the General Administration Committee.

The notice shall provide that the occupants and the property owner may appear before the General Administration Committee at City Hall on a date not less than seven days from the date of the mailing of the notice for a hearing regarding the delinquent charges, any dispute with regard thereto or the failed attempt to read the water meter.

B.	HEARING PROCESS: All requests for a hearing are to be made in writing at City Hall within 14 days of the mailing of the delinquency notice. All requests for a hearing should be delivered in person to City Hall during regular business hours (Monday-Friday, 8:00 a.m.-4:30 p.m.), at which time a date for the hearing will be scheduled. All hearing requests must cite a valid claim or dispute regarding the charges. Valid claims or disputes include but are not limited to the following: broken water meter, leak in water pipes, etc. Financial hardship or inability to pay is not a valid claim or dispute. The hearing shall be conducted informally, but may, with the mutual consent of the parties, be recorded by suitable sound reproduction equipment. Any and all written documents, memoranda or other tangible exhibits offered by the owner, occupant or user shall become part of the record of the hearing.

C.	TERMINATION OF SERVICE: After the proceedings outlined  in this Section
25.12 have been followed or in the event that the charges for service are not fully paid within 75 days after the charges have been billed, water service may be terminated by the City if the water and/or sewer charges set forth in the notice remain unpaid or if the City has not obtained an actual reading of the water meter.

D.	LIENS: In the event the charges for service are not fully paid within 60 days after the charges have been billed, such charges shall be deemed and hereby declared to be delinquent, and therefore such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate. The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds. The filing of such statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for service.
 
E.	OCCUPANCY: In the event that such charge remains unpaid after the posting of the notice of delinquency and services have been terminated the City may declare the building receiving said services “unfit for human occupancy.”

25.13	REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE Amended, 07-7-2

Upon payment to the City of the full delinquency amount, plus the 10 percent penalty, the administrative fee of $30 and a reinstatement of service fee of $100, the City shall reinstate the service or issue a permit for the service to be reinstated. If a permit is issued to reinstate the service, the owner of the premises or the occupant and user of the service, shall pay all costs necessary to reinstate the service, including inspection and supervision costs incurred by the City. In the event reinstatement does not take place during regular Water Department business hours (Monday-Friday 7:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m.) the reinstatement of service fee will be increased to $150. Reinstatement of service shall not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The City may require the balance due to be paid in cash.

25.14	POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS

The Coordinator and other duly authorized employees or agents of the City, bearing City identification which contains their photograph, shall be permitted to enter all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 25. They shall have no authority to inquire into any industrial process except as may have bearing on the use of water or the kind of discharge to the wastewater facilities.

The Coordinator and other duly authorized employees or agents of the City, bearing City identification which contains their photograph, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the public water and wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.

25.15	REGULATIONS APPLICABLE

The regulations of this Chapter 25 govern every user of the City water and wastewater facilities and shall be part of the contract between the City and every such user. In making application for water or sewer service every user shall agree in writing to be bound thereby. It is the duty of the Coordinator to enforce these regulations.

25.16	SHUTTING OFF WATER

In case of making repairs or alterations or constructing new facilities, or for any other reason, the Coordinator reserves the right to shut off the water and keep it shut off as long as may be necessary to make such repairs, alterations or the construction of new facilities. Prior to shutting off the water, users shall be given adequate notice except in an emergency; and in such case, the
 
Coordinator shall provide notice as conditions permit. No claim shall be made against the City by reason of the above or by reason of the breakage or failure of any pump, or other portion of the water system.

25.17	EMERGENCY LIMITATIONS OF USE OF WATER

A.	Whenever in the judgment of the Mayor public exigency may require it, he shall have the right and authority by proclamation, to limit in respect to time, or wholly suspend or prohibit for such length of time as such exigency shall in his judgment require, the use of water for any nonessential purpose, and no person shall use or draw water in violation of any such proclamation. The City shall take reasonable efforts to publicize the proclamation including the posting of a notice at City Hall, advising the media and all City personnel.

B.	PENALTY: Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section 25.17 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, plus the City’s cost of prosecution including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a violation continues to occur shall be considered a separate offense.

25.18	METERS AND SAMPLERS REQUIRED Amended, Ord. 14-9-5

A.	WATER METERS: No person shall be allowed to receive water from the City for any purpose except fire protection without first having a proper water meter installed to measure the amount of water consumed.

Meters shall conform to specifications fixed by the Coordinator as to size, capacity and construction. All meters shall be installed under the direction and supervision of the Coordinator at a location approved by the Coordinator.

All meters to be initially installed in properties within the City shall be paid for along with all other applicable fees at the time the building permit is issued. Meter fees shall be established from time to time by the City Council. For meters 1½ inches and smaller, the meter fee shall be sufficient to include the cost of the meter, installation, maintenance and replacement thereof. For meters larger than 1½ inches, the meter fee shall be sufficient to include the cost of the meter, plus shipping and handling, and installation. Meter fees shall not be refunded. All meters shall be purchased by the City and provided to the permit holder when requested.

Meters 1½ inch in size and smaller will be furnished and installed by the City and shall be the property of the City. Meters that are the property of the City shall be maintained, repaired or replaced by the City at no cost to the user except as provided for herein.

Meters larger than 1½ inches will be installed by the City and thereafter will become the property of the user. Meters owned by users shall be maintained by the user at no cost to the City. Said user, however, shall be required to maintain the meter so that the accuracy remains within three percent, plus or minus, of original accuracy. The user shall file a meter calibration report with the Coordinator annually.
 
In the event a building contains more than one user, a meter is hereby required for each user unless the building contains only residential dwelling units and the use of a single meter for the building is approved by the Coordinator.

The cost of meters 1½ inches and smaller and the installation thereof shall be borne by the user. The cost shall be termed the meter fee and shall be paid at the time application is made for water service. Meter fees shall be established from time to time by the City Council and shall be sufficient to include the cost of the meter, installation, maintenance and replacement thereof. Meter fees shall not be refunded.

B.	INSTALLATION: No accessories or equipment other than the equipment identi- fied and on file with the Public Works Department, shall be installed within 12 inches of either side or in front of the water meter. The equipment and installation method required for the automated meter reading will be specified in a separate installation instruction packet available through the Public Works Department.

C.	FLOW METERS: Any user except a domestic user may be required to install a flow meter in the inspection manhole (see 25.35-G) to accurately measure and record the rate of discharge of and the volume of wastewater discharged to a public sanitary sewer.

Any user, except a domestic user, may install a flow meter in the inspection manhole to accurately measure and record the rate of discharge of and the volume of wastewater discharged to a public sanitary sewer for billing purposes if approved by the Coordinator.

Flow meters shall be a permanent installation and shall include equipment to accurately indicate, record and total the flow and shall be approved by the Coordinator prior to installation. The equipment required to indicate, record and total the flow shall be located in a warm, dry, location and be accessible for reading. The equipment shall be recalibrated a minimum of once a year and a certificate of calibration filed with the Coordinator. The user shall submit flow records to the Coordinator monthly.

D.	SAMPLERS: Each industrial user and such other users except domestic users as may be designated by the Coordinator shall be required to sample the wastewater. The frequency of sampling shall be determined by the Coordinator. The minimum frequency of sampling shall not be less than once a year.

Samples shall be tested for constituents determined by the Coordinator by a commercial laboratory approved by the Coordinator and a copy of the analysis sent to the Coordinator. The user shall pay all costs of sampling and analysis.

E.	WATER METERS ON PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY: Whenever any portion of water pumped from a private water supply is discharged to the wastewater facilities of the City a meter shall be installed to measure the amount of water pumped from the private water supply. Wastewater bills shall be based on the amount of water pumped unless flow meters are approved as herein provided. Where flow meters are approved the meter requirement may be waived by the City Council.
 

All meters installed on private water supplies shall be purchased and owned by the user and shall conform to all of the requirements of Section 25.18-A except that the maintenance required for meters one inch and under shall not exceed the maintenance provided for City owned meters of the same size.

No person shall remove a private meter for the purpose of having it repaired without first contacting the Coordinator and having the meter read before it is removed and after it has been replaced. All meters shall be repaired through the City or by persons approved by the City. Whenever a meter is removed a replacement meter shall be installed to provide for continuous metering of the private water supply. If a replacement meter is not available the wastewater charges for the period for which no meter was in service shall be based on the average use for a previous comparable period as determined by the City.

No person shall alter the water supply piping from a private well to the meter after the installation of the meter has been approved by the Coordinator without having a permit from the City. No person shall tamper with the meter. Any person violating these provisions shall be subject to immediate termination in accordance with Section 25.12-C.

No person shall in any manner obstruct access to any meter.

At the discretion of the Coordinator, billing for users having a private well water supply shall be a fixed amount per billing period.

F.	SERVICE FAILURE TO INSTALL EQUIPMENT OR GRANT ACCESS: In the
event a customer either (i) fails or refuses to install or maintain any equipment required by the City, or (ii) fails or refuses to grant access to the City’s employed or contracted personnel to install or maintain any such equipment, the City may, at its discretion, take one or more of the following measures:

1.	Shut off water and/or sewer service to the building. Fourteen days before disconnection, the Coordinator will send the property owner notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that service will be discontinued and the building will be red-tagged as unfit for human occupancy. Service will be restored after the required equipment is installed or maintained, to the satisfaction of the Coordinator, and the City’s costs of disconnection and reconnection, including administrative fees and postage costs, are paid by the customer. Under certain circumstances, such as no reasonable in- stallation access from the meter to the power line, and at the discretion of the Coordinator, the City may waive the installation requirement.

2.	Impose a fine pursuant to Section 25.49-B of this Code for each day of noncompliance with this Section.

3.	As to the City’s transponder installation program in Fiscal Year 2014- 2015, the City shall extend a one month grace period starting on October
 
1, 2014, for those customers who have failed or refuse to have transpond- ers installed. Commencing November 1, 2014, the City shall impose a sur- charge on the customer’s water bill. The surcharge shall be in an amount to cover any reasonable expected use of water at the property, as well as an administrative fee to compensate for the inefficiency and additional City costs created by the customer not adopting the required new tran- sponder system at that particular property. Specifically, the surcharge shall be $20 per month ($60 per cycle). Beginning February 15, 2015, the sur- charge shall be increased to $40 per month ($120 per cycle). Finally, commencing May 1, 2015, the City shall automatically proceed pursuant to the provisions of Section 25.18-F1 regarding shut off procedures.

25.19	ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT

No person shall in any manner obstruct access to any valve, hydrant, stopcock, manhole, flow measuring equipment or any other equipment necessary to the operation of the water or wastewater facilities which is located in any public street, alley or easement.

No person shall in any manner obstruct access to any meter or any flow measuring equipment located in any building.

25.20	DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY

No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, equipment or property of the water or wastewater facilities.

No unauthorized person shall repair, remove or replace any equipment, appurtenance or property of the water and wastewater facilities.

Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct and shall pay the cost of restoring the equipment.

25.21	USE OF WATER FACILITIES REQUIRED Amended, Ord. 01-2-5

A.	Except as provided herein, the owner of all houses, buildings or properties situat- ed within the City and outside of the radius referenced in Section 21.21A, abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which a public water main with available capacity is within 200 feet of the nearest property line of the property, shall be required to extend the public water main to and across the frontage of the property and make connection as herein provided within six months said water main being available. If such water main extension benefits other properties the City may enact a recapture ordinance and make best efforts to collect and return to the owner amounts received from benefitted properties. The only exception to this Section 25.21 is with respect to an owner of an existing house, building or property that is serviced by a private well as of the effective date of this provision, February 26, 2001. In this situation, the owner may continue to use said private well until such time the existing private well system fails or is in need of repair
 
or replacement parts. At the time the existing private well system fails, needs repair or replace- ment parts, the private well shall immediately be abandoned and connection made to the City public water main.

B.	NOTICE: At the time a public water main becomes available pursuant to Section 25.21-A herein, written notice shall be sent to the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting a copy of said notice on the premises, of the requirement to connect to the public water main.

C.	FAILURE TO MAKE CONNECTION: In the event connection to the public wa- ter supply is not made as required in this Section 25.21, upon 30 days written notice to the owner and occupants, the City shall terminate occupancy and use of the premises pending compliance with this Section 25.21.

25.22	PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY

A.	Whenever a public water main is not available under the provisions of  Section
25.21 the building service pipe shall be connected to a private water supply complying with the provisions of this Section 25.22.

B.	Whenever an industrial user requires water for industrial purposes and the Coor- dinator determines that the City water facilities have inadequate capacity to provide the pressure, volume or rate flow required by said industry, the user may be required to install a private water supply complying with the provisions of this Section 25.22. Provided, however, that the private water supply is not used for any purpose except for industrial purposes and no cross connection is made to the public water supply.

C.	A private water supply shall not be used for domestic purposes for any building except a single family residence.

D.	Before commencement of construction of a private water supply, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Building Commissioner. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the Building Commis- sioner. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed, and shall be in such amount as the City Council may from time to time determine. The owner shall also secure permits from all other agencies having jurisdiction and file copies with the Building Commissioner.

E.	The owner shall operate and maintain the private water supply in a sanitary man- ner at all times, at no expense to the City.

F.	Whenever a private water supply is provided the owner shall install a water meter as provided in Section 25.18-D.
 
25.23	TAPPING WATER MAINS

A.	No person shall make a connection to the water facilities of the City without first making application to the Coordinator for the privilege of making said connection and to have a written permit approved by the Coordinator or Building Commissioner and to pay all applicable fees.

B.	Persons desiring such connection to the water facilities of the City shall, in addi- tion to making application, fully state all purposes for which water is required and answer all questions put to them by the Coordinator relating to the proposed water consumption. In the case of any fraudulent representation on the part of the user, the payment will be forfeited and the supply of water stopped.

C.	No permit will be issued until the Permittee:

1.	Pays the tapping fee as prescribed in this Section 25.23.

2.	Pays the cost of the meter and installation thereof (meter fee).

3.	Secures a street opening permit if required in conformance with the provi- sions of Chapter 6.

4.	Agrees to pay all costs of the installation of said service.

5.	Agrees to give the Coordinator a minimum of 24 hours notice prior to the start of the installation of the service and when the service shall be ready for inspection, except that no inspections will be made at times other than during regular City working hours.

6.	Agrees that the materials used and the method of installation shall be in conformance with specifications established by the Coordinator.

7.	Agrees to pay all costs of inspection and testing if inspection in excess of the inspection and testing normally provided by the City is deemed neces- sary by the Coordinator.

8.	Agrees to conform to all rules governing plumbers and to the regulations of the Illinois State Plumbing Code.

9.	Agrees to secure and protect the City from any liability or damage what- soever for injury (including death) to any person or property and files with the Clerk liability insurance certificates. The amount of the insurance shall be established by the City Council.

D.	FEES: Water tapping fees will be charged for connecting or tapping onto the wa- ter facilities. Such fees, which must be paid at the time of application for the service, are found in
 
Exhibit A of Chapter 24 of this Code.

25.24	WATER SERVICE PIPE

The water service pipe extends from the City water main to and includes the curb stop cock which shall be located in a street or an easement as directed by the Coordinator.

The pipe, valves and fittings used for the service pipe shall be as specified by the Coordinator. The Coordinator may make the service pipe tap to the water main or the Coordinator may allow the user’s contractor to make the connection under the supervision of the Coordinator.

The permittee shall pay all costs of installing the service including such material and services provided by the City. The permittee shall maintain the water service pipe.

25.25	BUILDING SERVICE PIPE

The building service pipe extends from the curb stopcock to the building and shall be installed by the user at his expense. The building service pipe shall be the same size and same material as the water service pipe and shall be inspected by the Coordinator.

Persons taking water must do so at their own expense, and must keep the building service pipe in good repair, protect it from frost or damage in any other manner and prevent all unnecessary waste of water. It shall be the duty of the user to maintain the building service pipe from the curb stop cock to the house. If the user fails to properly maintain the building service pipe the Coordinator shall have the authority to enter onto the property and provide maintenance as required and bill for the cost of said maintenance on the next water bill or shut the water off until proper maintenance is completed.

25.26	SEPARATE SERVICES REQUIRED

A separate water service pipe is required for every building or residence. Where a building contains more than one commercial or industrial user or where the building contains a combina- tion of commercial or industrial and residential uses there shall be separate services for each use if required by the Coordinator. A single meter is allowed in buildings with more than one residential user.

25.27	DISCONTINUING WATER SERVICE

Any person moving from or within the City shall give written notice to the City Water Billing Clerk prior to the expiration of the time for which payment has been made or becomes due and remaining unpaid; otherwise he shall be liable for the charge for the ensuing billing period.

Persons wishing to discontinue the use of water in homes used seasonally shall give written notice thereof to the Coordinator. Shutoff services shall be performed by the City only during regular business hours.
 
25.28	FIRE HYDRANTS Amended, 08-4-1, 07-3-6, 05-3-1, 04-2-1

A.	USE: All hydrants constructed in the City for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants. No persons other than members of the Marengo Fire Protection District and those authorized by the Coordinator shall open any such hydrant or attempt to draw water from same or in any manner interfere with or injure any of such hydrants.

B.	OBSTRUCTION OF HYDRANTS: No person shall obstruct the use of any fire hydrant or place any material in front thereof. Any material forming such obstruction may be removed by the City or by the Marengo Fire Protection District. The cost of removal shall be borne by the owner thereof.

C.	WRENCHES: No person shall use any water hydrant wrenches without the per- mission of the Coordinator.

D.	TEMPORARY USE: Any person wishing to make a connection to a hydrant as a temporary source of water for construction or other purposes approved by the Coordinator shall make application to the Coordinator. The user shall make a deposit equal to the replacement cost of the meter which shall be returned less $10.00 per week or portion thereof for meter rental and any cost of maintenance and repair to the meter. Meters will be supplied as available. No temporary meters shall be installed between November 15 and April 1 or at any other time where there is danger of freezing. Temporary meters shall be installed on a weekly basis and payment for the use shall be weekly.

E.	CHARGES: The charges for water that is taken directly from a fire hydrant shall be as follows:

	Effective
4/1/08	Effective
4/1/09	Effective
4/1/10	Effective
4/1/11
First 3,000 gallons of water:	$20.38	$21.40	$22.47	$23.59
plus a debt service charge of:	$  6.31	$  6.63	$  6.96	$  7.31
Per 1,000 gallons after first 3,000 gallons:	$  4.46	$  4.68	$  4.91	$  5.16
plus a debt service charge of	$  6.31	$  6.63	$  6.96	$  7.31
Plus an hourly salary of (1 hour minimum)
during regular business hours:	$31.54	$33.12	$34.86	$36.60
Plus an hourly salary (1 hour minimum) after
regular business hours:	$63.08	$66.24	$69.72	$73.20

25.29	WATER SERVICE CHARGE Amended, 18-6-2, 16-5-2, 15-6-1, 08-4-1, 07-3-6, 05-3-1,
04-2-1, 01-8-5

A.	METERED WATER SUPPLIES INSIDE THE CITY: The rates or charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the water facilities of the City inside the corporate limits, for meter readings taken after June 1, 2018, are based on the amount of water consumed as follows:
 



Billing rates are as follows:	Effective for meter
readings taken 6/1/2018
For each user of water service of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system within the corporate limits, the usage charge per 1,000 gallons of water used per quarter shall be:	

$3.05
Debt service charge to pay part of the cost of bonds
issued for system improvements per quarter for each single metered or multiple unit user per quarter shall be:	

$26.44

B.	METERED WATER SUPPLIES OUTSIDE THE CITY: The rates or charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the water facilities of the City outside the corporate limits, for meter readings taken after June 1, 2018, are based on the amount of water consumed as follows:

Billing rates are as follows:	Effective for meter
readings taken 6/1/2018
For each user of water service of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system outside the corporate limits, the usage charge per 1,000 gallons of water used per quarter shall be:	

$4.58
Debt service charge to pay part of the cost of bonds
issued for system improvements per quarter for each single metered or multiple unit user per quarter shall be:.	

$39.66

C.	UNMETERED  WATER  SUPPLY  FOR  SPRINKLER,  FIRE  PROTECTION
SERVICE: Whenever sprinkler or fire protection services are desired, application must be made for the privilege of installing such service. Complete plans for installation shall be attached to such petition. When said application is approved a contract shall be entered into with the City for connection from City mains to the property, which connection will be made by and the cost of same to be paid by the user.

City water will not be admitted into any sprinkler or fire protection service unless all pipes in connection with such system are left exposed for inspection and pressure testing.

A valve shall be installed with a rising stem, on each side of the check valve and each shall have the valve operating handle accessible for operation outside of the building.

No additional sprinkler heads shall be installed or new connections of any kind whatso- ever shall be made to a sprinkler or fire protection system unless a permit for such connection has been granted by the City.
 
Where a reservoir is maintained on any premises in connection with sprinkler or fire protection system, or for any other special service, the water service shall be connected with such reservoir in such a manner as to exclude all danger of back siphonage. Such connections shall be made only upon approval of the Coordinator.

No connection of any kind whatsoever except for fire protection shall be taken from any fire or sprinkler service system.

All private fire prevention water line users in the City shall pay an annual fee, on May 1 of each year, for the management, maintenance and operation thereof based on the following formula:

Diameter of water supply line x $1,000 x .33 = annual maintenance fee 2

25.30	EXTENSION OF PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS OR WATER MAINS

A.	No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or water main of the City for the purpose of extending same without first making application to the Coordinator for making said extension and to have the proposed extension approved by the City Council.

B.	Persons desiring such extension of the water and sewer system shall file with the Coordinator four copies of the following documents:

1.	Detailed plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional en- gineer registered in the State of Illinois.

2.	IEPA permit application with such supporting documents as are required by the IEPA, completely filled out and ready for City signature.

3.	Detailed estimate of cost of the extension.

C.	After approval of the plans and specifications by the City Engineer and receipt of an IEPA permit the person or persons shall submit to the Coordinator the following documents prior to starting the extension:

1.	Agreement and bond executed by the permittee wherein he agrees to make and install the improvements in accordance with the plans and specifica- tions specifying a completion date not more than six months after the date of the agreement unless the City Council determines, on the basis of the recommendation of the City Engineer, that a longer time is necessary.

The guarantee for completion of the improvements by the permittee shall be in the principal amount of 150 percent of the estimated cost as ap- proved by the City Engineer; and secured by either:
 

(a)	A certificate of deposit with or an escrow account at a federally in- sured bank or savings and loan association subject to draw by the City to complete the improvements if it is not completed within the prescribed time limit.

(b)	A clean, non-declining, irrevocable letter of credit issued by a fed- erally insured bank or savings and loan association. The letter shall be approved by the City and provide that funds may be drawn only by the City.

The bond shall remain in effect for a period of one year after acceptance of the work by the City Engineer as a guarantee of good faith of the permittee to correct defects. At the discretion of the City Council the bond may be reduced during the maintenance period.

2.	Copies of all permits, insurance and bonds required for street openings or stream crossings and any other permits required by an agency having ju- risdiction.

3.	Certificates of insurance protecting the City from any liability or damage whatsoever from injury, including death, to any person or property. The amount of the insurance shall be as established by the City Council.

D.	Person or persons extending water or sewer shall agree as follows:

1.	To pay all costs of plan review by the City Engineer. Payment shall be made to the City prior to the City signing the IEPA permit applications.

2.	To pay all costs of inspection including resident supervision if deemed necessary by the City Engineer. The estimated cost of inspection, ap- proved by the City Engineer, shall be deposited with the Treasurer prior to the start of work and additional funds added during the work if required. The permittee, however, shall pay only the actual costs of such services based on standard engineering fees. At the completion of the work any unused portion of the amount deposited shall be returned. No interest shall be paid on deposited funds.

3.	Materials and construction methods shall be in conformance with specifi- cations established by the City Engineer.

4.	The engineer designing the extension shall file as-built drawings at the completion of the work with the City.

E.	The performance bond will not be released until the following documents are filed with the Clerk and approved by the City Council:
 

1.	As-built drawings: one reproducible set and two sets of prints;

2.	Release of all permits;

3.	Copies of al tests required by the Coordinator or the City Engineer;

4.	The guarantee period has expired.

F.	No extension will be allowed to the sanitary sewer system if the City Council de- termines that the wastewater facilities have inadequate available capacity.

25.31	WASTES

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.

B.	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any water course within the City, or in any ar- ea under the jurisdiction of the City, any untreated sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or polluted waters.

C.	It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault or cesspool in- tended or used for the disposal of sewage.

25.32	USE OF SEWERS REQUIRED

The owner of all houses, buildings or properties situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located a public sewer, shall be required to make connection to the public sewer within 200 days after official notice that the public sewer is available. The owner shall pay all costs of connection, including recapture fees, if applicable.

The owner of all houses, buildings or properties situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which a public sewer is within 300 feet of the nearest property line of the property shall be required to extend the public sewer to and across the frontage of the property and made connection as herein provided. If such public sewer benefits other properties the City shall enact a recapture ordinance and make best efforts to collect and return to the owner amounts received from benefitted properties. All public sewer extensions shall be made in accordance with Section 25.30 herein.

25.33	PRIVATE WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES

A.	No person shall construct a wastewater treatment facility within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City for the purpose of treating wastewater and discharging same to a water course.
 
B.	No person shall construct a wastewater treatment facility within the corporate lim- its of the City for the purpose of treating industrial wastes and discharging same to a water course unless the City Council determines that the wastewater treatment facilities have inade- quate capacity, and issues a permit for the construction and operation of a wastewater treatment facility. No City permit shall become effective until:

1.	An IEPA permit to construct and operate the facility has been received.

2.	A NPDES permit has been received.

3.	The City Engineer has approved the plans and specifications in writing.

4.	The guarantee period has expired.

Persons operating a wastewater treatment facility shall file copies of all operating reports sent to the USEPA and IEPA with the Coordinator and such other reports as the Coordinator deems necessary.

C.	No person shall construct a private wastewater treatment facility with subsurface disposal of the effluent if the population to be served exceeds 15 persons or the system is intended to serve more than one building.

D.	Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 25.32 a pri- vate wastewater treatment facility employing subsurface absorption facilities may be installed, if the wastewater to be treated is domestic.

E.	Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater treatment facility employing subsurface absorption facilities the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Building Commissioner. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed, and shall be in such amount as the City Council may from time to time determine. The permit shall not be issued until applicable county permits are on file.

F.	A permit for a private wastewater treatment facility employing subsurface absorp- tion facilities shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Building Commissioner when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the Building Commissioner, except that no inspections will be made at any time other than regular City working hours.

G.	GRINDER PUMP SYSTEMS:

1.	POLICY: The City has experienced situations where development is pos-
 
sible but gravity sewers and conventional sanitary sewer systems are not practical. Accordingly, it is the policy of the City to approve grinder pump systems on a discretionary case-by-case basis. In order to implement a grinder pump system, a developer or individual homeowner must prove to the City that a grinder pump system is the only viable option other than a conventional sanitary sewer system.

2.	INSTALLATION: A permit for a private wastewater treatment facility employing a grinder pump system shall not be issued until the design and installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner or his designee shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Building Commissioner when the grinder pump system is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.

3.	OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: In addition, the Coordinator shall be entitled to inspect the grinder pump system if he has any reason to be- lieve that the grinder pump system is not operating properly or pursuant to a routine inspection protocol developed by the Coordinator. Should the grinder pump system fall into disrepair or otherwise need maintenance as determined by the City, and the owner refuses to repair, replace or other- wise fix the grinder pump system to the specifications of the City, the City may do so at its own expense and obtain reimbursement from the individ- ual owner. In that regard, and as a condition of obtaining a City permit for a grinder pump system, the individual owner shall enter into a contractual agreement indemnifying the City for any costs the City may incur with re- gard to maintaining the grinder pump system, and further allow the City reasonable access to the grinder pump system for inspection purposes.

H.	The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater treatment facility employing subsurface absorption facilities shall comply with the most recent regulations and provisions of the McHenry Health Department. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater treatment facility employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 22,800 square feet. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or water course.

I.	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to the property served by a pri- vate wastewater treatment facility, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Chapter 25, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with the City standards.

J.	The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater treatment facility in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the City.

25.34	CONNECTIONS TO THE WASTEWATER FACILITIES
 

A.	APPLICATION: No person shall construct a new wastewater source and connect same to the wastewater facilities of the City without first making application to the Coordinator for the privilege of making said connection and to have a written permit approved by the Coordinator and to pay all fees.

B.	PERMIT REQUIREMENTS: Persons desiring to construct a new waste source and connect same to the wastewater facilities of the City shall, in addition to making application, state the quantity, quality and rate of discharge of the wastewater to be discharged into the sewer. In the case of any fraudulent representation on the part of the user, the payment will be forfeited and the use of the sewer stopped.

No permit will be issued until the permittee:

1.	Pays the connection fee as prescribed in this Section 25.34.

2.	Secures a street opening permit if required in conformance with the provi- sions of Chapter 6.

3.	Agrees to pay all costs of the installation including the connection to the public sewer, if required.

4.	Agrees to give the Coordinator 24 hours notice prior to the start of any un- derground piping and when the underground piping will be ready for in- spection, except that no inspections will be made at times other than dur- ing regular City working hours.

5.	Agrees that the materials used and the method of installation shall be in conformance with specifications established by the City Engineer.

6.	Agrees to pay all inspection costs if such inspection is deemed necessary by the Coordinator.

7.	Agrees to conform to all rules governing plumbers and to the regulations of the Illinois State Plumbing Code.

8.	Agrees to secure and protect the City from any liability or damage what- soever for injury, including death, to any person or property and files with the Coordinator liability insurance certificates.

9.	Secures an IEPA permit if the wastewater:

(a)	Is domestic and the volume to be discharged is more than 1,500 gallons per day (gpd).

(b)	Is industrial.
 

10.	Secures a building permit if new waste source is new equipment to be in- stalled within an existing building.

11.	Agrees to conform to all applicable sections of this Code.

C.	CONNECTION, USER FEES: The fees for constructing a new wastewater source and connecting same to the wastewater facilities of the City are found in Exhibit A of Chapter 24 of this Code. For uses involving extra strength wastewater:

1.	For wastewater the strength of which exceeds normal domestic wastewater in any constituent, if allowed by the City Council, there shall be charged a surcharge computed at the time that connection is requested.

2.	Where the volume and strength of the wastewater to be discharged to the public sanitary sewers is not known at the time of the connection, the fee shall be estimated and adjusted to reflect actual conditions during the bill- ing period just prior to a full year of operation.

3.	The volume and strength of the wastewater for fee purposes shall be the maximum daily discharge of constituents.

4.	Where a connection is made based on the applicant’s statement that the strength of the wastewater does not exceed normal domestic wastewater in any constituent, and at the end of the billing period just prior to a full year of operation it is determined that the wastewater does exceed domestic wastewater in strength, the City Council may accept or reject the wastes.

The tapping fee for any use not located within the corporate limits of the City shall be three times the applicable tapping fee listed in Exhibit A of Chapter 24 of this Code.

D.	No connection will be allowed to the wastewater facilities if the City Council de- termines:

1.	That the wastewater facilities have inadequate treatment or delivery capac- ity.

2.	That the wastewater contains incompatible wastes in excess of that al- lowed by this Code.

3.	That the wastewater contains inadmissible substances.

4.	That the strength, volume or rate of discharge of a compatible waste from a single source or class of users alters substantially the operation of the wastewater facilities.
 


25.35	BUILDING SEWERS

A.	SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each dwelling unit of a building (i.e., single family dwelling, townhouse, duplex, apartment), except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building.

B.	OLD SEWERS: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new build- ings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Coordinator, to meet all require- ments of a new building sewer.

C.	LOCATION: Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the build- ing at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall. No building sewers shall be installed in any place where they may be subject to freezing temperatures unless adequate provisions are made to protect them from frost. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curbed pipe and fittings, or a manhole, as determined by the Coordinator.

D.	LIFT STATION: In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.

E.	PERMIT REQUIRED: No addition to or alteration of any building sewer shall be made or caused to be made by any person without a permit from the Coordinator and then only through a State of Illinois licensed plumber. No permit shall authorize anything not explicitly stated in the application.

F.	MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING SEWER: Persons connected to the sanitary sewer system through a building sewer shall maintain said building sewer in good repair, protect it from damage in any manner and prevent the entrance of uncontaminated waters. If the user fails to properly maintain the building sewer the Coordinator shall have the authority to enter onto the property to maintain the sewer and add the cost of said maintenance on the next sewer use bill or terminate the service until proper maintenance is completed.

G.	INSPECTION MANHOLE: All industrial users and such other users, except do- mestic users, as may be determined by the Coordinator, shall install an inspection manhole on the building sewer. Said manhole shall be located conveniently in the public right-of-way or easement. The manhole shall be a minimum of 48 inches in diameter and shall be equipped with such measuring and sampling equipment as may be required by the Coordinator.

H.	CLEAN OUT: The clean out pipe for a residential property shall be 10 feet from the building.
 


25.36	WASTES ADMISSIBLE TO THE WASTEWATER FACILITIES

The following wastes are admissible to the wastewater facilities of the City:

1.	Any compatible pollutant except that the strength, volume and rate of flow of the waste may be regulated.

2.	Any incompatible pollutant which is identified in the NPDES permit received by the City except that the total from all sources may not exceed the amount allowed under the NPDES permit.

3.	Any incompatible pollutant for which an effluent standard has been established by the IEPA or promulgated by authority of the Act provided that:

a.	The aggregate total from all sources shall not exceed the total allowable to the wastewater treatment facilities based on the average dry weather flow. It is as- sumed that there will be no removal of the incompatible waste in the treatment fa- cilities.

b.	The concentration of the incompatible waste discharged from any source shall not exceed two times the concentration allowed in the wastewater treatment facility effluent.

c.	The concentration of the incompatible waste in the wastewater treatment facility shall not exceed the maximum allowed by the IEPA.

d.	The concentration of the incompatible waste will not adversely affect the stream standards established for the Kishwaukee River.

4.	Cooling water or other uncontaminated industrial process water.

5.	The City may from time to time establish maximum concentrations of various pollutants in the wastewater treatment facility effluent.

25.37	WASTES INADMISSIBLE TO THE WASTEWATER FACILITIES

The following wastes shall not be introduced into the wastewater facilities of the City:

1.	Wastes which interfere with the operation of the wastewater facilities.

2.	Any cyanide or cyanogen compound unless an IEPA permit has been received by the City.

3.	Mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time.
 

4.	Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff and subsurface drainage.

5.	Uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters.

6.	Wastes which may create a fire or explosion hazard in the wastewater facilities.

7.	Wastes which will cause corrosive structural damage to the wastewater facilities.

8.	Wastes with pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0.

9.	Solid or viscous wastes in amounts which would cause obstructions to flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities.

10.	Wastes at a flow rate and/or pollutant discharge rate which is excessive over relatively short time periods so that there is a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treat- ment efficiency. Provided, however, that concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow shall not exceed five times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation for any period exceeding 15 minutes.

11.	Any incompatible waste except as admissible in Section 25.36.

12.	Any compatible waste, the strength of which exceeds normal domestic wastewater in any constituent except as permitted by the City Council.

13.	Any waste containing more than 100 mg/l of fats, oils or grease.

14.	Any garbage that has not been property shredded. The discharge of garbage into the wastewater facilities by any user except a domestic user shall be subject to review by the City Council and may be rejected if it determines there is inadequate treatment capacity available.

15.	Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit.

16.	Any wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits established by the City Council.

17.	Any wastes which will cause discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes or printing inks.

18.	Any wastes which alone or in combination with other wastes will cause the violation of any effluent or stream standards established by the IEPA or by authority of the Act.

25.38	GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS Amended, 05-11-4

A.	INSTALLATION: In order to help prevent sewer blockages and image  to the
 
Wastewater Treatment Plant caused by fats, oils and grease, a grease interceptor (trap) shall be installed at any establishment which disposes of fats, oil or grease (FOG). Grease traps shall be installed at any new, altered or existing establishment that disposes of FOG. Each grease trap shall be properly maintained at no cost to the City.

B.	SIZE AND MAINTENANCE: A grease trap installed on the same floor as the fixture shall have a minimum one-half the liquid holding capacity of the fixture. A grease trap located on a floor below the fixture shall have at least 60 percent of the liquid holding capacity of the fixture. Where two or more sinks or receptacles are connected to an interceptor, the liquid holding capacity shall be based on the combined volume of the fixtures served. To determine the liquid holding capacity in gallons of a plumbing fixture, multiply the length by the width by the height in inches and divide by 231. Each grease trap shall be located so that it may be readily cleaned and inspected. Should the trap be located outside of the establishment, proper mainte- nance and cleaning will be necessary. Water-cooled traps are not permitted.

C.	INSPECTION: The City shall inspect facilities with a grease trap a minimum of once per year. Additional inspections may take place if it is deemed necessary by the City, such as in the case of sewer blockages, to ascertain whether the purpose of this Section is being met and all requirements are complied with. Occupants of the premises containing a grease trap shall allow the City, or its representative, ready access upon presentation of credentials at reasonable times to all parts of said premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of records to be kept as required herein. During the inspections the following shall be verified:

1.	The maintenance and frequency of fats, oils and grease removal is done in an appropriate and timely manner. The trap must be cleaned and grease removed on a schedule (not more than 90 days) that will prevent grease from passing through the trap and into the public sewer system.

2.	The trap is in sound operating condition, or in need of replacement.

3.	No grease additives are being used in compliance with Section 25.27, Wastes Inadmissible to the Wastewater Facilities, of this Code.

4.	Each facility shall maintain a record of grease trap cleaning and mainte- nance. This shall include the date of cleaning, as well as the signature of a supervisor of the facility. In the case grease trap cleaning is done by an outside agency, receipts of such service from that agency shall be kept on file.

D.	PERMITS: Each facility that maintains a grease trap shall have a City permit, which shall be renewed annually at a fee of $75.00. Permits shall be issued and fees collected by the City of Marengo Water Department. Within 30 days after the effective date of this Section (December 26, 2005) those establishments with a grease trap must obtain a City permit. All non- profit establishments, private and public schools, churches, public and governmental facilities, fraternal organizations and bonafide tax exempt entities pursuant to IRS 501C3, shall have their
 
fee waived. However, those establishments and organizations are required to possess a permit and are subject to inspections.

25.39	PRETREATMENT

A.	Any user discharging or proposing to discharge any wastewater into the wastewater facilities of the City which contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 25.37 herein and/or which are in violation of the standards established by the IEPA or USEPA shall provide pretreatment of the wastewater to an acceptable condition for discharge to the wastewater facilities. All required permits shall be filed with the Coordinator prior to the start of constructing pretreatment facilities.

B.	Any user discharging or proposing to discharge a compatible waste, the strength of which exceeds normal domestic waste in any constituent, shall install a pretreatment facility if required by the Coordinator. If pretreatment is required it shall apply uniformly to all users within the industry number.

C.	Any user proposing to construct a pretreatment facility shall have the plans and specifications approved in writing by the City Engineer and an IEPA permit prior to receiving a permit by the City.

D.	Any user proposing to operate a pretreatment facility shall comply with all re- quirements of the IEPA and shall submit such operating data as may be required by the City.

25.40	USER CHARGE

A.	POLICY: It is hereby declared that the policy of the City is:

1.	The City shall adhere to the requirements of Title 40, Protection of the Environment, Chapter 1, Environmental Protection Agency, Subchapter B, Grants, Part 35, State and Local Assistance, Final Grant Regulations, ef- fective February 11, 1974 and all subsequent enactments and regulations issued pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972.

2.	No funds for the operation and maintenance of the wastewater facilities shall be derived from the use of an ad valorem tax.

3.	No charge will be made for any inadmissible waste.

4.	Where the removal of any constituent is incidental to the treatment process no charge will be made for that constituent.

5.	All wastes, the strength of which does not exceed normal domestic waste in any constituent, shall, for billing purposes, be considered to be normal domestic wastes. User charges for normal domestic wastes shall be based on flow alone.
 

6.	Charges for extra strength wastes shall be expressed in dollars per pound of constituent in excess of normal domestic wastewater.

B.	COST OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: The cost of operation and maintenance shall be computed as follows:

1.	Estimate projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities for the next fiscal year.

2.	Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, BOD and SS.

3.	Estimate wastewater volume to be billed. Said volume shall be a total of:

(a)	Water meter readings;

(b)	Estimated use for users not using the City water facilities; and

(c)	Flow meter readings.

C.	SUMMARY OF USERS: Annually concurrently with the determination of the cost of operation and maintenance the City shall make a summary of all users. Said summary shall include a summary of all domestic users with a breakdown as to whether City or private water supply is used, a summary of commercial users listing all such users discharging industrial wastes and/or subject to a surcharge and a summary of all industry listing all such users discharging industrial wastes and/or subject to a surcharge. Where a user discharges industrial wastes and/or is subject to a surcharge an estimate of the volume and strength of said wastewater shall be made.

D.	SURCHARGE: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose wastes exceed the concentration for BOD or SS in normal domestic wastewater. The surcharge shall be expressed as dollars per pound of each constituent (BOD or SS).

Per billing cycle the number of pounds of each constituent from each user subject to a surcharge shall be computed as follows:

BOD (pounds) = (Average analysis per billing cycle in mg/l - 200) x total flow (MG) x 8.34

SS (pounds) = (Average analysis per billing cycle in mg/l - 200) x total flow (MG) x 8.34

Total flow for the billing cycle shall be either water meter or flow meter readings an shall be expressed in million gallons (MG).
 
The surcharge shall be the pounds of each constituent per billing period times the unit cost for each constituent.

Annually the City shall list all users expected to be billed a surcharge for the coming year and the total amount expected to be received from surcharges.

E.	USER CHARGE: Annually and such other times as the City Council shall deem necessary the user charge shall be determined by dividing the estimated amount of revenue required for the operation and maintenance for the next fiscal year less the estimated amount of revenue to be received from surcharges by the estimated volume of wastewater to be billed to all users for the next fiscal year expressed on 1,000 gallon units. The resultant charge shall be expressed in dollars per 1,000 gallons.

25.41	DEBT SERVICE AND OTHER COSTS

Annually and at such other times as the City Council deems necessary, the rates for debt service and other cost shall be computed as follows:

1.	The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the estimated amount of wastewater to be billed for the next fiscal year, expressed in 1,000 gallon units. The resultant charge shall be expressed in dollars per thousand gallons.

2.	When deemed necessary the City Council may declare a rate to provide funds for such other costs as may be applicable to the wastewater facilities. Such a rate shall be based on volume of wastewater billed only and shall be applicable to all users.

25.42	WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE Amended, 18-6-2, 16-5-2, 15-6-1, 14-3-3, 11-8-
2, 08-4-1,	07-3-6, 05-3-1, 04-2-1, 01-8-5

There shall be and there are hereby established rates or charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the City, for meter readings taken after June 1, 2018, based on the amount of wastewater discharged into the wastewater facilities plus a surcharge for the wastewater, the strength of which exceeds normal domestic wastewater. The rate shall be re- computed annually and shall provide adequate funds for the operation and maintenance of the facilities, hereinafter referred to as the user charge, the cost of any bond debt of such facilities and such other costs as may be deemed necessary by the City Council.

Billing rates are as follows:	Effective for meter readings taken 6/1/2018
For users within the City with metered City
Water	
per 1,000 gallons of water used per quarter:	$8.75
 

Debt service charge per quarter:	
$17.80
Residential:	
Non-Residential: <50,000 gallons of usage	$43.22
per quarter	$68.65
Non-Residential: >50,000 gallons of usage	
per quarter	
For non-metered users within the City*	
Basic user charge	$148.69
Debt service charge per quarter:	
$17.80
Residential:	
Non-Residential:	$68.65
*For users outside the corporate limits of the
City, the rate, if service is allowed under this category, shall be based on the amount of water consumed, as shown by water meters	
Per 1,000 gallons of water used per quarter	$13.12
Debt service charge per quarter
Residential:
Non-Residential:	
$26.70
To be negotiated
Non-metered users outside the City:	
Residential & Non-Residential Charge	To be negotiated
*In the event usage of the wastewater facilities is determined to exceed 20,000 gallons per quarter, the City may require the installation of metering devices on the water supply or sewer to measure the amount of



25.43	WATER, SANITARY SEWER AND STORM SEWER USES OUTSIDE OF THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY

No permit shall be issued for the tapping into or use of any water main or sanitary sewer or storm sewer facility under the jurisdiction of the City for any location outside of the corporate limits of the City until the person or user executes a perpetual, binding agreement to comply with and be governed by all applicable sections of Chapters 25, 26, 27 and 28 of this Code.

25.44	WATER, SANITARY SEWER AND STORM SEWER USES FOR AUTOMOBILE SERVICE, REPAIR AND FUEL DISPENSING PROPERTIES

A.	DISCHARGE MONITORING: Inspection manholes in sanitary sewers as re- quired by Section 25.35-G shall be capable of being equipped with continuous 24-hour compo- site sampling equipment meeting the requirements of Section 25.18-C. When property use involves automotive repair or handling, sale and dispensing of petroleum products and/or automotive fluids, all sanitary sewers serving non-domestic uses shall include such monitoring throughout the year in a manner secured and coordinated by the Coordinator. Additionally, any
 
property involved in the repair or servicing of automobiles, trucks or engine-powered equipment shall install a triple basin oil separator in the sanitary line servicing the repair area of the building. This system shall be cleaned, serviced and inspected at least twice per year.

B.	STORMWATER HANDLING AND DETENTION: Stormwater handling shall be in accordance with this Code and when the property use is associated with automotive repair or handling, sale or dispensing of petroleum products and/or automotive fluids, there shall be a separate drainage system constructed to collect all fluids from the areas associated with pump islands and under pump canopies. This separate drainage system shall collect these fluids and hold them in a separate sealed tank for testing and removal by approved special waste handling methods. Stormwater conductors or downspouts that drain the canopy roof shall be discharged via hard piping directly to the on-site storm sewer system. Downspouts shall not be allowed to discharge across the surface of the fueling area and/or parking lot. All fuel dispensing equipment, storage tanks, secondary containment structures, monitoring wells, leak detection equipment, piping and venting shall be installed in accordance with the standards listed below:

1.	Guidance Manual for LUST Cleanups in Illinois, September 1989; and Leaking Underground Storage Tank Manual, September 1991; both pub- lished by the IEPA, 2200 Churchill Road, P.O. Box 19276, Springfield, IL 62794-9276.

2.	Recommended Practices for Installation of Underground Liquid Storage Systems, PEI/RP100, 1994; published by Petroleum Equipment Institute,
P.O. Box 2380, Tulsa, OK 74101.

3.	Flammable and Combustible Liquid Code, NFPA/30, 1993; Automotive and Marine Services Station Code, NFPA/30A, 1993; National Electric Code, NFPA/70, 1993; and Underground Leakage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids, NFPA/329, 1992; all published by National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy, MA 02269-9904.

4.	Underground Storage Tanks; Technical Requirements and State Program Approval; Final Rules, 40 CFR Parts 280 and 281, Part II, Federal Regis- ter, Friday September 23, 1988; and Musts for UST’s: A Summary of the New Regulations for Underground Storage Tank Systems, and Hazardous Waste Management Standards, Federal Register, July 14, 1986, both pub- lished by USEPA, Office of Underground Storage Tanks, 401 M Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20460.

5.	Rules of the Illinois State Fire Marshall, Part 170 & 180, Title 41, Chapter 1, State of Illinois, Office of the Fire Marshall, 1035 Stevenson Parkway, Springfield, IL 62703.

C.	JURISDICTION:
 
1.	These requirements shall be met by any property use associated with au- tomotive repair or the handling, sale or dispensing of petroleum products and/or automotive fluids, where any water main, wastewater or storm- water facility is under the jurisdiction of the City, regardless of whether or not such property lies within the corporate limits of the City.

2.	The requirements of this Subsection 25.45-C shall not be applied to exist- ing property uses except that whenever a permit shall be required for new construction or reconstruction of a property use associated with automo- tive repair or the handling, sale or dispensing of petroleum products and/or automotive fluids involving placement, replacement, reconfiguration, re- moval or modification of any fueling area, compliance with the provisions of this Section 25.45 shall be required.

25.45	LIMITATIONS ON DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER

In case of making repairs or alterations or constructing new facilities or for any other reason, the Mayor and City Council reserves the right to limit the discharge of wastewater to the wastewater facilities for as long as may be necessary by giving such reasonable notice thereof as shall be practical to the user. No claim shall be made against the City by reason of the above or by reason of the breakage or failure of any portion of the wastewater facilities.

25.46	SURCHARGE   FOR   ILLEGAL   CONNECTIONS   OR   UNINSPECTED PROPERTY

A.	SEWER SURCHARGE: The Building Commissioner is authorized and directed to inspect any and all facilities, including businesses, residences and any other permanent structures with City sewer service for purposes of determining compliance with federal grant application standards, which are specifically incorporated herein, or illegal connections whereby excessive storm runoff water is diverted into the sanitary sewer. If the Building Commissioner is unable to acquire access to any business, residence or other structure within the City, or finds a violation of the federal grant application standards or an illegal connection, the Building Commissioner shall notify the Utility Billing Clerk who shall levy a surcharge of $80 per quarter on any water or sewer bills for said premises. Said surcharge shall be a provisional charge for 90 days after it is first billed. If, within said 90-day period, the owner brings the business, residence or other structure into compliance and is inspected by the City or a licensed civil engineer, at the owner’s expense, the surcharge will be removed. If there is not compliance within 90 days the
$80 surcharge will be levied each quarter until compliance.

B.	WAIVER OF SEWER SURCHARGE: The sewer surcharge shall be removed from charges for water use only that meets the following criteria:

1.	The water is conducted from the main to the ultimate user through a sepa- rate water line installed at the expense of the user, including a separate hookup fee;
 
2.	All such water is measured through a separate meter;

3.	Substantially all of the water is utilized to maintain public grounds or pri- vate grounds having a contiguous area not less than one acre which sup- port natural vegetation and which are maintained; and

4.	The user has obtained a permit from the City Council for waiver of the sewer surcharge.

25.47	WELL SETBACK ZONE Amended, 05-11-4

A.	The use or attempt to use a potable water supply, groundwater from an area with- in a 2,500-foot radius of 536 N. State Street, 600 N. State Street and 602 N. State Street, by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, except at points of withdrawal by the City. The continued use of wells within this radius shall not be prohibited so long as they are in operation on the effective date of this Section 25.47 (August 25, 2000). Only the installation of new wells within said radius from the effective date of this Section 25.47 forward shall be required to be in compliance.

B.	Pursuant to the authority conferred by 415ILCS 5/14.1 et seq., and except as pro- vided herein, no person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source or new potential route within the minimum setback zone of Well No. 8, 107 Lynn Drive, IEPA #1110650; Well No.7, Greenlee and N. Lynn Drive, IEPA #00849; and Well No. 6, Greenlee and Prospect, IEPA #20193.

C.	Pursuant to the authority conferred by 415 ILCS 5.14.1 et seq., and except as pro- vided herein, no person shall place a new potential primary source within the maximum setback zone of Well No. 8, 107 Lynn Drive, IEPA #1110650; Well No. 7, Greenlee and N. Lynn Drive, IEPA #00849; and Well No. 6, Greenlee and Prospect, IEPA #20193.

D.	WAIVER, EXCEPTIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS OF MINIMAL HAZARD:
Waivers, exceptions and certifications of minimal hazard shall be pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/14.2

25.48	CPI ADJUSTMENT Amended 18-6-2, 06-5-3

All potable water and sanitary sewer connection fees and charges shall be subject to an annual "CPI Adjustment" which shall be applied for meter readings taken after March 1st of each year starting in 2019. Annually, the fees shall be adjusted by the December-December Percent change as published by the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics, All Items
Consumer Price Index ("CPI") for All Urban Consumers (1982-84 = 100) for the Chicago-Naperville-
Elgin, Ill-Ind-Wisc Statistical Area, Illinois. If any index is calculated from a base
different from the base period 1982-84 = 100, such index shall be converted to a base period of 1982-84 = 100 by use of a conversion factor supplied by said Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the
CPI is discontinued or replaced, such other governmental Cost of Living Index or computation which replaces the CPI shall be used in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained if the CPI had not been discontinued or replaced. The annual CPI adjustment shall be a
minimum of 1% and a maximum of 3% in the event the CPI is less than 1% or greater than 3%
 
respectively.

25.49	PENALTIES Amended, 05-11-4

A.	Any facility responsible for violating Section 25.38 herein for sewer blockage shall be responsible for the cost of damages done to affected properties plus any and all related costs for remediation, restitution and litigation. Violation of Section 25.48 shall result in a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000 per day plus all cost related to remediation, restitution and prosecution, including but not limited to filing fees, witness fees and attorneys’ fee and will be subject to disconnection of water service. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.

B.	Unless another penalty is specifically provided by this Chapter 25 for the viola- tion of any particular section hereof, any person violating any provision of this Chapter or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance hereof, or any lawful order made by a City official hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than
$1,000, plus all cost related to remediation, restitution and prosecution, including but no limited to filing fees, witness fees and attorneys’ fees.
 
EXHIBIT A CHAPTER 25 DEFINITIONS

Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500) and P.L. 93-243. All rules and regulations promulgated under authority of the act are made part of this Chapter 25 by reference.

Average Dry Weather Flow: The average daily flow for the lowest three month period in the previous calendar year.

Average Wet Weather Flow: The average daily flow for the highest month in the previous calendar year.

Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from the soil, wastes and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.

Building Sewer: The extension of the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.

BOD: (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter.

Combined Sewer: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water.

Compatible Pollutant: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, fecal coliform bacteria, compounds, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit issued to the City.

Coordinator: Coordinator of Public Works or designee.

Department: The combined water and wastewater department of the City.

Domestic Wastes, Domestic Wastewater or Sanitary Wastes: Wastewater derived principally from dwellings but also includes all wastewater derived from plumbing fixtures located in commercial or industrial users.

Domestic or Residential User: Any user of the wastewater facilities not classed as an industrial user.

Dwelling or Residential Dwelling Unit: A unit designed for occupancy by one family. It may be a house designed for the exclusive use of one family or it may be a portion of a building designed and intended to be used by one family.
 
Estimated Flow From Domestic Users: The estimated wastewater flow from single family dwellings where private water systems are used. For the purpose of Chapter 25 the contribution per dwelling unit shall be 350 gallons per day.

Easement: An acquired legal right for a specific use of land owned by others.

Garbage: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

IEPA: (Illinois Environmental Protection Agency) All rules and regulations established by the IEPA are made a part of this Chapter 25 by reference.

Incidental removal or incidental to: The removal of a constituent for which no capital or operating or maintenance costs are expended.

Incompatible Pollutant: Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant.

Industrial User: Any non-governmental user of the wastewater treatment facilities identified in the S.I.C. Manual under the following divisions:

A.	Division A:	Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.

B.	
Division B:	
Mining.

C.	
Division D:	
Manufacturing.

D.	
Division E:	
Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services.

E.	
Division I:	
Services.

The user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the City that it will introduce primary segregated domestic wastes or wastes from plumbing fixtures.

Industrial Wastes or Industrial Wastewater: The liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.

Liability: Whenever reference is made to “secure and protect the City from any liability or damage” it shall include all authorized employees and agents of the City as well as the elected and appointed officials.

Inspection Manhole: A 48-inch diameter or larger manhole, installed on a user’s property which is continuously accessible to the Department for inspection or sampling.

Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the wastewater treatment facilities of the City that:
 
A.	Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day.

B.	Has a flow greater than 10 percent of the average dry weather flow.

C.	Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Act.

D.	If found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant im- pact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.

Maximum Wet Weather Flow: The average daily flow for the maximum week in the month used to determine the average wet weather flow.

New Wastewater Source: Any source constructed after the adoption of Chapter 25. For the purposes of Chapter 25 additions to a dwelling unit shall not be considered a new source.

Normal Domestic Wastewater: For the purposes of Chapter 25 normal domestic wastewater shall contain the following constituents at the strengths indicated:

BOD:	200 mg/l
SS:	240 mg/l

NPDES: (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) A permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Administrator or, where appropriate, by the IEPA, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.

Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns, or taxing body.

pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

P: Phosphorus or phosphorus compounds.

Plumbing Fixture: Any device or equipment normally located in a dwelling unit from which wastewater is discharged.

Potable water: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes or preparing foods.

Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction into the wastewater facilities.
 

Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

Public Sewer: A common sewer owned by the City.

Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance during the service life of the treatment facilities for which such facilities were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.

Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commer- cial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.

Service Life: The period of time during which a component of the facilities will be capable of performing a function.

S.I.C. Manual: The Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Executive Office of the President, Office Management and Budget.

Substantial Removal: In general means the removal of at least 80 percent.

SS: (denoting suspended solids) Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension of water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

Unit of Flow: A unit of flow for billing purposes shall be 1,000 gallons.

USEPA: The United State Environmental Protection Agency.

User: Any person or persons making connection to water and/or wastewater facilities of the City. Where a single meter serves multiple users or residential units, each use or residential unit is considered a user for the purpose of computing fees and charges, except for administrative fees, which shall be paid based on the number of meters.

Wastewater: The spent water of the community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.

Wastewater Facilities: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes, and dispose of the effluent.

Water and Wastewater Service Charge: A charge for the use of and the service supplied by
 
the water and wastewater facilities of the City. The service charge shall consist of the user charge, the cost of any bond debt of such facilities and such other costs as may be deemed necessary by the City.

Wastewater source or waste source: Any installation, process or equipment from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants.

Wastewater Treatment Facilities: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.

Water Course:

A.	A natural or artificial channel for passage of water.

B.	A running stream of water.

C.	A natural stream fed from permanent or natural sources, including rivers, creeks, runs and rivulets. There must be a stream, usually flowing in a particular direction (though it need not flow continuously) in a definite channel having a bed or banks and usually discharg- ing into some other stream or body of water.

Water Facilities: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, pump, treat and distribute water to the users.
 
CHAPTER 26
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL RULES AND REGULATIONS

 
26.01
26.02
26.03
26.04
26.05
26.06
 
Cross-Connection Control General Policy
Definitions
Water System
Cross-Con nection Prohibited Survey  and Investigations Where Protection is Required
 


26.1	CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL GENERAL POLICY

A.	The purpose of these rules and regulations is:

1, To protect the public water supply system from contaminant or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply system.

2.	To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and non-pot­ able water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing sub­ stance of unknown or questionable safety.

3.	To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water systems.

B.	APPLICATION:   These rule and regulations shall apply to all premises served  by the
public potable water supply system of the City.

C.	POLICY : The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow o r back-siphonage of contaminant s through the customer's water service connection. If, in the judgment of the Public Works Coordinator or his authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply device, the Public Works Coordinator shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises . The consume r shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in Section 26.05-D-4 for a period of at least five years. The Public Works Coordinator may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection  report to the Wat er Department to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be required . All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector certified by the !EPA .

26.2	DEFINITIONS

In addition to the definitions found in Appendi x A of this Code. the definitions contained in this Chapter
26 are defined as follows :
 
Approved:	Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engi­ neers, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.

Auxiliary Water System: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes or streams; or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.

Backflow: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply.

Backflow Prevention Device: Any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the IEPA.
CCDI:   The Cross-Connection  Control Device Inspector approved  by the City and the IEPA. Consumer  or Customer:   The owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied
by or in any manner connected to a public water system.

Consumer's Water System: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.

Contamination: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substa nee to a degree which could create a health hazard.

Coordinator:   The Public Works Coordinator or the authorized representative.

Cross-Connection: Any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.

Direct cross-connection means a cross-connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.

Indirect cross-connection means a cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system.

Double Check Valve Assembly: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.

Fixed Property Air Gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle.

Health Hazard:  Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or  potential damage to the health and well-being  of consumers.   The word  "severe"  as used to
 
qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.

Inspection: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures , piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.

Non-Potable Water: Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm.  Code 604.

Plumbing : The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person . Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures , appurtenances and app liances for a supply of water for all purposes, inc luding without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures , appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.

Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic , radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.

Potable Water: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic  purposes.

Potential Cross-Connection:  A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination   point.

Process Fluid(s) : Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system . This includes but is not limited to:

1.	Polluted or contaminated waters;

2.	Process waters;

3.	Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;

4.	. Cooling waters;

5.	Questionable  or  contaminated  natural  waters  taken  from  wells,  lakes, stream s or  irrigation systems;

6.	Chemicals in solution or suspension; and

7.	Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other
processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
 
Public Water Supply: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations ,treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances , collectively or severally , actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days per year . A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a "non-community water supply."

Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device: A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valve at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device , and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.

Service Connection: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through
which water is supplied to the user.

Survey:  The collection of information pertaining to a customer's  piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within the customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not  be  an actual plumbing  inspection.

System Hazard:  A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not
dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system.

Used Water : Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed thr ough the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.

Water Purveyor:  The owner or official custodian of a public water system.

26.03              WATER SYSTEM

A . The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: The public water supply and the consumer's water system.

8.	The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the Public Works Coordinato r up to the point where the consumer's water system begins.

1.	The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the produc­ tion, treatment , storage and de livery of water to the public water supply distribution  system.

2.	The public water supply distribution system shall inc lude the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system .
 
C. The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points of use.

26.4	CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED

A.	Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis.

8.	PROHIBITIONS:

1.	No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical qua lity as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agenc y.

2.	There shall be no arrangement  or connection by which an unsafe substance
may enter a supply.

26.5	SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS

A.	The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the CCCDI for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's  premises,  and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection  control devices within the consumer's premises.

B.	On request by the Public Works Coordinator, the consume r shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Public Works Coordinator for the verification of information submitted by the consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection  results.

C.	It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connec tions to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system . All cross-connect ion control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3(1) .

D.	It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that :

1.	.  All  cross-connections   are  removed;  or  approved  cross-connection  control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.

2.	Cross-connection  control  devices  shall  be  installed  in  accordance  with  the
manufacturer's instructions.

3.	Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a CCCDI. The in­ spection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in acco rdance with the  manufacturer's  instructions .

4.	Testing and records:
 
(a)	Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer .

(b)	Records submitted to the Water Department shall be available for in­
spection by Agency personnel in accordance with 41 5 ILCS 5/4(e) .

(c)	Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent rest, name of CCCDI and type and date of repairs .

(d)	A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:

I.	Date of each test;

II.	Name and approval number of person performing the test; Ill.	Test results;
IV.	.	Repairs or servicing required ;

V.	Repairs and date completed; and

VI.	Service performed and date completed .

26.6	WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED

A.	An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as descr ibed in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulation, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the Public Works Coordinator, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist .

8.	An  approved  backflow prevention device shall be installed  on each service line to a
consumer's water system serving premises where the following condition s exist:

1.	Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional  source by the Public  Works Coordinator and the source is approved by the Agency.

2.	Premises on which any substance is handled which can created an actual premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters origi­ nating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the Public Works Coordinator.
 
Chapter 27
CABLENIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE1

 
27.1	1
27.02
27.03
27.04
27.05
27.06
 
Definitions
CableNideo Service Provider Fee Imposed
Applicable Principles
No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider
Late Fees, Payments
 


27.2	DEFINITIONS

In addition to those terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, the following terms shall have the following meanings in this Chapter:

Cable service: As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).

Commission: The Illinois Commerce Commission.

Gross revenu es: A ll consid eration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or v ideo service area within the City.

l.	Gross revenues shall include the following:

A.	Recurring charges for cable or v ideo service.

B.	Event-based charges for cable service or video serv ice, including , but not limited to, pay -per-vi ew and video-on-demand charges.

C.	Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video servi ce equ ipment.

D.	Service  charges  related  to  the  provision   of  cable  service  or  video   service,
including but not limited to activation, installation and repair charges.

E.	Administrative  charges related to the provi sion of cable service or v ideo serv ice, including but not limited to service order and service termination  charges.

F.	Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges and other charges
assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.

G.	A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to
compen sation arrangements  for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any


1  Ordinance 07-11-2
 
products or services derived from the operation of the holder 's netvvork to provide cable service or video service within the City. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the City divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compen sation arrangement.

H.	Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder 's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to paragraph 1-H herein.

I.	In the case of a cable service or video service that  is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and record s that are kept in the regular course of business.

J.	The service provider fee pennitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-80 l (b).

2.	Gross revenues do not include any of the following:

A.	Revenues not actually received , even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi).

B.	Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.

C.	Regardle ss of whether the services are bundled, packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation , revenue received from telecommunication services, information services or the provisi on of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders.

D.	The sale of cable services  or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser 's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the City and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/2 1-80l (b) with respect to the service.

E.	Any  tax   or  fee  of  general   applicability   imposed  upon  the  subscribers  or  the
transaction  by a city, state, federal or any other governmental entity and collected by
 
the holder of the state-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing
entity, including sales and use taxes.

F.	Security deposits collected from subscribers.

G.	Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.

3.	Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-80l(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.

Holder: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.

Service: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401 .

Service provider fee: The amount paid under this Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a City for the service areas within its terdtorial jurisdi ction.

Video service: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the public Internet.

27.2	CABLENIDEO SERVICE PROV1DER FEE IMPOSED

A.	FEE IMPOSED: A fee is imposed on any holder providing cable service  or video service in the City.

B.	AMOUNT OF FEE: The amount of the fee imposed shall be 5 percent of the holder's gross revenues.

C.	NOTICE TO THE CITY: The holder shall notify the City at least lO days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the City.

D.	HOLDER'S LIABILITY: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the City. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Chapter by the holder. The
 
ordinance adopting this Chapter shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-40 J (b)(6) to the City.

E.	PAYMENT DATE: The payment of  the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.

F.	.   EXEMPTION:  The fee imposed  does not apply  to existing  cable service  or  video service providers that have an existing franchi se agreement with the City in which a fee is paid.

G.	CREDIT FOR OTHER PAYMENTS: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the  amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under Section 27.02-B.

27.3	APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES

All  determination s and  calculations  under  this  Chapter  shall  be  made  pursuant  to  generally accepted accounting principles.

27.4	NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER

Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax. that is or may later be imposed by the City, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the City 's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E91 l fees, taxes or charges.

27.5	AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER

A.	AUDIT REQUIREMENT: The City will notify the holder of the requirement s it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the City imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder 's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirement s of the City. If all local franchises between the City and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers ' Bill of Rights Act, 50
ILCS 4511 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the
amounts are correct.

B.	ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30 days after the City's submission of an invoice for the sum.
 
27.06	LATE FEES, PAYMENTS

All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed  by ordinances adopted by the City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 4511 et seq.
 
CHAPTER 29
McHENRY COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE



29.1	Adoption of the McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance
29.2	McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance Amendments
29.3	Permit Fees
29.4	Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Floodway Map and Flood Insurance Study Exhibit A Amendments



29.1	ADOPTION OF THE McHENRY COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE Amended, 16-8-3, 15-11-1, 08-8-2

The McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance, as most recently amended by the County of McHenry on April 5, 2016, is hereby adopted by reference and is in full force and ef- fect within the City of Marengo shall be known as Chapter 29 in the Marengo Municipal Code.

29.2	McHENRY	COUNTY	STORMWATER	MANAGEMENT	ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS Amended 16-8-3, 15-11-1, 08-8-2

That certain amendments, deletions and additions to the McHenry County Stormwater Manage- ment Ordinance, as identified on attached Exhibit A and adopted by reference, are hereby incor- porated and adopted by the City of Marengo with an effective date of August 22, 2016.

29.3	PERMIT FEES Amended 15-11-1

The following fees shall be paid to the City of Marengo prior to the issuance of any permit re- quired by this Ordinance:

Minor Development and Single Lot Developments

Review Fee, includes one resubmittal	$150 Resubmittals beyond the first resubmittal	$50/ submittal Outside Consulting Review Services	Time and Material

A deposit fee pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Marengo Municipal Code may be required. All Other Development (intermediate, major, SFHA and wetlands)
Review Fee, includes one resubmittal	$500 Resubmittals beyond the first resubmittal	$200/ submittal Outside Consulting Review Services	Time and Material

A deposit fee pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Marengo Municipal Code may be required
 
29.4	FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS, FLOODWAY MAP AND FLOOD INSUR- ANCE STUDY 06-11-3

The following is a list of the currently effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps (“FIRM”), floodway and Flood Insurance Study (“FIS”) data to be used in the enforcement of this Chapter. This list shall be interpreted to include any such amendments to such studies and maps as may be pre- pared from time to time.


Community Number	Date of Current Effective Map	McHenry County FIRM   Panel   Num- ber	McHenry County FIS Effective Date
170482	11/16/06	17111C 0163J	11/16/06
170482	11/16/06	17111C 0164J	11/16/06
170482	11/16/06	17111C 0275J	11/16/06
170482	11/16/06	17111C 0276J	11/16/06
170482	11/16/06	17111C 0277J	11/16/06
 









McHENRY		
	

 
		
	
		
COUNTY





McHenry County, Illinois


Stormwater  Management Ordinance


January 20, 2004























Amended :
April 15, 2008
October 19, 201O
March 15, 2011
April 15, 2014
December 1, 2014
April 5, 2016
 



















Copies of this document are available for review or purchase at:

Department of Planning and Development McHenry County Administration  Building 667 Ware Road
Woodstock,  Illinois

It is also available for download at:
www .mchenrycounty il.gov






Inquiries may be directed to:

stormwater@co .mchenry .ii.us

Department of Planning and Development 2200 North Seminary Avenue
Woodstock,  Illinois 60098
(815) 334-4560
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
NOT ES TO USER	1
ARTI CLE 1	2
§15.60.010	Introduction, Authori ty and Purpose	2
A.	Introduction	2
B.	Authority	2
C.	Purpose	2
ARTICLE II	4
§15.60.020	Scope of Regulation	4
A.	Jurisdiction and Administration	4
B.	Regulated Development	4
C.	Exempted Development	4
D.	Reduced Standards for Specific Types of Developm ent	5
ARTICLE 111	8
§15.60.030	General Permits	8
A.  Geheral Permit Number 1-Authorizing Routine Projects	9
B.	General Permit Number 2 - Authorizing Single Family Homes	17
C.	Letters of Und erstanding	21
ARTI CLE IV	22
§15.60.040	Stormwater Mana gement Permit Provisions	22
A.	Development Classification	22
B.	.   Developm ent Phasing	22
C.	Approval Prior to Perm itting	22
D.	Fees and Application Review Times	23
E.	Permit Terms and Extension s	23
F.	Permit Conditions	24
ARTICLE V	25
§15.60.050	Application Requirem ents	25
A.	Enforcement Officer Authority	25
B.	Property Interest	25
C.	Basic Submittal	25
D.	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Submittal	2 6
E.	Runoff Control Submittal	2 7
F.	Flood Hazard Area Submittal	30
G.	Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal.	32
 
ii
ARTICLE VI	34
§15.60.060	Performance Standards	34
A.	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control	34
B.	Runoff Control	41
C.	Flood Hazard Areas	52
D.	Wetlands and Waters	71
E.	Buffer Areas	77
ARTICLE VII	80
§15.60.070	Variances and Appeals	80
A.	Variances	80
B.	Appeals	82
ARTICLE VIII	84
§15.60.080	Inspections and Access	84
ARTICLE IX	85
§15.60.090	Violation and Penalty	85
ARTICLE X	87
§15.60.100	Procedure and Enforcement	87
A.	Responsibility for Enforcement	87
B.	Multi-County Municipalities	87
C.	Duties of the MCSC Chief Engineer	88
D.	.  Duties of the Enforcement Officer	88
E.	Representative Capacity	90
F.	Community Certification	90
ARTICLE XI	93
§15.60.110	Disclaimer of Liability	93
ARTICLE XII	94
§15.60.120	Severability	94
ARTICLE XII I	95
§15.60.130	Abrogation and Greater Restrictions	95
ARTICLE XIV	96
§15.60.140	Amendments	96
 
iii





TABLES

1.	Regulation of Routine Projects	6

2.	Summary of General Permit 1	8

3.	Applicability of Soil Erosion and Sediment Contro l Performance Standards	34

4.	Minimum Elevation Standards for Public Health Protection	58

5.	Bu ilding Protection Standards for Flood Hazard Areas	59

6.	Acceptable Measures for Flood Protection	59

7.	Compensatory Storage Exemptions	66

8.	- Required Compensatory Storage Ratios	67

9.	IWMC Mitigation Ratios	73

10.	Buffer Widths	77




FIGURES

1.	How to Elevate Your Floodplain Building	61

2.	Enclosures Below the BFE	62

3.	Accessory Structures	64

4.	Understanding the Floodway	129

5.	Flood Hazard Areas	133

6.	Understanding the Riverine Floodplain	134
 
iv


APPENDICES
Appendix 1	97
§15.60.150	Permitting Fl owcharts	97
Appendix 2	106
§15.60.160	Standard Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Notes	106
Appendix 3	108
§15.60.170	Standard Drain Tile Notes	108
Append ix 4	109
§15.60.180	Rainfall Depth -Duration Frequency Tabl es for McHenry County	109
Appendix 5	111
§15.60.190   Hydrologic and Hydraulic Models and Techniques Approved by MCSC	111
Appendix 6	113
§15.60.200	Detention Volume vs. Percent Impervious Chart for McHenry County	113
Append ix 7	114
§15.60.220	IDNR/OWR Dam Safety Permit Flowchart	114
Append ix 8	115
§15.60.230	Public Bodies of Water in McHenry County	115
Appendix 9	116
§15.60.240	McHenry County Watersheds	116
Appendix 10	117
§15.60.250	McHenry County Watershed Plans	117
Appendix 11	118
§15.60.260	Floodplain and Floodway Maps	118
Appendix 12	127
§15.60.270	Definitions	127
Appendix 13	150
§15.60.280   Acronym s	150
 
Notes to User	1


Notes to User

The McHenry County Stormwater Management Ordinance (this Ordinance) regulates development and substant i al improvements to buildings in the floodplain throughout McHenry County, within incorporated and unincorporated areas alike. As you read through this Ordinance, you will notice that certain terms are underlined and the Ordinance  uses numerous  acronyms.  Underlined  terms are defined in Appendix 12and acronyms are defined in Appendix 13.

Not all development is regulated by this Ordinance, but development that is regulated requires a stormwater management permit before construction is allowed to commence. Some development is regulated b ecause of its size, such as: development that hydrologically disturbs 5,000 square feet or more; development that hydrologically disturbs 50% or more of a parcel; and development  that results in an additional 20,000 square feet of impervious area since the original effective date of th i s Ordinance. Other development is regulated because of its location, regardless of its size. Examples include development that is located partially or completely in a flood hazard area or wetland.

The basic steps used to determine whether a particular project requires a stormwater management permit are listed below. The Permitting Flow Charts in Appendix 1provide additional guidance. If you have any questions about this Ordinance or its applicability to a specific project, please contact the McHenry County Department of Planning and Development.

1.	Determin e whether your project meets the definition of development (see Appendix 12). If
it does, go on to Step 2.
2.	Determine whether your project is regu lated development (see Article II, Section B). If it is, go on to Step 3.
3.	Determine whether your project is exempted development (see Article II, Section C). If it is not, go on to Step 4.
4.	Determine whether your project qualifies for a General Permit, which waives certain requirements of this Ordinance in order to streamline the permit process for specific types of routine projects (see Article III). If it does, follow the process described for that General Permit.  If it does not, go on to Step 5.
5.	Determine how your project is classified (see Article IV, Section A) and then go on to Step 6.
6.	Determine which Application Requirements apply (see Article V). Then go on to Step 7.
7.	Determine which Performance Standards apply (see Article VI). Then go on to Step 8.
8.	Submit a complete stormwater management permit application to a Certified Community or to the McHenry County Department of Planning and Development, along with the required submittals.
9.	Await the issuance of a stormwater management permi t prior to commencing your project.
 
Article I: Introduction, Authority and Purpose, Section A. : Introduction, Paragraph 1.	2


Article  I

§15.60.010	Introduction, Authority and Purpose

A.	Introduction

1.	The McHenry County Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan, adopted by the McHenry County Board on June 16, 1997 states, "To provide a consistent level of protection and to provide equity throughout the County, a program for consistent Countywide regulation and enforcement should . be develop ed with standards established at the Countywide level and, where appropriate, modified at the watershed level to meet watershed specific need s. A Countywide regulatory program would involve development of a Countywide watershed development ordinance that applies to both incorporated and unincorporated areas. ... [T]he watershed development ordinance should be comprehensive and specify standards for stormwater drainage and detention, floodplain management, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and stream and wetland protection in a single document."

2.	McHenry County has determined that uniform and consistent enforcement by municipalitie s that adopt the standards of the Stormwater Management Ordinance will enhance the effectiveness of th e program. The County also understands that local conditions may sometimes require additional or more restrictive standards to me et the purpose of this Ordinance. In those instances where the requirements of this Ordinance are not stipulated in a municipal ordinance or are more restrictive than municipal requirements, this Ordinance shall prevail. In some cases, the requirements of this Ordinance are more restrictive than Federal or State minimum standards. A municipality has the right to enact more restrictive standards than the minimum standards of this Ordinance.

B.	Authority

1.	This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the powers granted to McHenry County by 55
ILCS 5/5-1041, 1042, 1049, 1062, 1063, 1104, 12003, 15001 & 40001 et seq., (County)
and by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, 11-31-2 and 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq .
including 18g.

2.	This Ordinance establishes  minimum  standards and may be superseded by more
restrictive Federal, State, or other local regulations.

C.	Purpose

1.	The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish reasonable rules and regulations for
floodplain and stormwater management in order to:

a.	Protect and preserve the quality and environm ental values of land and water resources in McHenry County;

b.	Encourage development in a manner that promote s the orderly, sustainable and
cost-effective utilization of land and water resources;

c.	Minimize the impact of development on flood hazards, erosion, and water quality;

d.	Minimize the need for additional expenditure of public funds for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood related emergency operations;
 
Article I: Introduction, Authority and Purpose, Section C.: Purpose, Paragraph 1.	3


e.	Minimize additional disruption of governmental services and the economy due to flooding and drainage problems;

f.	Maintain eligibili ty for the NFIP by equalin g or exceeding Federal floodplain development regulations (the NFIP is codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended) thereby making federally subsidized flood insurance available to residents in participating communities;

g.	Protect the hydrologic, hydr aulic, water quality, aquatic habitat, recreation and other beneficial functions of streams, pon ds, lakes, wetlands, and flood storage areas;

h.	Protect the quantity and quality of groundwater resou rces;

i.	Meetthe requirements of The Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act, Resources, 615 ILCS 5/1 et. seq.;

j.	Minimize harm due to peri odic flooding including loss of life and property and
threats and inconveniences to public health, safety and welfare;

k.	Protect buildings and improvements to buildings from flood damage;

1.	Facilitate the permitting of sound maintenance of channels and  existing stormwater management systems; and

m.	Require the regular, planned maintenance of new stormwater management systems.
 
Article II: Scope of Regulation, Section A.: Jurisdiction and Administration, Paragraph 1. 	4


Article II

§15.60.020	Scope of Regulation

A.	Jurisdiction and Administration

1.	This  Ordinance  applies  throughout  McHenry  County,  within  incorporated  and
'	unincorporat ed areas.
2.	The administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall be performed by: Certified Communities, within their respective jurisdictions; and,
The MCSC, its agents, employees and assignees in all other areas of McHenry County.

3.	A list of Certified Communities may be obtained from the McHenry County Department
of Planning and Development.

B.	Regulated Development

1.	Refer to the Regulated Development Flowchart in Appendix 1.

2.	No person, firm, corporation or governmen.tal agency, unless specifically exempted, shall commence any regulated development without first obtaining a stormwater management perm it. Unless it is specifically exempted in Article II, Section C, any activity that meets any of the following criteria, is considered regul ated development:

a.	Any development that is located partially or completely in a flood hazard area; or

b.	Any development located partially or completely within  the boundary  of a
wetland or waters; or

c.	Any development that hydrologically disturbs 5,000 square feet or more; or

d.	Any development that hydrologically disturbs 50% or more of a parcel; or

e.	Any development that results in an additional 20,000 square feet of impervious
area since the effective date of this Ordinance; or

f.	Any development on a lot or parcel of land platted after December 1, 2014 that results in impervious area exceeding the design paramet ers of an existing stormw ater management facility; or

g.	Any development that is part of a larger common plan of development that, as a
whole, would constitute regulated development.

C.	Exempted  Development

1.	Development that consists solely of the following activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance, upon review and verification by the Enforcement Officer:

a.	Maintenance of existing buildings outside the floodplain;

b.	Maintenance of existing buildings within the floodplain that does not constitute a substantial improvement;

c.	Maintenance  of existing roads and trails;

d.	Other maintenance activities;

e.	Gardening  and  landscaping  that  does  not  involve  filling,  grading,  or  the construction of berms;
 
Article II: Scope of Regulation, Section C.: Exempted Development, Paragraph 1. 	5


f.	Tillage and similar agricultural practi ces that do not involve filling, grading or the construction of levees;

g.	Improvements undertaken  pursuant to a written NRCS Conservation Plan, when
the improvements are not located within a flood hazard area, WOTUS, or IWMC;

h.	Demolition and accompanying restoration, including the remova l of bridges and culverts, provided  that:

(1)	Natural land contours are restored;

(2)	The disturbed area is less than 1acre; and

(3)	Appropriate soil erosion and sediment control practices are utilized;

i.	Installation, repair or replacement of an onsite waste disposal system, well, sewer or water service line, or other utility service line serving one existing building, provided that:

(1)	The activity is not located partially or completely in a flood haza rd area or a wetland;

(2)	The disturbed area is less than 1acre;

(3)	The activity does not result in an increase in ground elevation; and

(4)	Appropriate soil erosion and sediment control pra ctices are utilized.

D.	Reduced Standards for Specific Types of Development

1.	Regulated development that received one or more of the approvals set forth in a through e below prior to June 1, 2004 shall be exempt from the Buffer Areas Performance Standard s of this Ordinance and may be exempt from the Runoff Rate Redu ction .and Watershed Specific Requirements of this Ordinance, upon review and by the Enforceme nt Officer that the regulated development is consistent with th e prior approval. An app licant's written exemption request shall itemize each Ordinance provision for which an exemption is requested.

a.	Annexation agreement

b.	Final plat of subdivision

c.	Planned unit development

d.	Replat of an industrial subdivision

e.	Replat of a commercial subd ivision

2.	Mining Development that received a conditional use permit prior to June 1, 20 04 shall be exempt from the Buffer Areas Performance Standards of this Ordinance and shall be exempt from the Compensatory Storage Requirements of this Ordinance for fill outside the floodway, upon review and authori zation by the Enforcement Officer. The Enforcement Officer may give credit toward meeting the Compensatory Storage Requirements for excavation prior to June 1, 2004 an d after September 30, 1981,which was the effective date of the first FIRM in McHenry County. An applicant's written exemptio n request shall itemize each Ordinance provision for which an exemption is requested .
 
Article II: Scope of Regulation, Section D.: Redu ced Standards for Specific Types of Devel opment,
Paragr aph 3.	6

3.	A Public Road Developm ent in a floodway shall be exempt from the BFE determination requirement s of this Ordinance, provided IDOT/DOH issues a Flood way Construction Permit for the Public Road Development.

4.	Portions of a development site that do not drain offsite may be exempt from the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Performance Standard s of this Ordinan ce.

TABLE 1 Regulation of Routine Projects
Project Type	Exempt	General Permit	Individual Permit

Building Maintenance	Refer to Appendix 12: Maintenance of Existing Buildin gs	

N/A	Refer to Appendix 12: Substantial Improvement

New Single Family Home	

N/A	Refer to Article III, Section 8: General
Permit 2	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Road Maintenance	Refer to Appendix 12: Maintenance of Roads and Trails	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Trails	Refer to Appendi x 12: Maintenance of Roads and Trails	Refer to Article Ill, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Driveways	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Maintenance Activities	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit  1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Parking Lots	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Mainten ance Activit ies	

N/A	All Other Development Regulated by Ar ticle II, Section 8

Culverts, Storm Sewers, and
Drain Tiles	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Maintenance Activities	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Per mit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section 8

Bridges	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Maintenance Activities	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Dredging	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Maintenance Activiti es	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regu lated by Art icle II, Section 8

Removal of an Obstruction	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Maintenance Activities	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section 8

Stonnwater  Management Facilities	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Maintenance Activities	

N/A	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section 8

Gardening and Landscaping	Refer to Article II, Section C: Exempted Development	

N/A	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section 8
 
Article II: Scop e of Regulation , Section D.: Reduced Standards for Specific Types of Development,
Paragraph 4.	7

Project Type	Exempt	General	Permit	Individual Permit

Tillage and Similar Agricultural Practices	Refer to Article II, Section C: Exempted Developm ent	

N/A	All Other Development Regulate d by Article II, Section B

Implementing a NRCS Conservation  Plan	Refer to Article II, Section C: Exempted Development	

N/A	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B


Demolition	Refer to Article II, Section C: Exe mpted Development	

N/A	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Onsite Waste Disposal Systems and Wells	Refer to Article II, Section C: Exempted Development	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Sewer and Water Service Lines	Refer to Article II, Section C: Exempted Development	

N/A	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Underground and
Overhead Utilities	Refer to Appendix 12: Other Maintenance Activities	Refer to Article III, Section A: Genera l Permit 1	All Other Development Regu lated by Article II, Section B


Seawalls	

N/A	Refer to Arti cle III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Shoreline and Streambank Stabilization	

N/A	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	A ll Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B


Boat Docks	

N/A	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regu lated by Article II, Section B

Signposts, Poles Fencing,
and Guardrails	

N/A	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B


Decks	

N/A	Refer to Article III, Section A : General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B


Pools	

N/A	Refer to Art icle III, Section A: General Permit 1	All  Other Development Regulated  by Article II, Section B


Material Storage	

N/A	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Development Regulated by Article II, Section B

Wetland Restoration and Enhancement	

N/A	Refer to Article III, Section A: General Permit 1	All Other Developme nt Regulated by Ar ticle II, Section B
 
Articl                        e                         III                        :                        General                         Permits 	8


Article III

§15.60.030    General Permits

Gen era l Permits waive certain requirem ents of this Ordinance in order to streamline the permit process for specific types ofroutine proje cts. The General Permits listed in this Articl e may be issu ed by MCSC or a Certified Communi ty. provid ed that the regulat ed development meets the Appli cability criteria, the Terms and Conditions for the specific type of project, and the Authorization requirements.

	TABLE 2	Summary of General Permit 1

Type of Regulated Development	
Applicability	
Authorization	Terms and
Conditions

Underground and Overhead Utilities	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.b
Storm Sewer Outfalls, Drain Tile Outfalls, and Outlet Channels	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.c

Maintenance of Existing Roads and Bridges	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.d

Sidewalks, Trails, Driveways, and Patios	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.e

Boardwalks	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.f

Seawalls	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.g

Other Shoreline and Streambank Protection	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.h

Minor Non-Commercial Boat Docks	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.i

Signposts, Poles, Fencing, and Guardrails	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.j
Minor Modification of Culverts, Storm Sewers, and Drain Tiles	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.k

Decks	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.1

Topsoil and Sand Restoration	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.m

Pools	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.n

Replacement Onsite Waste Disposal Systems	
A.l	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.o

Material Storage	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.p

Dredging	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.q

Wetland Restoration and Enhancement	
A.1	
A.2	
A.3.a, A.3.r
 
Articl e III: General Permits, Section A.: General Permit Number 1-Authorizing Routine Projects,
Paragraph 1. 	9

A.	General Permit Number 1 - Authorizing Routine Projects

1.	Applicability

a.	This General Permit Number 1only applies to regu lated developments identified in this Section, which result in less than 20,000 square feet of hydrologically disturbed	area, except where the Terms and Conditions for Specified Developm ent set forth in Paragraph 3 below explicitly state otherwise.

b.	This General Permit Number 1applies to regul ated development within flood hazard areas, except where the Terms and Conditi ons for Specified Development set forth in Paragraph 3 below explicitly state otherwise.

c.	This General Perm i t Number 1applies to IWMC impacts less than or equal to 0.10 acre.

d.	This Gen eral P ermit Number 1applies to regula ted devel opment within WOTUS when a permit or letter of no objection has been obtained from the USACE.

e.	This General Permit Number 1does not apply to regulated developments which would be required to meet the Stormwater Storage Requirements of this Ordinance.

f.	This General Permit Number 1does not apply to regulated developments which would adversely impact drainage patterns  on adjoining property or increase flood heights on adjoining property.

2.	Authorization

a.	Applicants seeking authorization by General Permit Number 1shall demonstrate an ownership interest in the subject property, or written authorization by the property owner to proceed with the development, and shall submit a stormwater managem ent permit application with the required supporting information to the Enforcement  Officer prior to commencing a proposed regulated development. The following information is required in support of the stormwater management permit application:

(1)	A  description  and  depiction  of  the  proposed  regul a ted  development
demonstrating that it meets the conditions of the General Permit;

(2)	All appli cable consultations, waivers, approvals, and permits from Federal,
State, and local authorities shall be submitted; and

(3)	Payment of the stormwater management permit fee.

b.	If the Enforcement Officer determin es that the proposed regulated development complies with the terms and conditions of General Permit Number 1, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in writing and shall schedule a meeting at the development site for photographic documentation of the site conditions.	If the Enforcement Officer determines that the regulated development does not comply with the terms and conditions of General Permit Number 1, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in writing and provide instructions on the procedures to seek authorization under an individual permit.
 
Article Ill: General Permits, Section A.: General Permit Number 1- Authorizing Routine Projects, Paragraph 2. 	10

c.	No part of a regulated development shall be authorized by a General Permit, unless the entire regulated development meets the terms and conditions of one or more General Permits.

d.	Regulated development not specified in, or not meeting th e terms and conditions
of, a General Permit shall require an individual permit.

e.	MCSC and Certified Communities may authorize regulated development under General Permit Number 1.

f.	Any regulated development authorized by this General Permit Number 1shall be
completed within 2 years of the date of authorization.

3.	Terms and Conditions for Specified Development

a.	All specified regulated development

(1)	Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. The Enforcement Officer may add requirements or conditions as necessary to control soil erosion and sedimentation.

(2)	Any drain tile serving adjoining properties that is damaged as a part of
regulated development authorized by this General Permit shall be repaired.

(3)	This General Permit Number 1 does not authorize the operation of equipment within a channel. To the extent possible, all in-stream work shall be conducted during low-water conditions.

(4)	This General Permit Number 1authorizes temporary channel crossings, when necessary, provided that the temporary channel crossing meets the following requirements:

i.	Temporary approach roads shall be 0.5 foot or l ess above existing
grade;

ii.	Fill within the channel shall be at or below existing grade and shall be
composed of non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel; and

iii.	The temporary channel crossing, including temporary approach roads, shall be removed within 90 days after installation, unless the Enforcement Officer grants an extension of time.

(5)	Except as specified in Paragraph 2 above and in these Terms and Conditions for Specified Development of this General Permit Number 1, the Application Requirements and Performance Standards of this Ordinance are waived for · regulated development authorized by this General Permit Number 1.

b.	Underground and overhead utilities - To be authorized by this General P ermit Number 1, underground and overhead utilities installation shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	The construction of the utility shall not result in any increase in ground elevations within a flood hazard area.

(2)	The construction of the utility shall not involve the placement of above ground structures in a flood hazard area other than supporting towers for
 
Articl e III: General Permits, Section A.: General Permit Number 1- Authorizing Routine Projects,
Paragraph 3. 	11

overh ead utilities, well casings, and watertight openings necessary for a
water supply system or sanitary sewer line.

All above ground openings for new and replacement water supply systems and wells within a flood hazard area shall be watertight or elevated to the FPE. When the BFE has not yet been determined according to the Flood Hazard Areas Performance Standards of this Ordinance, the BFE may be approximated by adding 2 feet to the highest adjacent grade.

(3)	All above ground openings for new and replacement sanitary sewer lines within a flood hazard area shall be watertight below the FPE. When the BFE has not yet been determined according to the Flood Hazard Areas Performance Standards of this Ordinance, the BFE may be approxim ated by adding 2 feet to the highest adjacent grade.

(4)	In the case of und erground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement shall be buried a minimum of 3 feet below the existing stream bed.

(5)	Overhead utilities and associated supporting towers shall be non­ obstructive to flood flows, shall not be placed below the ordinary high water mark. and shall be designed not to catch debris within a flood hazard area. If attached to an existing bridge, the utility shall be constructed above the low chord elevation.

(6)	In IWMC. any excavation shall be backfilled with soil excavated from the trench in the same stratification in which it was removed.

(7)	A contingency plan for frac-out shall be requir ed for any utility proposed to
be installed by directional boring.

c.	Storm sewer outfalls, drain tile outfalls, and outlet channels - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, storm sewer outfalls, drain tile outfalls, and outlet channel s shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	The outfall shall not project riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope or bulkhead .

(2)	Construction of outfalls and outlet channels shall not result in an increase
in ground elevation within a flood hazard area.

(3)	The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity of the channel soil, unl ess channel erosion would be prevented by the use of rip­ rap or other design measures.

(4)	Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream until the ditch
is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream sedimentation.

(5)	Bank eros ion shall be prev ented by aprons, energy dissipaters, or drop structures as necessary.

d.	Maintenance of existing roads and bridges - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, maintenance of existing road s and bridges shall meet the following criteria .

(1)	Rehabilitative maintenance, such as milling and overlaying, that does not
increase the imperv ious area and does not increase the surface elevation.
 
Article III: General Permits, Section A: General Permit Number 1- Authorizing Routine Projects, Paragraph 3. 	12

Maint enance  also  includes  increasing  the  surface  elevation  with  the following limitations:

i.	Resurfacing outside flood hazard areas;

ii.	Resurfacing within flood prone areas;

iii.	Resurfacing within the flood fringe, provided the differen ce between the elevation of the road or bridge surface after resurfacin g and the elevation of the road or bridge surface on the effective date of this Ordinance is not more than two inches.

(2)	Rep ai r, not including in-kind r eplacement, of an existing bridge outside the design ated floodway.

e.	Sidewalks, trails, driveways, and patios - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, sidewalks, trails, driveways, and patios shall be built at or below existing grad e within a flood ha za rd area.

f.	Boardwalks - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, boardwalks
shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	This Genera l Permit Number 1 does not apply to boardwalk s within a
design ated floodway.

(2)	The construction of the bo ardwalk shall not result in any increase in existing ground elevations within a flood hazard area.

(3)	The bo ardwalk shall be an chored to prevent lateral movem ent.

(4)	The boardwalk shall be non-obstructive to flood flows and designed not to
catch debris.

g.	Seawalls - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, constru ction of
seawalls shall m eet the following criteria.

(1)	The length of shoreline or streambank to be protected shall not exceed 500 feet.

(2)	The seawall shall be properly anchored  to resist anticipated  forces of
current and wave action.

(3)	The seawall shall not extend high er than the ordinary hi gh water m ark. unless the height of the new seawall matches the height of the existing seawall or existing seawalls on adjacent prop erties.

(4)	Eroded areas on the lan dward side of the seawall may be backfilled,
provid ed the backfill is not placed higher than the top of the seawall.

(5)	The seawall shall be located so that the modifi ed cross-sectional area of a chann el does not decrease the cross-sectional area of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the developm ent site. The Enforcement Offi cer may waive this requirement where a new seawall would tie into existing seawalls upstream and downstream of the developm ent site, or where a new seawall is constructed no more than 6 inches riverward of the existing seawall.

(6)	In the case of seawalls on lakes, the seawall shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined by the normal pool elevation. The
 
Articl e III : General Permits, Section A.: General Permit Number 1- Authorizing Routine Projects,
Paragraph 3. 	13

Enforcement Officer may waive this requirement where a new seawall would tie into existing seawalls on adj acent prop erties, or where a new seawall is constructed no m ore than 6 inches lakeward of the existing seawall.

h.	. Other shoreline and streambank protection - To be authorized by this  General Permit Numbe r 1, construction of shoreline and streambank  protection shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	Where vegetative streambank and shoreline protection is not used, only the following structural materials may be utilized: stone and concrete riprap, cellular blocks, fabric-formed concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/ceme nt filled bags, geotechnical fabric m aterials, and treated timber (excluding creosote treated railroad ties, utility poles,  and other  timber).

(2)	The length of shoreline or streambank to be protected shall not exceed 1,000 feet. Where n on-vegetative (structural) protection is utilized, the length of shoreline or streambank stabilization to be protected shall not exceed 500 feet. Vegetative and non-vegetative protection may be combined, but in no case shall non-vegetative protection exceed 500 feet in total length.

(3)	All material utilized shall be prop erly sized or anchored to resist anticipated forces of current and wave action. The Illinois Urban Manu al (www.aiswcd .org/IUM ) or other references approved by the Enforcement Officer may be used for proper material sizing.

(4)	Materials shall be placed in a way that woul d not cause erosion or the accum ulati on of debris on propert ies adj acent to or opposite the project.

(5)	Materials shall be placed so that the modified cross-sectional area of a chan nel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream an d downstream of the devel opment site or the bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope an d to Jessen the quantity of material requ ired.

(6)	In the case of gabion structures and similar protection measures on Jakes, the structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined by the normal pool elevation.

(7)	This General Permit Number 1 does not authorize in-stream work performe d beyond th e toe of th e slope, with the exception of naturalized grade control that does not result in a Joss of conveyance.

i.	Minor non-commercial boat docks - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, construction of minor non-commercia l bo at docks shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	The boat dock shall n ot proj ect more than 50 feet into a waterway, and in no instance greater than % of the width of the waterway.

(2)	The width of the boat dock shall n ot be greater than 10 feet.

(3)	For L-shaped or T-sh aped docks, the length of that portion parallel to the shoreline shall not exceed 50% of the land owner's shoreline frontage, nor be greater than 50 feet in length .
 
Article III: General Permits, Section A.: General Permit Number 1-Authorizing Routine Projects,
Paragraph 3. 	14

(4)	Docks shall be aligned so as not to cross the straight-line projection of prop erty lines into the waterway or come within 10 feet of the straight-line projection of the property line.

(5)	Seasonal shore stations/boat lifts shall be located adjacent to a boat dock or
seawall and shall not cross the straight-lin e projection of the property lines.

(6)	The boat dock shall be securely anchored to prevent its detachment and becoming a floating hazard during times of high water or winds.

(7)	This General Permit Number 1does not authorize any accessory structures or improvements to a minor non-commerci al boat dock, such as non-fabric roofs and elevated decks.

(8)	Non-floating boat docks shall be constructed  in a manner which will
minimize obstruction of flow.

j.	Signposts, poles, fencing, and guardrails -To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, signposts, poles, fencing, and guardrails shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	No fencing shall be placed within a floodway.

(2)	No  fill except posts, poles, and supports shall be placed within the flood
hazard area.

(3)	Signposts, poles, fencing, and guardrails shall be non-obstructive to flood flows.

k.	Minor modification of culverts, storm sewers, and drain tiles - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, minor modification of culverts, storm sewers and drain tiles shall m eet the following criteria.

(1)	This General Permit Number 1does not authorize modifications to the size, shape, and materi al of culverts within a floodway.

(2)	This General Permit Number 1does not authorize modifi cations to the size, shape, and material of culverts where a building within 500 feet upstream of the culvert is located within a mapped Zone AE. A, AH, or AO floodp lain on the FEMA FIRM.

(3)	This Genera l Permit Number 1does not authorize modifications to the size, shape, and material of culverts where a building within 500 feet upstream of th e culvert is located within a mapped Flood of Record area on the USGS­ Hydrologic Investigation Atlas Flood of Record Map.

(4)	This General Permit Number 1does not authorize culvert extensions within
a designated floodway.

(5)	Modifications to the size, shape, and material of a culvert, storm sewer, or drain tile shall maintain 90-125% of the capacity of the existing culvert, storm sewer, or drain tile. Minor adjustment of pipe invert elevations to correct an adverse slope shall be allowed without consideration of the resulting increas e in pipe capacity. Calculations prep ared by a licensed professiona l engineer shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with this condition.
 
Article III: General Permits, Section A.: General Perm it Number 1- Authorizing Routin e Projects, Paragraph 3. 	15

(6)	Culvert extensions shall not exceed the lesser of 40 feet or 100% of the original pip e length and shall not result in a change in alignment or a reduction in pipe size.

I.	Decks - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, decks shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	The construction of the deck shall not result in any increase in existing
ground elevations within a flood hazard area.

(2)	If either the existing building or proposed deck is within a flood hazard area, the deck shall be constructed as a stand-alone structure and shall not be attached to an existing building.

(3)	Th e deck shall not be enclosed.

(4)	The deck shall be anchored to prevent lateral movem ent.

(5)	The deck must be non-obstructiv e to flood flows and designed not to catch
debris.

(6)	The deck shall be design ed to allow automatic entry and exit offloodwaters.

m.	Topsoil and sand restoration - To be authorized by this Genera l Permit Numb er
1, topsoil and sand restoration shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	Topsoil may be placed within a flood hazard area for the purpos e of restoring the natural ground elevation and stabilizing an erosion control problem or establishi ng vegetative cover.

(2)	Topsoil may be placed within a flood hazard area for the purpose of restoring pre-subsid ence ground elevations to an area that primarily experiences subsidence due to flooding. The restoration fill shall not exceed pre-subsidence ground elevations.

(3)	Up to 1cubic yard of sand per lineal foot may be placed for the purpose of restoring a beach within a flood hazard area.

(4)	The length of beach restoration shall not exceed 1000 feet.

(5)	This General Permit Number 1does not authorize the placement of sand for
the purpose of creating a new beach or expanding an existing beach.

n.	Pools - To be authoriz ed by this General Permit Number 1, pools sh all m eet the following criteria.

(1)	This General Perm it Number 1does not authorize the installation of above ground pools within a flood hazard area.

(2)	This General Permit Number 1does not authorize fill within a flood hazard
area.

(3)	Spoil material s shall be hauled away from the development site.

(4)	Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.

(5)	Appropriate soil erosion and sediment control practices shall be utilized.
 
Article III: General Permits, Section A.: General Permit Number 1-Authorizing Routine Projects, Paragraph  3. 	16

o.	Replacement onsite waste disposal systems - To be authorized by this permit,
replacement onsite waste disposal systems shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	Replacement onsite waste disposal systems may be installed in the flood hazard area below the BFE. provided that no reasonable alternative exists, as determined by the Enforcement Officer, and provided that the system has a watertight hold ing tank and all mechanical and electrical components and above ground openings of the system below the BFE are watertight. When the BFE has not yet been determined according to the Flood Hazard Areas Performance Standards of this Ordinance, the BFE may be approximated by adding two feet to the highe st adjace nt grade.

(2)	Fill within a flood hazard area shall be the minimum necessary for construction.

p.	Material storage - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, material storage shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	This General Permit Number 1does not apply within a flood hazard area.

(2)	The design shall minimize exposure of pollutants to precipitation  and
stormwater runoff.

q.	Dredging - To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, dredging shall meet the following criteria.

(1)	This General Permit Number 1applies to dredging cha nn els and ponds.

(2)	This General Permit Number 1does not apply to the construction of a new channel or water body; all work shall be for the purpose of re-establishing the natural or original designed condition.

(3)	Spoil materials shall be spread thinly (less than 0.1foot) and incorporated into existing cultivated areas, or shall be hauled away from the development site.

(4)	Temporary stockpiles greater than 100 cubic yards and temporary stockpiles remaining in place more than 7 days sh all not be located in flood hazard areas and shall be non-obstructive to flood flows. Temporary stockpile areas shall not occupy more than 20,00 0 square feet in total.

(5)	Channel dredging projects shall not exceed 0.5 mile. The hydrologic disturbance limit of 20,000 square feet is waived for the area of channel dredging.

r.	Wetland restoration and enhancement- To be authorized by this General Permit Number 1, wetland restoration  and  enhancement  shall  meet  the  following criteria.

(1)	This General  Permit Numb er 1 authorizes wetland  restoration  and
enhancement on any public or private land, including:

i.	The removal of accumulated sediments;

ii.	Restoration  of eroded areas and grade stabilization;

iii.	Installation,  removal  and  maintenance  of  small  water  control structures, dikes and berms; and
 
Article III: Gen eral Permits, Section A.: Gen eral Permit Number 1- Authorizing Routine Proje cts,
Paragraph 3. 	17

iv.	Other related activities.

(2)	This Gener al Permit Numbe r 1may be used to relocate aquatic habitat types
on th e developm ent site.

(3)	This General Permit Number 1does not authorize:

i.	Fill within flood hazard areas. except that which would restore the developm ent site to the natural conditi on;

ii.	The relocation or channelization of a linear waterway such as a river,
stream. or creek;

iii.	The conversion of a stream or creek to another aquatic use, such as
the creation of an impoundment for waterfowl habitat; or

iv.	The conversion  of natural wetland s to another aquatic use.

(4)	The abandonment or rem oval of drain tiles shall be annotated on a drain til e su rvey for any restoration and enhancement activities involv ing the abandonm ent or removal of drain tiles.

B.	General Permit Number 2 - Authorizing Single Family Homes

1.	Applicability

a.	This General Permit Number 2 only applies to r egulated developments involving the construction or _reconstruction  of a single family residence resulting in less than 1acre of hy drolo gically disturb ed area.

b.	This Gen eral Permit Number 2 does not apply to regulated development within
flood hazard areas.

c.	This Gen eral Permit Number 2 does not apply to r egu lated development within IWMC or WOTUS.

d.	This Gen eral Permit Number 2 does not apply to regula ted developments which would be required to meet the Stormwater Storage Requiremen ts of this Ordinance.

e.	This General Permit Number 2 does not apply to regulated developments which would adversely impact drainage patterns on adjoining property or increase flood heights on adjoining property.

2.	Authorization

Applicants seeking authorization by Gen era l Perm it Number 2 shall demonstrate an ownership interest in the subject property, or written authorization by the property owner to proceed with the development, and shall submit a stormwater managem ent permit application with the required supporting in formation to the  Enforcement Officer prior to commencin g the proposed regulated d evelopm ent. The following information is required  for authorization by General Permit Number 2.

a.	A development plan shall be submitted showing  the  proposed  regulated developm ent with all other relevant information, including but n ot limited to:
 
Article III: General Permits, Section B.: General Permit Number 2 -Authorizing Single Family
Homes, Paragraph 2. 	18

(1)	Property lines;

(2)	Buildings and other structures;

(3)	Easements;

(4)	Utility lines, culverts, onsite waste disposal systems, and wells;

(5)	Existing and proposed ground elevations sufficient to depict the proposed work and how it ties into existing ground elevations;

(6)	Existing and proposed imperviou s areas;

(7)	Areas of temporary disturbance;

(8)	Placement of spoil materials;

(9)	Details of construction;

(10)	Dimensions of the proposed regulated development;

(11)	The type and location of all soil erosion and sediment control me sures;

(12)	Specifications for seeding or other methods of stabilization;

(13)	The McHenry County Standard Soil Erosion  and Sediment Control Notes in Appendix 2;

(14)	All components of the stormwater m anagement system, including the overland flow path, drain tiles, storm sewers, and water quality protection measures; and

(15)	The McHenry County Standard Drain Tile Notes in Appendix 3;

(16)	The location of any flood hazard area on  the  development  site  and extending 100 feet beyond the development site, based on available maps and studies; and

(17)	The location  of all WOTUS  and  IWMC. extending  100 feet beyond  the
development site, based on available maps and studies.

b.	For regulated development disturbing 20,000 square feet or more, the development plan shall be prepared by a licensed professiona l engineer and include the following additional information :

(1)	A benchmark referenced to NAVD88;

(2)	Existing contours extending 100 feet beyond the development site with a
maximum contour interval of 1foot;

(3)	Existing spot elevations demonstrating drainage patterns;

(4)	Top of foundation and lowest entry elevation of all existing buildings within
100 feet of the development site;

(5)	All existing im pervious areas such as roadways, structures, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks, pathways, trails;

(6)	The existing stormwater management system including storm sewers, drain tiles, culverts, and inlets on the development site and 100 feet beyond the development site. Inform ation regarding the invert and rim elevations, pipe sizes, pipe lengths, and material type shall be provided;
 
Article III: General Permits, Section B.: General Permit Number 2 - Authorizing Single Family
Hom es, Paragraph 2. 	19

(7)	Existing utilities including sanitary sewer, water main, onsite waste disposal system, well, or any other utilities that exist on the site and 100 feet beyond the development site. On  development  sites  where  an infiltr ation facility is proposed, existing water supply wells shall be shown 200 feet beyond the development site. Information regarding the invert and rim elevations, pipe sizes, pipe lengths, and material type shall be provid ed;

(8)	Location and limits of all existing and proposed deed or plat restrictions;

(9)	Existing trees and vegetation areas on the development site;

(10)	Proposed contours throughout the development site with a maximum contour interval of 1foot;

(11)	Proposed spot elevations demonstrating drainage patterns;

(12)	Top of foundation, lowest floor, low opening elevation, and floodproofing elevations of all proposed stru ctures adjacent to a stormwater management facility or along an overland flow path;

(13)	All proposed imp ervious areas such as roadways, structures, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks, pathways, trails;

(14)	The proposed stormwater management system including pipes, drain tiles, culverts, and inlets on the d evelopment si te. Inform ation regard ing the invert and rim elevations, pipe sizes, pipe lengths, and material type shall be provided;

(15)	Proposed utilities including sanitary, storm, water main, onsite waste disposal system, well, or any other utilities on the site. Information regarding the invert and rim elevations, pipe sizes, pipe lengths, and material type shall be provided;

(16)	Design details for proposed stormwater management system including, but
not limited to major and minor stormwater systems; and

(17)	Cross-sections	for   overland   flow  path s,  sufficient   to	demonstrate
compliance with the freeboard requirements of this Ordinance.

c.	All applicable consultations, waivers, approva ls, and permits from Federal, State, and local authorities shall be submitted.

d.	Payment of the stormwater management permit fee.

e.	If the Enforcement Officer determines that the proposed regulated development complies with the terms and conditions of General Permit Number 2, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in writing. If the Enforcement Officer determines that the regulated development does not comply with the terms and conditions of a General Permit Number 2, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in writing and provide instructions on the procedures to seek authorization under an individual permit.

f.	No part of a regulated development shall be authorized by a General Permit, unless the entire regul ated development meets the terms and conditions of one or more General Permits.
 
Article III: General Permits, Section B.: General Permit Number 2 -Authorizing Single Family
Homes, Paragraph 2.	- 	20

g.	Regulated development not specified in, or not meeting the terms and conditions of, a General Permit shall require an individual permit.

h.	MCSC and Certified  Communities may authorize regulated development under General Permit Number 2.

i.	Except as specified in this Paragraph 2 and in the Terms and Conditions for Specified Development set forth in Paragraph 3 below of this General Permit Number 2, the Application Requirements and Performance Standards of this Ordinance are waived for regulated development authorized by a General Permit Number 2.

j .	Any regulated developm ent authorized by this General Permit shall be completed within 2 years of the date of authorization.

3.	Terms and Conditions for Specified Development

a.	Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent   erosion  and  sedimentation.	The Enforcement Officer may add requirements	or conditions as necessary to control soil erosion and sedimentation.

b.	All concentrated stormwater discharges from a regulated development shall be conveyed into an existing channel. storm sewer, or overland flow path and shall not   result in flood  damage  at  the  development  site  or  upstream  of  the development site.

c.	The diversion of stormwater runoff shall be prohibited  unless no reasonable alternative exists, as determined by the Enforcement Officer. The diversion of stormwater runoff shall not result in flood damage at the development site. upstream of the development site or on downstream adjoining properties.

d.	Appropriate pre-treatment shall be provided for stormwa ter runoff directed to new or existing Class V injection well s.

e.	Appropriate pre-treatment shall be provided for stormwater runoff directed to infiltration based practices in areas designated as High or Moderately High Potential for Aquifer Recharge/Contamination on the McHenry County Sensitive Aquifer Recharge Areas Map.
 
Article III: General Permits, Section C.: Letters of Understanding 	21
C.   Letters of Understanding
The McH enry County Board may enter into Letters of Und erstanding with various agencies that perform regu lated devel opment activities in McHenry County. The purpose of a Letter of Understanding is to streamline the stormwater management  permit process  for routine and minor projects  related to the restoration or enhancement of natural areas or  for regulated development that m akes natural areas accessible to the public. A Letter of Understanding shall describe the terms and conditions for specific regul ated development activities to ensure compliance with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. A Letter of Understanding will b e issued after notice and opportunity for public review and comment, and approval from IDNR/OWR and FEMA, ifrequired by law. Once a Letter of Understanding has been issued, the Letter of Understanding sh all authorize any regulated development by the nam ed agency which meets the terms and conditions of the Letter of Und erstanding, until the Letter of Understanding expires or is terminated by action of the McH enry County Board . Certified Communities may adopt and enforce any Letter of Understanding issued by McHenry County within the community's jurisdicti on. Non-compliance with the requirements and standards of a Letter of Understandin g constitutes a violation of this Ordinance and is subject to the Violation and Penalty standards of this Ordinan ce.
 
Article IV: Stormwater Management Permit Provisions, Section A: Development Classification, Paragraph 1. 	22

Article IV

§15.60.040	Stormwater Management Permit Provisions

A  Development Classification

1.	Refer to the Development Classification Flowchar t in Appendix 1.

2.	The Enforcement Officer shall make the determination regarding the classification of a
regulated development.

3.	All  regulated  development   requiring   a  stormwater   management   permit,   except regulated development authorized by a General Permit, shall be cla ssified as a Minor. I ntermediate . Major , Public Road, or Mining Development.

4.	Regulated development located partially or completely within a flood hazard area shall also be classified as a Flood Hazard Area Development.

5.	Regu l ated development located partially or completely within WOTUS or IWMC shall also be classified as a Wetland and Waters Development.

6.	Regulated development located partially or completely within a watershed or sub­ watershed, for which additional or more restrictive standards have been adopted by MCSC or a Certified Community, shall also be classified as a Watershed Specific Area Development.

7.	To the extent that a regulat ed deve lopment fits multipl e classifications, it shall comply with all applicable requirements for each classification.

B.     Development Phasing

In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of devel opment to circumvent the intent of this Ordinance, the requirements of this Ordinance shall apply all regu lated d evelopment within the contiguous property, unless waived by the Enforcement Officer.

C.	Approval Prior to Permitting

1.	Prior to the issuance of stormwater management permit. the applicant may request conditional approval of: a BFE determin ation, floodway delineation, IWMC boundary determination, or any other component of a regulat ed development. A request for conditional approva l shall include the information required for the component of regulated development by the Application Requirements of this Ordinance. The Enforcement Officer shall review the component of regulated development based on conformance with the Performance Standards of this Ordinance .

2.	Earth change approval for a regulated development may b e granted by the Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of a stormwater management permit. The Earth change approval is subject to the following conditions:

a.	An  Earth  Change  Plan  shall  be  submitted  demonstrating  that  the  proposed grading would meet the applicable Performance Standards of this Ordinance;

b.	No im pervious areas shall be created;

c.	No fill shall be placed in flood hazard areas;

d.	No regulat ed development may occur within IWMC or WOTUS;

e.	No regulated development may occur in areas for which Federal and/or State permits are required, unless the applicable permits have been obtained;
 
Article IV: Stormwater Management Permit Provisions, Section C.: Approval Prior to Permitting, Paragraph  2. 	23

f.	All regulated development shall be completed at the risk of the applicant;

g.	Add itional conditions may be specified by the Enforcement Officer. depending on development site characteristics; and

h.	Earth change approval may be revoked by the Enforcement Officer at any time for non-compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance or the conditions of the earth change approval.

D.	Fees and Application Review Times

1.	A fee schedul e shall be established by separate resolution of McHenry County.

2.	A separate fee schedule may be established by Certified Communit i es.

3.	Stormwater management permit applications shall be reviewed within 15 business days of receipt to determine if the Application Requirements of this Ordinance have been met. A complete application package shall be approved or denied within 45 business days of the latest item submitted.

E.	Permit Terms and Extensions

1.	The term of a stormwater management permit shall be from the issue date to the
expiration date. The term of a stormwater management permit shall be:

a.	The lesser of 2 years or the term of the building permit for General Permits and
for Minor, Intermediat e, and Publi c Road Developments;

b.	The lesser of 3 years or the term of the building permit for Major Developments;
or

c.	The lesser of 10 years or the term of the conditiona l use permit for Mining
Development.

2.	A permit extension may be requested in writing by the appli cant if the regulated development is not completed within the term of the stormwater management permit. The  Enforcement Officer may extend the permit for the time periods listed below. Permit extension requests may not be made prior to 90 days of the permit expiration date.

a.	The permit term for General Permits and for Minor, Intermediate, and Public
Road Developments may be extended for 6 months at a time.

b.	The permit  term  for  Major  Developments  and  Mini ng  Developments  may be extended for 12 month s at a time.

3.	The Enforcement Officer may amend or add special conditions to the permit at the time of the extension, such as updating the terms of a performance guarante e by revising the estimated cost to complet e construction.

4.	A stormwater management permit shall be terminated without the possibility of an extension if the actual start of construct ion is not commenced within 180 days after the issue date of the stormwater management permit and if any activity related  to a building authorized by the stormwater management permit is not in compliance with the most,recent version of:

a.	The FIS;

b.	The FIRM;
 
Article IV: Stormwater Management Permit Provisions, Section E.: Permit Terms and Extensions,
Paragraph 4.	24·

c.	The NFIP regulations; and

d.	The Flood Hazard Areas Performance Standards of this Ordinan ce.

5.	A stormwater management permit may be terminated  during its term or a permit
extension may be den ied for reasons including, but not limited to:

a.	Noncompliance with any condition of the permit;

b.	The applicant's failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the application process
or the applicant's misrepresentation of any relevant facts at any time;

c.	The regulated development is not commenced within 2 years after the issue date
of the stormwater management p ermit;

d.	The regu lated development is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months
after commencing the regulated development.

F.	Permit Conditions

1.	Special Conditions may be added to a permit by the Enforcement Officer to clarify the purpose or authorization granted by the stormwater management permit. Special conditions may also specify other restrictions and constraints of the regulated development.

2.	Development plans bearing the approval stamp of the Enforcement Officer shall be retained at the development site throughout the duration of construction activities.

3.	A deed or plat restriction required as part of a stormwater manag ement perm it shall
not be modifi ed without th e approval of the Enforcement Officer.
 
Articl e V: Application Requirem ents, Section A : Enforcem ent Officer Authority 	25


Article V

§15.60.050	Application Requirements

A  Enforcement Officer Authority

The  Enfor cement  Officer  shall  make the  determ ination  as  to  whether  the  submi tted
documentation demonstrates compliance with this Ordinan ce.

B.	Property Interest

The applicant shall demonstrate an ownership interest in the subject property, or written
authorization by the property owner to proceed with the development.

C.	Basic Submittal

The   following   requir em ents   apply   to   all   regulated   development,   except   regulated development authoriz ed by a Gen eral Perm it.

1.	A stormwater management permit applica tion shall be submitted.

2.	A developm ent plan shall be submitted showing the propose d regulated development
with all other relevant inform ation, including but not limited to:

a.	Property lines;

b.	Building s and other structures;

c.	Easements;

d.	Utility lines, culverts, onsite waste disposal systems, and wells;

e.	Existing and proposed ground elevations sufficient to depi ct the proposed work and how it ties into existing ground elevations;

f.	Existing and proposed imperviou s a r eas;

g.	Areas of temporary disturbance;

h.	Placem ent of spoil materials;

i.	Details of construction;

j.	Dim ensions of the proposed  regulated development;

k.	The location of any flood haza rd ar ea on the d evelopment site and extending 100 feet beyond the development site, based on available m aps and studies, unless a BFE determination is required by this Ordinance; and

1.	The location of all WOTU S and IWM C, extending beyond the development site, based on available maps and studies, unless a Wetland Determination Report is required by this Ordinan ce.

3.	For regulated development that does not include a n ew building and would not change existing ground elevations, the development plan may be sketched  on an aerial ph otograph showing 2 foot contour interval topogra phic mapping and the applicant's written agreement that: "The finished ground elevations shall match existing ground elevations and all spoil ma terial shall be removed from the developm ent site" which shall be depict ed on the aerial photograph as a note.
 
Article V: Application Requirem ents, Section C.: Basic Submittal, Paragraph 4.	26


4.	All applicable consultations, waivers, approva ls, and permits from Federal, State, and
local authorities shall be submitted.

5.	Payment of the stormwater management permit fee.

D.	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Submittal

In addition to other applicable Application Requirements, the following requirements apply
to all regulated developmen t, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

1.	A development plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Performance Standards of this Ordinance. The development plan shall include:

a.	The type and location of all soil erosion and sediment control measures. If the regulated development will be constructed in phases, the development plan shall specify all control mea sures necess ary for each phase;

b.	Detail drawings for all soil erosion and sediment control measures;

c.	Specifications for seeding or other methods of stabilization; and

d.	The McHenry County Standard Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Notes in Appendix 2.

2.	For regulated development disturbing 1acre or more, the development plan shall be
submitted with the following additional information:

a.	A narrative description of the existing land cover and soil survey data for the development site and adjacent areas;

b.	A narrative description of the proposed temporary and permanent soil erosion and sediment control practices, including a narrative describing how flood hazard areas, wetlands, waters and buffer areas will be protected from erosion and sedimentation;

c.	A schedule of construction activities including, but not limited to, clearing and grading, installation of stabilized construction entrances, disposal of construction waste, stockpiling, and inspection  and  mainten ance  of  all  soil  erosion  and sediment control 'practices;

d.	Data and calculations used to size, locate, design, and maintain all soil erosion and sediment  control  practices, where  applicable, and  for the  design  of  temporary · stream  crossings; and

e.	Id entification of person(s) or entity having legal responsibility for installation, main tenance, and removal of erosion and sediment control practices during construction and after regulated development is completed.

3.	All applicable consultations, waivers, approvals, and permits from Federal, State, and
local authoriti es shall be submitted including, but not limited to:

a.	Coverage by the IEPA under General NPDES Permit No . ILR10; and

b.	A permit from the road authority for development in a public right-of-way.
 
Article V: Application Requirements, Section E.: Runoff Control Submittal, Paragraph 1. 	27


E.	Runoff Control Submittal

In addition to other applicable Application  Requirements, the following requirements apply to all regulated development, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

1.	Refer to the Runoff Control Submittal Flowchart in Appendix 1.

2.	For Minor Development the following documentation shall be submitt ed demonstrating com pliance with the Runoff Control Performance Standards of this Ordinance.

a.	A development plan shall be submitted that depicts:

(1)	All applicable components of the stormwater management system, including the overland flow path, drain tiles, storm sewers, and water quality protection measures; and

(2)	Includes the McHenry County Standard Drain Tile Notes in App endix 3.

b.	As applicable, design calculations prepared by a licensed professional engineer shall be submitted. When required, the design calculations shall demonstrate that the Runoff Control Performance Standards of this Ordinance have been met for the following components:

(1)	Overland flow paths;

(2)	Drain tiles; and

(3)	Storm sewers.

3.	For Intermediate , Major. Publi c Road, or Mining Development, the development plans and supporting calculations shall be prepar ed by a licensed professional engineer and shall meet the Minor Development Runoff Control Submittal requirement s set forth in Paragraph E.2 above and the following additiona l requ irements:

a.	A statement shall be submitted, which is signed by the licensed professiona l engineer that prepared the development plans, rendering an opinion that the development plan s meet the minimum requirem ents of this Ordinance;

b.	A development plan shall be submitted that depicts:

(1)	A benchmark referenced to NAVD88;

(2)	Existing utilities in luding sanitary sewer, water m ain, onsite waste disposal system, well, or any other utilities that exist on the site and 100 feet  beyond  the  development  site.	On development sites where an infiltration facility is proposed, existing water supply wells shall be shown 200 feet beyond th e development site. Information regardin g the invert and rim elevations, pipe sizes, pipe lengths, and material type shall be provid ed;

(3)	Location and limits of all existing and proposed deed or plat restrictions;

(4)	Existing trees and vegetation areas on the development site;

(5)	Proposed contours throughout  the development site with a maximum
contour interval of 1foot;

(6)	Proposed spot elevations demonstrating drainage patterns;
 
Article V: Application Requirements, Section E.: Runoff Control Submittal, Paragraph 3. 	28


(7)	Top of foundation, lowest floor, low opening elevation, and floodproofing elevations of all proposed structures within a flood hazard area, adjacent to a storm water management  facility; or along an overland flow path;

(8)	All proposed imp ervious areas such as roadways, structures, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks, pathways, and trails;

(9)	Proposed stormwater manag ement system including pipes, drain tiles. culverts, and inlets on the development site. Information regarding the invert and rim elevations, pipe sizes, pipe lengths, and material type shall be provided;

(10)	Proposed utilities including  sanitary,  storm, water  main,  onsite waste disposal system, well, or any other  utilities on th e development site. Information regarding the  invert  and  rim  elevations,  pipe  sizes,  pipe lengths, and materi al type shall be provided;

(11)	Design details for proposed stormwater management system including, but not limited to, major and minor stormwater systems, stormwater management facilities, water quality protection measures, overflow structures, and control structures includin g restrictor size and invert; and Cross-sections for overland flow paths and stormwater management facilities sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the freeboard requirements of this Ordinance;

c.	Runoff data and calculations for the development site and tributary areas, if a stormwater managem ent system is necessary for the developm ent site to meet the requirements of this Ordinance. The data and calculations may include the following, as applicable:

(1)	A narrative identifying the procedures, assumptions,  and data used in hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for sizing both major and minor stormwater systems;

(2)	A schematic diagram of the existing and proposed hydro lo gic and hydraulic
calculations;

(3)	Delineation of tributary areas to each overland flow path, inlet and stormwater management facility;

(4)	Tim e of concentration calculations;

(5)	Runoff  Curve Number and runoff coefficient calculations for existing and
proposed conditions;

(6)	Rainfall depth and distribution data;

(7)	Storm sewer and inlet design calculations;

(8)	Hydraulic grade line and high water surface el evations for design storm events;

(9)	Assumptions or calculations utilized to determine tailwater conditions for the development site;

(10)	Digital copies of the hydrologic and hydraulic models; and
 
Article V: Application Requirements, Section E.: Runoff Control Submittal, Paragraph 3. 	29


(11)	Other  calculations  necessary  to  demonstrate   compliance  with  this Ordinance;

d.	Stormwater management facility data and calculations for the development site and tributary areas, if stormwater storage is necessary for the development site to meet the requirement s of this Ordinance. The data and calculations shall include the following:

(1)	A narrative identifying the procedures, assumpti ons, and data used in hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to determine the post-developm ent allowable release rate and related stormw ater storage volum e;

(2)	A tabular summary of existing, allowable, and proposed release rates for design storm events;

(3)	A tabular summary of required and proposed stormw ater storage volumes for d esign storm events;

(4)	Elevation versus storage area data for the stormwater management facility;

(5)	Elevation  versus discharge  curve data for the control structure  of the stormwater management facility;

(6)	Elevation versus time data for the stormwater management facility:

(7)	Calculations demonstrating that the overflow structure is sized to meet the requirements of this Ordinance;

(8)	Assumption s or calculations utilized to determine tailwater conditions for
the development site; and

(9)	Seeding and/or planting specifications for detention within IWMC;

e.	Infiltr ati on facility data including the following development site specific information, prepared by a qualified professional, if the applicant proposes an infiltration facility to meet the Stormwater Storage Requirements of this Ordinance;

(1)	Infiltration rate; and

(2)	Seasonal high groundwater elevation;

f.	Pre-treatment  measures  for  infiltration  facilities,  Cla ss V  injection  wells,  and
infiltration -based water quality treatment practices;

g.	A narrative describing how the development site utilizes the strategies in the Runoff Volume Reduction Hierarchy of this Ordinance, if applicable;

h.	Watershed specific design data, if applicable;

i.	A recorded deed or plat restriction, if applicable; and

j.	A recorded maintenance plan, if applicable.

4.	For regu lated development required to meet the Stormwater Storage Requirements of this Ordinance, as-built pla n s shall be submitted with a certificate stating that stormwater management facilities were constructed  in substantia l conformance  with the approved  development plans.
 
Article V: Application Requirements, Section E.: Runoff Control Submittal, Paragraph 5. 	30


5.	All applicable consultations, waivers, approvals, and permits from Federal, State, and local authorities shall be submitted including, but not limited to documentat ion ofIEPA receipt of a Class V injection well inventory.

F.	Flood Hazard Area Submittal

In addition to other applicable Application Requirements, the following requ irements apply to all Flood Hazard Area Development. except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

1.	Refer to the Flood Hazard Area Submittal Flowchart in Appendix 1.

2.	A statement shall be submitted, which is signed by the licensed professional engineer that prepared the development plans, rendering an opinion that the developr:nent plans meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance;

3.	A developm ent plan and calculations shall be subm itted demonstrating compliance with the Flood Hazard Areas Performance Standards of this Ordinance . The development plan shall include:

a.	A benchm ark ref erenced to NAVD88;

b.	A delineation of the existing and proposed BFE on the development site with the source of the BFE noted;

c.	Mapped limits of the flood hazard area per the appropriate source;

d.	A delineation of the floodway on the development site;

e.	Identification of any public bodies of water;

f.	Top  of  foundation,  lowest  floor,  low  opening  elevation,  and  floodproofing elevations of all proposed buildings within a flood hazard area;

g.	Details of floodproofing measures, such as material  specifications, construction methods, and calculations; and

h.	Notes limiting the usage of enclosed areas below the BFE.

4.	A BFE determination prepared by a licensed professional engineer. if necessary to meet the   Flood   Hazard  Ar eas  Performance   Standards  of  this  Ordinance.   The  BFE determination shall include the following:

a.	A narrative identifying the procedures, assumptions, and data used in the existing and proposed hydrologic and hydrauli c calculations;

b.	A tabular summary of existing and proposed flows, flood elevations, and velocities for all storm events up to and including the ba se flood event;

c.	A  schematic  diagram  of the  existing  and  proposed  hydrologic  and  hydrauli c
calculations;

d.	An  exhibit  delin eating  all  tributary  areas  for  the  hydrologic  and  hydraulic calculations;

e.	Time of concentration calculations for existing and proposed conditions;

f.	Runoff Curve Number calculations for existing and proposed conditions;

g.	Rainfall depth and distribution data;
 
Article V: Application Requirements, Section F.: Flood Haza rd Area Submittal, Paragraph 4. 	31


h.	An exhibit locating all cross-sections utilized within the hydrologic and hydraulic
calculations;

i.	Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations for all storm events up to and
including the base flood event;

j.	Analyses of alternative transition sections;

k.	Assumptions or calculations utilized to determine tailwater conditions for the development site;

I.	Digital copies of the hydrologic and hydraulic models; and

m.	Other calculations necessary to demonstrate compliance with this Ordinance.

5.	Floodplain fill and compensatory storage calculations prepared by a licensed professional engineer, if compensatory storage is necessary for the development site to meet the requirements of this Ordinance. The data and calculations shall include the following:

a.	Cross-sections showing the areas of fill and excavation;

b.	A plan view delineating the location of cross-sections;

c.	A tabular summary of fill and excavation volumes; and

d.	As applicable, as-built plans and a certificate stating that compensatory storage areas   were  constructed   in  substantial   conformance   with   the   approved development plans.

6.	For  revisions  to  FIRM(s)  necessary  to  meet  the  Flood  Hazard  Areas  Performance
Standards of this Ordinance, the following information shall be submitted:

a.	All hydrologic and hydraulic calcul ations;

b.	All LOMC applications with supporting documentation; and

c.	A recorded deed or plat restriction for any offsite increase in th e water surface profile.

7.	For any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other activity to a building in a floodplain, a subst antia l improvement determination shall be submitted. The data and calculations shall include:

a.	A detailed and complete cost estimate;

b.	Supporting documentation for the cost estimate, including data from recognized
cost estimating manuals or contract()r bids;

c.	A signed and notarized market value determination form; and

d.	A  calculation  of  the  cumulative  percentage  of  individual  damages,  repairs,
reconstructions, rehabilitations, additions, improvements, and maintenance.

8.	For buildings required to meetthe Building Protection Requirements of this Ordinance, an Elevation Certificate, a Floodproofing Certificate, or a similar instrument shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with  this Ordinance.

9.	All applicable consultations, waivers, approvals, and permits from Federal, State, and
local authorities shall be subm itted including, but not limited to perm its from
 
Article V: Application Requirements, Section F.: Flood Hazard Area Submittal, Paragraph 9.	32


IDNR/OWR for floodway construction, dam safety, or development within a public body of water.

G.	Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal

In addition to other applicable Application Requirements, the following requirements apply to all Wetland and Waters Developmen t. except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

1.	Refer to the Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal Flowchar t in Appendix 1.

2.	A development plan shall be submitted demonstrating compliance with the Wetlands and Waters Performance Standards and the Buffer Area Performance Standards of this Ordinance. The development plan shall include a delineation ofall WOTUS. IWMC, and buff er area s on the development site.

3.	A Letter of No Impact or a Wetland Determination Report, prepared by a wetland specialist, shall be submitted for all WOTUS and IWMC on the development site. if applicable.

4.	All applicable consultation s, waivers, approvals, and permits from Federa l, State, and
local authorities shall be submitted includin g, but not limited to:

a.	A Jurisdictional Determination and a Letter of No Objection from the USACE;

b.	A permit from the USACE;

c.	Documentation that the regulated development is in compliance with the IDNR's
Endangered Species Consultation Program [520 ILCS 10/11];

d.	Documentation that th e regulated development is in compliance with th e U .S. Fish and Wildlife Service's consultati on program und er the Endangered Species Act; and

e.	ANatural Resources Information (NRI) report or letter prepared by the McHenry ­
Lake County Soil and Water Conservation Distri ct.

5.	For regulat ed development within the buffer area of WOTUS or IWMC. the following
additional informatio n shall be submitt ed:

a.	A narrative describing the current con dition of the buffer area, includ ing the existing plant community(s) present and a list of the plant species characterized individually as native or n on-native;

b.	Calculation s for determining the existing and proposed buffer area impacted by
the development;

c.	The size, location, and design details for any BMPs proposed for mitigating buffer impacts; and

d.	Calculations demonstrating that the required buff er area is provided by varying the buff er wid th.

6.	For regulated development adjacent to IWMC , but not impacting the IWMC, wetland hydrology calculations shall also be submitted.

7.	For IWMC impacts, the following additional inform ation prepared by a wetland
specia list shall be submitted:
 
Article V: Application Requirements, Section G.: Wetland s, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal,
Paragraph 7. 	33

a.	A mitigation plan;

b.	Performance standards and a recorded maintenance plan for onsite mitigation of a IWMC impact; and

c.	A receipt for payment into a Wetland Bank or the MCSC Wetland Restoration
Fund.

8.	For Category IV IWMC impacts, a narrative describing the benefits of the IWMC impacts to the aquatic environmen t shall also be submitted. The narrative shall be prepared by a wetland specialist.

9.	For Category V temporary IWMC impacts, a restoration plan prepared by a wetland specialist shall be submitted.

10.	A recorded maintenance plan and a recorded deed or plat restriction shall be submitted for the wetlands, waters and buffer areas within or adjacent to a regulated developm ent disturbing 5 acres or more, a Mining Development. or any regulated development involving a subdivision of land.

11.	For buffer averaging, a recorded deed or plat restriction shall be submitted for the wetlands. waters and buffer areas.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards,'Section A.: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Paragraph 1.	34


Article VI

§15.60.060	Performance Standards

A.	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control


TABLE 3	Applicability of Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Performance Standards





Type of Development	


Basic
Requirements

A.1	Requirements
for Development Disturbing 1 acre or More

A.Z	


Channel
Requirements

A.3	
Inspections and Maintenance Requirements

A.4	


Notification Requirement s

A.5	


Special Precautions

A.6

General Permit	
Waived*	
N/A	
Waived*	
Waived*	
Waived*	
Waived*

Minor	
x	
N/A	If Channel
Construction
Included	
x	
x	
x

Intermediate	
x	
N/A	If Channel Construction Included	
x	
x	
x

Major	
x	
x	If Channel
Construction Included	
x	
x	
x


Public Road	
x	

If Dev .?. 1ac	If Channel Construction Included	
x	
x	
x


Mining	
xs	

IfDev .?. 1ac	If Channel Construction Included	
x	
x	
x


Flood Hazard Area	
x	

lfDev .?. 1ac	If Channel
Construction
Included	
x	
x	
x


Wetland	
x	

I f Dev .?_ lac	
If Chann el Construction Includ ed	
x	
x	
x
Refer to the Performance Standard s and Term s and Condition s of Specified Developm ent of the specific General Perm it.
s.	Requirem ents may be wa ived by the Enforcem ent Officer for portions of the development site that do not drain offsite.

1.	Basic Requirements

The following requirement s apply to all regulated development, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit. Specific requirements may be waived by the Enforcem ent Officer for portions of the development sitethat do n ot drain offsite.

a.	Control m easures shall m eet the minimum standards and specifications of the Jllinois Urban Manual (www .aiswcd .org/IUM) unless stated otherwise in this Ordinance.
 
Article VI: Performa n ce Standards, Section A.: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Paragraph 1.	35


b.	Soil disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize erosion.
Areas of the development site that are not to be disturbed shall be protected from construction traffic or other disturbance until final stabilization is achieved.

c.	Soil stabilization measures shall consider the time of year, development site conditions and the use of temporary or permanent measures.

d.	Stabilization by seeding shall include topsoil placement and fertilization, as
necessary .

e.	Native seed mixtu res shall include rapid-growing annual grasses or small grains
to provide temporary soil stabilization.

f.	Offsite property shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at concentrated discharge locations and along the length of any outfall chann el, as necessary to prevent erosion.

g.	Sediment control measures shall be installed prior to the disturbance of tributary areas.

h.	Stabilization of disturbed areas shall be initiated immediately whenever any clearing, grading, excavating or other earth disturbing activities have permanently ceased on any portion of the development site, or temporarily ceased on any portion of the development site and will not resume for a period exceed ing 14 calendar days. Stabilization of disturbed areas shall be initiated within 1working day of permanent or temporary cessati on of earth disturbing activities and shall be completed as soon as possible, but not later than 14 calendar days from the initiation of stabilization work in an area. Exceptions to these time frames are specified below:

(1)	Where the initiation of stabilization measures is precluded by snow cover, stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable; and

(2)	In  areas where  construction  activity has  temporarily  ceased  and  will
resume after 14 days, a temporary stabilization method may be used.

i.		Disturbance of steep slopes shall be minim ized . Areas or embankments having slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be stabilized with staked in place sod, erosion control blanket in combination with seeding, or an equivalent control measure.

j.	The interior side sl opes of all stormwater management facilities shall be stabilized with staked in place sod, erosion control blanket in combination with seeding, or an equivalent control measure. The control measure shall be installed between the design high water level and the bottom of the facility in a dry bottom stormwater management facility, or between the design high water level and the normal water level for all other stormwater management facilities.

k.	Perimeter contro l measures shall be provi ded downslope and perpe n dicular to the flow of runoff from disturbed areas, where the tributary area is greater than 5,000 square feet, and where runoff will flow in a sheet flow manner. Perimeter erosion control sh all also be provided at the base of soil stockpiles. Acceptab l e perimeter control measures include:

(1)	Silt fences  meeting the standards and specifications  of the Illinois  Urban
Manual (www.a iswcd.org/IUM) or AASHTO Standard Specification 288-00;
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section A.: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Paragraph 1.	36


(2)	A vegetated filter strip, meeting the following standards:

i.	A minimum width of 25 feet perpendi cul ar to the f19w of runoff; and

ii.	Vegetation consists of native plants, turf grass, or other plants that
cover 70% or more of the ground surface; or

(3)	An  equivalent  control measure.	The Enforcem ent Officer may allow agricultural crops as a perimeter control measure, if such m easures are projected to control erosion as well as other typica l perimeter controls. The appropria teness of agricultural crops  as  a  perimeter  control  m easure depends on developmen t si te specific considerations, such as the ground slope, type of crop, and the distance to the nearest channel or adjacent prop erty.

I.	The stormwater management system shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation downslope from disturbed areas. Inl et protection that reduces sediment loading, while allowing runoff to enter th e inlet shall be required for all storm sewers. Check dams, or an equivalent control measure, shall be required for all channels. Filter fabric inlet protection and straw bale ditch checks are not acceptable control measures.

m.	If dewatering services are used, discharges shall be routed through an effective sediment control measure (e.g., sedim ent trap or an equivalent control measure). The Enforcement Officer shall be notified prior to the commencem ent of dewaterin g activities.

n.	All temporary soil erosion and sediment control measures shall b e removed within 30 days after final stabiliza tion of the developm ent site is achieved or after the  tempor ary measures are no longer necessary. Trapped sediment shall be removed and disturbed areas shall be permanently stabilized.

o.	Stockpiled soil and materials shall be removed from flood hazard areas at the end of each work day. Soil and materials stockpiled in IWMC or buffer areas shall be placed on timber mats, or an equivalent control measure.

p.	Effective control m easures shall be utilized to minimize the discharge of pollutants from the development site. At a minimum , control measures shall be implemented in order to:

(1)	Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipm ent and vehicle washing,
whe el wash water, and other wash water; and

(2)	Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscap e materia ls, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergen ts, vehicle fluids, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the develo pment site to precipitation and to stormwater.

q.	Adequ ate receptacles shall be provided  for the depositing of all construction material debris gener ated during th e developmen t process. The applica nt shall not cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving  of construction material debris upon or into any developm ent site, chann el, or IWMC. The developm ent site shall be maintained free of construction material debris.




'
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section A.: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Paragraph 1.	37


r.	Where regulated development is allowed within a buffer area, construction fencing shall be install ed a minimum of 1foot outside the WOTUS or IWMC and all other regulated development shall be limited to the non-WOTUS or non-IWMC side of the construction fence. This requirement shall not apply to regulated development involving impacts to or enhancem ent of WOTUS or IWMC.

s.	The Enforcement Officer may require additional or alternate soil erosion and sediment control mea sures, based on devel opment site specific considerations and the effectiveness of the installed control measures.

2.	Requirements for Development Disturbing 1Acre or More

In addition to the Basic Requirements, the following requirem ents apply to Major Development, Public Road Development and Mining D evelop ment disturbing 1acre or mor e.

a.	Meet the requirements of IEPA General NPDES Permit No. ILR10, if applicable.

b.	A stabiliz ed construction entrance shall be located at any point where traffic will be exiting a development site to a public right-of-way, street, alley or parki ng area. Any sediment or soil reaching an improved public right-of-way, street, alley or parking area shall be removed by scraping or street cleaning as accumulations warrant and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.

c.	Structural control measures shall be utilized, when necessary, to treat wash water, divert flows from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from expose d areas of the development site. Such practices may include: earth dikes, drainage swales, sediment traps, check dams, subsurfa ce drains, pip e slope drains, l evel spreaders, storm drain inlet protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and sediment basins.

d.	Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance or in the Illinois Urban Manual (www.aiswcd.org/IUM ), the structu ral practices shall be designed for a storm event equal to or greater than a 25 year, 24 hour storm.

e.	Sediment traps and sediment basins shall be appropriately sized and designed to facilitate periodic removal of sediment, and located with regard to the size of the tributary area:

(1)	Runoff from disturbed areas with more than 1but fewer than  5 acres of tributary area shall be routed to a sediment trap, or an equivalent control m easure;

(2)	Runoff from disturbed areas with a tributary area of 5 acres or more shall be routed to a sediment basin with a perforated filtered riser pipe, or an equivalent control measures; and

(3)	Sediment basins shall have both a perm anent pool (dead storage) and additional volume (live storage). Each volume shall, at a minimum, be equal to the amount of  runoff from a 2 year, 24 hour storm over the onsite hydrologically disturbed tributary area. The live storage volume may be determined using the Detention Volum e vs. Percent Impervious Chart in Appendix 6 and the developed condition percent impervious area. The available sediment volume below the normal water level shall be in addition to the dead storage volume and shall be sized for the estimated sediment
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section A.: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Paragraph 2.	38


load generated from the development site over the duration of the construction period. For construction period s exceeding 1year, the 1year sediment load may be utilized with an annual sediment removal schedule.

3.	Channel Requirements

In addition to  other applicable Soil Erosion and Sediment  Control Performance Standards, the following requirements apply to regulated development below the ordinary high water mark of channels.

a.	Land disturbance in channels shall be avoided, where possible . The following requirements shall be met when land disturbance below the ordinary high water mark of channels cannot be avoided:

(1)	Disturbance shall be timed to occur during low-flow or no-flow conditions;

(2)	Equipment shall only cross channels at permanent bridges or culverts, except when a temporary channel crossing meets the following criteria:

i.	Fill within th e channel shall be composed of non-erosive material,
such as rip-rap or gravel; and

ii.	The temporary channel crossing, including temporary approach roads, shall be removed within 1year after installation, unless the Enforcement Officer grants an extension of time.

(3)	Temporary cofferdams may be required by the Enforcement Officer and shall be constructed of non- erosive material; and

(4)	The disturbed area, including bed and banks, shall be stabilized with staked in place sod, erosion control blanket in combination with seeding, or an equivalent control measure no more than 48 hours after disturban ce is completed or interrupted.

b.	New or relocated channels shall be constructed in dry conditions. All construction, including stabilization, shall be completed prior to diversion of water into the new or relocated channel.

4.	Inspection and Maintenance Requirements

The following requirements apply to all regulat ed development, except regul ated
development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	Development plans bearing the approval stamp of the Enforcement Officer shall be retained at the development site throughout the duration of construction activities and shall be annotated with field changes.

b.	Disturbed areas that have not been finally stabilized and areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system. Structural control measures identified in the plans shall  be observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. Discharge locations shall be inspected to evaluate whether soil erosion and sediment control m easures are effective in preventing significant impacts  to  receiving  waters.	Locations where vehicles enter or exit the development site shall be inspected for evidence of offsite sediment tracking. Such inspections  shall be performed at the intervals stated in Paragraph 4.c below.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section A.: Soil Erosi on and Sediment Control, Paragraph 4..	39


c.	For regulat ed development disturbing 1 acre or more, a qualified inspector (provided by the applicant) shall inspect the development site at the following intervals:

(1)	Upon completion of installation of soil erosion  and sediment control measures	(including perimeter controls and diversions), pri or to proceeding with any other earth disturbance or grading;

(2)	After stripping an d clearing;

(3)	After rough grading;

(4)	After final grading;

(5)	After seeding an d landscapin g;

(6)	After  final  stabiliza tion  and  landscaping,  prior  to  removal  of  sedim ent
controls;

(7)	At l east once every 7 calendar days; and

(8)	Within 24 hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5 inch or greater rain event
or a discharge due to snowmelt.

(9)	Inspections may be reduced to once per month when construction activities have ceased due to frozen conditions. Weekly inspections will recommen ce when construction activities are conducted, or if there is 0.5 inch or greater rain event, or a discharge due to snowm elt occurs.

d.	For regulated developm ent disturbing less than 1acre, an inspector (provided by the applica nt) shall inspect the developmen t site at intervals 1, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 of the above list.

e.	Inspection s may be reduced to once per month when construction activities have ceased due to frozen ground conditions. Weekly inspections shall resume when constru ction activities resume, within 24 hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5 inch or greater, or when snowme lt results in a discha rge from the development site.

f.	Inspection reports shall be retain ed at the development site throughout the duration of construction activities, and made available to the Enforceme n t Officer upon requ est. The reports shall include:

(1)	The scope of the inspection;

(2)	The name and signature of the inspector;

(3)	Qualifications of the qualified inspector, if required;

(4)	The date of the inspection;

(5)	Observations  relating  to  th e  conditi ons  and   effectiveness   of  control m easures; and

(6)	Corrective actions taken to address deficienci es.

g.	·	All tempor ary and permanent erosion and sedim ent control measures shall be maintained in an effective working condition throughout the  duration  of constru ction activities. Deficienci es shall be identifi ed through regular inspection s, summari zed in inspection reports, and repaired or replaced
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section A.: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Paragraph 4.	40


immediately.	The Enforcement Officer shall be notified of any Inciden ce of Noncompliance filed with the IEPA and whenever an ineffective control measure needs to be replaced with an alternative control measure.

S.	Notification  Requirements

The following requirements  apply to all regulated development, except regul ated
development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	To facilitate inspections by the Enforcement Officer and to ensure compliance with the stormwater management permit, and this Ordinance, the applicant shall notify the Enforcement Officer within 2 working days of the construction stages specified below:

(1)	For regulated development disturbing 1acre or more:

i.	Prior to the start of construction;

ii.	Upon completion of installation of soil erosion and sediment control measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to proceeding with any other earth disturbance or grading;

iii.	After stripping and clearing,

iv.	After rough grading;

v.	After final grading;

vi.	After seeding and land scaping; and

vii.	After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of sediment
controls.

viii.	If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done in phases or areas, the applicant shall give notice at the completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or area.

(2)	For regulated development disturbing less than  1acre, notifications  are
required at stages i, ii, iv, and vii of the above list.

6.	Special Precautions

a.	If at any stage of the construction, the Enforcement Officer determines that the nature of the regulated development is such that further work authorized by an issued stormwater management permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, IWMC, WOTUS, buffer area, or stormwater management system. the Enforcement Officer may require, as a condition of allowing the work to be continued, that reasonable special precautions be taken to avoid the likelihood of such peril. Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to: constructing a more level exposed slope; constructing additional drainage facilities, berms, or terraces; compaction, or cribbing; temporary or perm an ent stabilization ; or hirin g a professional consultant to recommend corrective actions.

b.	Where it appears that damage may occur due to incomplete grading at the development site, work may be stopped and the applicant required to install temporary structures, or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoinin g property or the public safety prior to the advent of seasonal rains or
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section A.: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Paragraph 6.	41


winter shut-down . For regulated  development disturbing 1 acre or more, or where unusual site conditions prevail, the Enforcement Officer may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages, so as to insure the completion of protective measures or devices.

8.	Runoff Control

1.	Basic Requirements

The following requirements  apply to all regulated  development, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	All concentrated stormwater discharges from a  development  site shall  be conveyed into an existing channel, storm sewer, or overland flow path and shall not   result in flood damage  at  the  development  site  or  upstream  of  the development site.

b.	The diversion of stormwater runoff shall be prohibited unless no reasonable alternative exists, as determined by the Enforcement Officer. The diversion of stormwater runoff shall not result in flood damage at the development site, upstream of the development site, or on downstream adjoining properties.

c.	Within a development site, streets, blocks, lots, deed or plat restrictions, parks and other public grounds shall be located in such a manner as to preserve natural streams and channels.

d.	Stormwater     management	facilities	within	subdivisions, ·   Planned	Unit Developments, and manufactured home parks with 5  or more  parcels  platted after December 1, 2014 shall be located within an outlot.

e.	The development plans and plats for subdivisions, Planned Un it Developments, and manufactured hom e parks shall show the BFE, as well as the limits of flood hazard areas, public bodies of water, WOTUS, IWMC, and buffer areas.

f.	The plats for subdivisions, Planned Unit Developments, and manufactured home parks shall include a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that accounts for changes in the drainage of surface water in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).

g.	The plats for subdivisions, Planned Unit Developments, and manufactured home parks shall specify the minimum low openin g elevation for each lot adjacent to an overland flow path, the minimum lowest adjacent grade for each lot adjacent to a flood hazard area, and the maximum impervious area allowed on each lot for the provided stormwater storage volume.

h.	The stormwater management system for a regulated development shall be functional prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion for any buildin g which is part of the regulated development.

i.	A community shall not approve any preliminary Planned Unit Development or Plat of Subdivision, unless the Planned Unit Development or Plat is subject to meeting the minimum standards of this Ordinance.

j.	A community shall not approve any final Planned Unit Development or Plat of Subdivision, unless the Planned Unit Development or Plat meets the minimum standards of this Ordinance.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 1. 	42


k.	A final Planned Unit Developm ent or Plat of Subdivision with an area greater than 5 acres platted after December 1, 2014 shall state the maximum imp ervious area allowed for each lot or parcel of land based on the design of the stormwater manag ement  system.

I.	Pursuant to State law, a property owner of a parcel being subdivided adjacent to a State or County right-of-way sha ll notify the highway authority of the proposed subdivision in writing, and request that the highway authority provid e, at the cost of the highway authority or otherwise provided by law, the amount of additiona l capacity in any stormwater detention facility to be constructed in the subdivi sion for the future availability of the highway authority for meeting stormwater detention requirements of any future public construction on the highway.

m.	A maint enance plan shall be recorded for the stormwater management system.
The Enfor cement Officer may waive this requirement for Minor and Intermediate
Development.

2.	Overland Flow Paths

In addition to other applicable Runoff Control Perform ance Standards, the following requirements apply to all regulated development. except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	An overland flow path shall be provided for all areas of a development site. The overland flow path shall convey floodwaters for all storm events up to and including the b ase flood event without flood damage at the development site or upstr eam of the development site. Where the tributary area is less than 20 acres, the storm  sewers and inlets may be sized for the base flood event in lieu of providing an overland flow path.

b.	An overland fl ow path serving more than one property shall be protected from obstructions, such as fencing, landscaping, or storage sheds through a deed or plat restriction . The Enforcement Officer may waive the requirement for a deed or plat  restriction where an increase  in  flood  heights  on upstream  adjoining properties is unlike ly to result from obstruction of the overland flow path.

c.	The overland flow path shall be designed to:

(1)	Ensure the freeboard requirement of this Ordinance is met;

(2)	Prevent an increase flood heights on upstream adjoining properties; and

(3)	Prevent flood damage at the development site.

d.	The overland flow path shall be designed using a model or technique identified in Appendix 5 of this Ordinance or otherwise approved by MCSC, based on the flow rate for:

(1)	The base flood event considering all onsite and offsite tributary areas; or

(2)	Conveyance of a minimum of 1cfs per acre of tributary area .

e.	The minimu m l ow opening el evation for a new building that is located adjacent to an overland flow path and has n ot been wet fl oodproofed according to the Building Protection Standards of this Ordinance, sh all m eet the following freeboard requirement:
 
Article VI: Perform ance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 2. 	43


(1)	At least 0.5 foot above the BFE where the tributary area is 20 acres or less;
or

(2)	At l east 1.0 foot above the BFE where the tributa ry area is between 20 and 100 acres; or

(3)	At least 2.0 feet above the BFE where the tributary area is 100 acres or
more.

f.	Modification of an existing overland flow path shall not result in increased flood heights on upstream adjoining propert ies or flood damage at the development site.

3.	Drain Tiles

In addition to other applicable Runoff Control Performance Standards, the following requirements apply to all regulated development, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	Drain tiles disturbed during regulated developm ent shall be reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance, unless the development plans specify abandonment of the drain tiles.

b.	All  abandoned  drain til es within  disturbed  areas shall be removed  in their
entirety.

c.	Drai n til es within the disturbed area of a devel opme nt site shall be replaced, bypassed around the development site or intercepted and connected to the stormwater management system for the development site. The size of the replaced or bypassed drain tile shall be equival ent to the existing drain tile.

d.	Existing drain tiles shall be protected from an adverse tailwater condition due to a new storm water management system.

e.	Observation wells, or similar structures for inspecting and maintaining drain tiles, shall be installed at any point where an existing drain tile flows into or out of a development site. Maintenance access shall be provided to the observation well through a deed or plat restriction for regulat ed devel opme nt disturbing 5 acres or more.

f.	Concentrated discharges from a d evelopment site shall be connected to an existing drain tile. where possible; however, the primary outlet from the development site shall be a surface discharge and the drain tile connection shall be designed as a secondary, low flow outlet. When no reasonable alternative exists, the Enforcement Officer may approve the connection of a concentrated discharge from a development site to an existing drain tile as the primary outlet, provided the existing drain tile is located within a deed or plat restriction to the point it discharges into a channel.

g.	A drain tile survey shall locate existing farm and storm drain til es by means of slit trenching or other appropriate method s perform ed by an experienced subsurface drainage consultant. A drain tile survey shall include the following as applicable on a topogr aphic map:

(1)	The location of each slit trench identified  to correspond with the  tile investigation report and field staked at no less than 50 foot intervals;
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 3. 	44


(2)	The location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow, tile size and any connection to adjoining properties;

(3)	A summary of the tile investigation report showing trench identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of the tile filled with water, percentage of restrictions caused by sediment; depth  of  ground cover and tile system classification; and

(4)	The  name,  address  and  phone  number  of  the  person  or  consultant responsible for the drain tile survey.

h.	The Enforcement  Officer may accept a drain tile  map prepared  by a drainage district or other reliable source in lieu of a drain tile survey. The drain tile survey requirement shall be waived  for any Minor Development  and the  Enforcement Officer may waive the drain tile survey requirement for an  Intermediate Development, Major Development. Public Road  Development  or  Mining Development,  provided   the   applicant  submits  a  narrative   and   supporting evidence indicating to the satisfaction of the Enforceme nt Officer that drain tiles are  not likely  to  be  present  within  the  development  site.   This  evidence  may consist of:

(1)	Soil maps;

(2)	Historic aerial photographs;

(3)	Historic topographic maps; and

(4)	Wetland maps.

4.	Storm Sewers

In addition to other applicable Runoff Control Performance Standards, the following requirements apply to all regulated development, except regulated development authorized by a Genera l Permit.

a.	Storm sewers shall not connect to sanitary sewers.

b.	Energy dissipation devices shall be provided at the outlets of all storm sewer systems to minimize erosion.

c.	New storm sewers serving new regulated development shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer for the 10 year critical duration storm as a minimum. The storm sewer design shall be based on full flow conditions, unl ess detailed calculations demonstrate the hydraulic grade line would not exceed the ground elevation. The Enforcement Officer may waive this requirement when storm sewers are not necessary for the development site to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.

d.	New inlets shall be designed to prevent ponding in streets from exceeding 0.5 foot during the 100 year storm and to prevent ponding in parking lots from exceeding
1.0 foot during the 100 year storm. Ponding depth shall be measured at the inlet. The Enforcement Officer may waive this requirement when storm sewers are not necessary for the development site to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.

e.	The minimum full flow velocity for new storm sewers serving new regulated development shall be 2.5 feet per second . The maximum full flow velocity for new storm sewers serving new regulated development shall be 8.0 feet per second.
 
Article VI : Perform ance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragra ph 4. 	45


The Enforcement Officer may waive this requirement when storm sewers are not necessary for the development site to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.

f.	The minimum storm sewer size shall be 12 inches for storm sewers serving more than one property. The Enforcement Officer may waiv e this requir ement when storm sewers are not n ecessary for the development site to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.

g.	New storm sewers serving more than one property shall be located in a deed or plat restriction of sufficient size to maintain and re-construct the storm sewer. The Enfor cement Officer may waive the requirement for a deed or plat restriction where an increase in flood heights on upstream adjoinin g propertie s is unlik ely to result from th e lack of maintenance of the storm sewer.

5.	Runoff Rate Reduction

In addition to other applicable Runoff Control Performance Standards, the following requ irements apply to all regul ated development required to provid e stormwater storage.

a.	Stormwater Storage Requirements

(1)	Stormwater storage shall be required for a regul ated development that creates 20,000 square feet or more new imp ervious  area. unless the conditions of i, ii, or iii are met:

i.	1.0 acre or less of new imperviou s ar ea is created; and

(a)	The total impervious area including the propos ed development wou ld not exceed 10% of the contiguous property; and

(b)	The   applicant   demonstrates   to   the   satisfaction	of the Enforcement Officer that the developm ent will not result in flood damage at the development site, upstream of the development site, or on downstream adjoining properties; or

ii.	The total impervious area including the proposed development wou ld
not exceed 5% of the contiguous property; and

(a)	An agricultural conservation easement or other conservation easem ent is recorded over sufficient und eveloped area that the total impervious area may not exceed 5% of the contigu ous property. The easement shall b e granted to McH enry County or a Certified Community. The easement may be temporary, but the term of the easement shall run until the stormwater storage waiver is no longer n ecessary, for reasons such as the removal of new imperv iou s ar ea or the installation of a stormwater m anagem en t facility; and

(b)	The   applica nt   demonstrat es   to   the   satisfaction	of	th e Enfor cem ent Officer that the development will not result in flood   dam age at th e  development  site.  upstream  of  the development site, or on down stream adjoinin g prop erties; or

iii.	The regul ated development is a Public Road D evelopm ent and less
than 1.5 acres of n ew impervio us area is created.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 5. 	46


(2)	Linear impervious areas, such as a widened road, driveways and public recreational trails, which are less than 12.4 feet wide (1.5 acres per lineal mile) may be excluded when calculatin g the new impervious area to determine whether stormwater storage is required. This exclusion shall apply only when determining whether stormwater storage is required and not to the design of a stormwater management facility in cases where stormwater storage is required .

b.	Allowable Release Rates

(1)	The allowable rel ease rates for a development site shall be calculated based on the hydrologically disturbed area of the regulated development, except that the allowable release rate for a Public Road Development involving an existing linear impervious surface shall be based on the new impervious area, rather than the hydrologically  disturbed  area.

(2)	Release rates for a detention facility shall not exceed the lesser of the
following:

i.	0.04 cubic feet per second per acre for the 2 year, 24 hour storm and
0.15 cubic feet per second per acre for the 100 year, 24 hour storm;

ii.	More restrictive release for the 2 year and 100 year storm rates, if
adopted by the MCSC or a Certified Community; or

iii.	The existing conditions peak runoff rate.

(3)	The allowable release rates for a detention facility shall be utilized for the design of an infiltration facility. unless the Enforcement Officer approves a design based on the infiltration rate of the underlying soil, as determin ed by a qualified professional. In such a case, the Enforcement Officer may add special conditions to the approval, such as a performance guarantee or a design factor of safety.

c.	Runoff Rates and Storage Volume

(1)	The required stormwater storage volume may be determined by:

i.	The Detention Volume vs. Percent Impervious Chart in Appendix '6 for stormwater management facilities with a tributary area less than 10 acres, provided that the allowable release rates are 0.04 cubic feet per second per acre for the 2 year storm and 0.15 cubic feet per second per acre for the 100 year storm; or

ii.	A licensed professional engineer using a model or technique identified in Appendix 5 of this Ordinance or otherwise approved by MCSC or IDNR/OWR.

(2)	Runoff calculations for all offsite tributary areas may be based on either the anticipated future land use conditions or existing land use conditions. Anti cipated future land use conditions shall be based on future land use and existing  offsite  stormwater  management  facilities.	Existing land use conditions shall be based on existing land use and existing offsite stormwater management faciliti es.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 5.	47


(3)	Compensatory storage for flood storage volume lost in a depressional storage area may either be:

i.	Added to the required 2 year stormwater storage vol ume; or

ii.	Replaced as a new depressional storage a rea.

(4)	The Enforcem ent Officer may waive the requirement to add compensatory storage volum e to the required detention storage volume if accessing the compensatory storage volum e wou ld :

i.	Require a control structure with a diameter smaller than the minimum diameter; or

ii.	Result in a dewatering time that exceeds the maxim um dewatering
time.

(5)	Any regu lated d evelopment th at results in impervious ar ea exceeding the design param eters of an existing detention or infiltration facility shall either expand the existing stormwater management facility, or include a control measure designed to reduce  the  additiona l .volum e  of  runoff  from  the regulated developm ent, such as a rain garden or the replacement of existing impervious pav ement with perme able pavement.

d.	Stormwater Management Facilities

(1)	Basic Requ irem ents

The following requirements apply to the stormwater management facilities for all regulated development required to meet the Stormwater Storage Requirements of this Ordinance.

i.	Offsite runoff may be bypa ssed around a proposed stormwater management fac ility.

ii.	Stormwater management facilities shall be sized for the runoff from any public road improvements required as part of the regulated development.

iii.	Stormwat er  management  facilities  sh all  be  designed  to d ewater
within 72 hours following the end of the design storm.

iv.	A stable overflow shall be provided for each stormwater management facility. The overflow shall be capable of passing th e unattenuated inflow from the 100 year critical duration storm from the entire tributary area without increasing flood heigh ts on upstream adjoining properties or resulting in flood dam age at the development site, based on runoff calculations meeting the Runoff Rates an d Storage Volume Standards of this Ordinan ce. The overflow elevation shall be at or above the 100 year design high water elevation.

v.	A minimum freeboard of one 1foot shall be provided above the design high  water  surface  elevation  of  the   100  year  flow  through  the overflow.

vi.	Stormwater managem ent facilities serving mor e than one property shall be located in a deed or plat restriction with access to the stormwater managem ent facility from  the public right-of-way .  The
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 5. 	48


Enforcement Officer may waive the requirement for a deed or plat restriction where an increase in flood heights on upstream prop erties is unlikely to result from the lack of maintenance of the stormwater management  facility.

(2)	Detention Facilities

In addition to other applicable Stormwater Management Facility Standards, the following requirements apply to detention facilities for all regulated development requir ed to meet the Stormwater Storage Requirements of this Ordinance.

i.	Single pipe outlets shall have a minimum inside diameter of12 inches.
Control structures such as orifices, weirs, and perforate d risers may be used to meet the allowable release rates. Outlet pipes and control structures shall be designed to minimize the need for maintenance and prevent tampering.

ii.	Control structures shall have a minimum diameter of 4 inches when a single pipe outlet or an orifice plate is used to restrict the outflow from a detention facility. If a smaller diameter is necessary to meet the allowable release rates, the control structure shall be designed to prevent clogging.

iii.	Detention facilities shall be designed with appropriate tailwater conditions, as approved by the Enforcement Officer.

iv.	Inlets to the detention facility shall be located as far from the outlet as possible. Paved low flow channels shall not be allowed between inlets and the outlet.

v.	The side slopes at the shoreline of wet bottom and wetland detention facilities (from at least 6 inches below to at least 6 inches above normal water level) shall be no steeper than 10:1to prevent shoreline erosion due to wave action and fluctuating water  levels.	Above shoreline areas, or in dry detention facilities, the maximum side slope shall be 4:1.

vi.	Wet bottom detention facilities with a permanent pool depth greater than 3 feet shall include a safety shelf with a minimum 8 foot width that is no more than 1foot below norm al water level.

(3)	Online Detention

In addition to other applicable Stormwater Management Facility Standards, the following requirements apply to online detention facilities for all regulated   development   required	to meet the Stormwa ter Storage Requirements of this Ordinance.

i.	Online detention shall not be allowed on perennial streams.

ii.	Online detention shall not be allowed in HQAR.

iii.	Online detention shall not be allowed where the offsite to onsite tributary area ratio is greater than 10:1, except for regulated development that provides a watershed benefit. Online detention shall not be allowed where the tributary area is greater than 640


Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of rmderlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Article VI: Perform ance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 5. 	49


acres, except for regulated developm ent that proyjdes a watershed benefit.

iv.	The release rates shall be 0.04 cubic feet per second per acre of the total tributary area at the elevation created by impoundment of the requir ed 2 year stormwater storage volume, and 0.15 cubic feet per second per acre of the total tributary area at the elevation created by impoundment of the required 100 yea r stormwater storage volume. The release rate and required stormwater storage volume shall be calculated using the 24 hour storm. These standards may be modified by the Enforcement Officer to pr event an increase in the existing condition peak discharge rate or to prevent frequent overflow from the online detention facility.

v.	Compensatory storage shall be provided for the volume of flood storage lost due to fill and stormwater storage within a flood hazard area. The compensatory storage volume shall be in addition to the required  detention volume.

vi.	Meet IDNR/OWR and USACE requirements for modific ations to a channel to accommodate online detention, if applicable.

vii.	An impoundment of a channel shall be designed to allow the migration and movement of present or potenti ally present indigenous species that require access upstream and downstream of the impoundment as part of their life cycle.

(4)	Detention Within WOTUS and IWMC

In addition to other applicable Stormwater M anagem ent Facility Standard s, the following requirements apply to detention facilities located within WOTUS or IWMC.

i.	Detention within WOTUS shall meet the requirements  of the USACE, if applicable.

ii.	Detention within IWMC shall require IWMC mitigation, unless the detention facility is vegetated according to the standard s of the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illin ois (NRCS, et al.) and the pre-development IWMC is comprised of:

(a)	Farmed wetlands;

(b)	Non-farmed wetlands that are not HQAR covered by at least
85% of one or more of the following species:

(i)	Reed canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea)

(ii)	Purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria)

(iii)	Common reed (Phragmites australis)

(iv)	Buckthorn (Rhamnus spp.)

(c)	Non-farmed wetlands that are not HQAR with a FQI of 7 or less;
or

(d)	Open water that is not HQAR.



Refer to App endix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 5. 	50


(5)	Infiltration Faciliti es

In addition to other applicable Stormwater Management Facility Standards, the following requirements apply to infiltra tion facilities for all regulated development required to meet the Stormwater Storage Requirement s of this Ordinance.

i.	The und erlying soils shall have an infiltration rate of at least 0.5 inch per hour. The development site specific infiltration rate shall be determined by a qualified professional and approved by the Enforcement Officer.

ii.	The bottom of the infiltr ation facility shall be at least 4 feet above the seasonal high groundwater elevation . The development site specific seasonal high groundw ater elevation shall be determined by a qualified professional and approved by the Enforcement Officer.

iii.	The design high water level of the facility shall be at least 200 feet
from water supply wells and onsite waste disposal systems.

iv.	The design high water level of the facility shall be at least 10 feet from
any building foundation.

v.	Pre-treatment  shall  be  provided  to  prevent  obstruction  of  the
infiltration facility.

vi.	Runoff from the following areas shall not be routed to an infiltration
facility:

(a)	Areas subject to frequent winter deicing; and

(b)	Other areas where precipitation will be exposed to potential
contaminants.

vii.	The maximum side slope shall be 4:1.

6.	Runoff Volum e Reduction Hierarchy

Jn addition to other applicable Runoff Control Performance Standards, the following requirements apply to Major Development, Public Road Develo pm ent and Minin g Developm ent disturbing  1acre or mor e.

a.	The applicant shall choose one or more strategy from the following hierarchy to minimize the increase in runoff volum e from the development site:

(1)	Preservation of n atural features of the development site (e.g. natural storage and infiltration characteristics, flo odplains, wetlands, prairie s and woodlands) ;

(2)	Preservation of th e existing natural streams, channels and drainageways;

(3)	Minimization of impervious surfa ces created at the development site (e.g. narrowing road width, minimizing driveway length and width, clustering hom es and shared driveways);

(4)	Conveyance of stormwater in open vegetated channels;

(5)	Natural landscaping as an alternative to turf grass;

(6)	Structural measures that provid e water quality and quantity control;


Refer to App endix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Article VI: Perform ance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Con trol, Paragraph 6. 	51


(7)	Structural measures that provide only quantity control.

7.	Water Quality Protection

In addition to oth er applicable Runoff Control Perfo rmance Standards, the foll owing requirements apply to all regulated development, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	Water quality treatm ent shall be provided for stormwater runoff from increased
impervious areas.

(1)	On highly impervious developmen t sites, such as multi-family resid ential and non-residential developments, water quality treatment devices shall be designed to remove both floatable and settleable pollutants from as much of th e stormwater runoff from increased imperv ious ar eas as possible. This requireme nt may be met by directing as much stormwater runoff from increased impervious areas as possible through a hydrodynamic separator, or into a catch basin fitted with a hooded outlet cover. Alternate treatment methods providing a similar or higher level of water quality treatment may be approved by the Enforcement Officer.

(2)	In Public Road Developments, the stormwater management system shall be designed to direct as much storm water runoff from increased impervious areas as possible through a vegetated swale, across a vege tated filter strip, or into a catch basin before being discharged from the development site. Altern ate treatment methods providing a similar or higher level of water quality treatment may be approved by the Enforcement Officer.

b.	Appropriate pre -treatment shall be provided for storm water runoff directed to
n ew or existing Class V injection well.

c.	Appropriate pre-treatment shall be provided for stormwa ter runoff directed to infiltration based practices in areas designated as High or Moderately High Potential for Aquifer Recharge/Contam ination on the McHenry County Sensitive Aquifer Recharge Areas Map.

8.	Watershed  Specific Requirements

In addition to other applicable Runoff Control Performance Standards, the following requirements apply to Watershed Specific Area Development, except, regulated development authorized by a General Permi t.

a.	Crystal Lake Watershed Specific Requirements

(1)	The boundary of the Crystal Lake Watershed is generally depicted in Appendix 9. Any area of land along the watershed boundary that can be shown to be outside of the Crystal Lake Watershed shall not be subj ect to the Crystal Lake Watershed Specific Requirements .

(2)	Any regul ated development that hydrologic ally disturbs more than 20,000 square feet ofland within the Crystal Lake Watershe d shall comply with the following requirements in addition to the other applicable requirements of this Ordinance:

i.	The	regul ated   development	shall	incorporate	runoff	volume reduction practices to infiltrate, evaporate, or transpire at least 95%



Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of und erlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for permittin9 flowcharts.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section B.: Runoff Control, Paragraph 8.	52


of   the   annual   stormwater   runoff   volume   from   hydrologically disturbed  areas.

ii.		Perform an evaluation of the development site and field testing practices in accordance with Chapter 2.1 of the City of Crystal Lake - Crystal Lake Watershed Stormwater Management Design Manual.

iii.		Design the development site in accordance with sections 3.4-3.7 and section 5.1 of the City of Crystal Lake - Crystal Lake Watershed Stormwater Management Design Manual (http://www.crystallake.org/home/showdocument?id  =230).

b.	McHenry County Watershed Plans are listed in Appendix 10 for reference only.
Recommendations from these plans may be the basis for additional Watershed Specific Requirements upon amendmen t of this Ordinance by the McHenry County Board.

C.	Flood Hazard Areas

1.	A development is located in a flood hazard area if any of the following criteria are met:

a.	If any portion of the development site is within a mapped Flood of Record area on
the USGS-Hydrologic Investigation Atlas Flood of Record Map;

b.	If any portion of the development site is within a closed contour of a depressional
storage area;

c.	If any portion of the development site is within a channel that has a tributary area greater than 100 acres;

d.	If any portion of the development site is within a mapped Zone AE. A, AH or AO floodplain on the FEMA FIRM:

e.	If any portion of the development site is outside a mapped Zone AE, but is below the BFE; or

f.	If any portion of the development site is below the BFE determined by the simplified methods for estimating the BFE described in the FEMA publication Managing Floodplain Deve lopment in Approximate Zone A Areas.

2.	Determining the BFE and Limits of a Flood Prone Area

a.	The BFE shall be determined utilizing one of the following methodologies:

(1)	Adding 3 feet to the Flood of Record indicated on the USGS-Hydrologic Investigation Atlas;

(2)	Adding 0.5 foot to the surface overflow of a depressional storage area.
Where  a  smaller  depressional   storage  area  exists  within   a  larger
depressional storage area, the BFE shall be based on the highest surface
overflow; or

(3)	The BFE may be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a model or technique identified in Appendix 5 of this Ordinance or otherwise approved by MCSC or IDNR/OWR.

b.	The limits of a flood prone area shall be the projection of the BFE onto the developm ent site topography.
 
Article VI : Perform ance Standards, Section C.: Flood Ha zard Areas, Paragraph 3. 	53


3.	Determining the BFE and Limits of a Zone AE Floodplain

a.	The BFE shall be determin ed utilizing the following hierarchy as it applies to the developm ent site:

(1)	The  1Percent Annual  Chance  elevation  from  the Summary of Stillwater
Elevations table in the FIS (for non-riverin e flood sources);

(2)	The Regulatory 1 Percent Annu al Chance Flood Water Surface Elevation from the Floodway Data Table in the FIS (for a development site located at a cross-section);

(3)	The 1 Percent Annual Chance Flood Elevati on at the development site
scaled onto the Flood Profile in th e FIS; or

(4)	Th e BFE may be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a m odel or technique identified in Appendix 5 of this Ordinance or otherwise approved by MCSC or IDNR/OWR.

b.	The limits of a Zone AE floodplain shall be the projection of the BFE onto the developm ent  site  topography.    The  Building  Protection  Standard s  for  Flood Hazard Ar eas of this Ordinance apply to a building within a mapp ed Zon e AE floodplain until a LOMC is obtained from FEMA.

4.	Determining the BFE and Limits of a Zone A Floodplain

a.	The BFE shall be determined utilizing one of the following methodologies:

(1)	For regulat ed developments less than SO lots and 5 acres, the Enforcem ent Officer may approve th e use of the simplified method s for estimating the BFE described in the FEMA publi cation Managing Floodplain D evelopm ent in Approximat e Zone A Ar eas; or

(2)	The B FE shall be determined by a licen sed profession al engineer using a model or technique identified in Appendix 5  or otherwise approved by MCSC or IDNR/OWR.

b.	The limits of a Zone A flood p l ai n shall be th e projection of the  BFE onto th e development    site    topography.	The  Building  Protection   Standards  for  Flood Hazard Areas of this Ordinance  apply to  a  building within  a  mapped  Zone A floodplain until a LOMC is obtained from FEMA.

5.	Determining the BFE and Limits of a Zone AH Floodpla in

a.	The BFE shall be determined utilizing one of the following methodologies :

(1)	The elevation noted on the FIRM; or

(2)	Th e BFE may be determined by a licensed professiona l engineer using a model or techniqu e identified in Appendix 5 of this Ordinance or otherwise approved by MCSC or IDNR/OWR .

b.	The limits of a Zone AH flood plain shall be the projection of the BFE onto the development site topography. The Building Protection Standards for Flood Hazard Areas of this Ordinance apply to a building within a mapped Zone AH floodplain until a LOMC is obtained from FEMA.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 6. 	54


6.	Determining the BFE and Limits of a Zone AO Floodplain

a.	The BFE shall be determined utilizing one of the following methodologies:

(1)	The depth noted on the FIRM plus the highest adjacent grade;

(2)	At least 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth is noted on the FIRM; or

(3)	The BFE may be determ ined by a licensed professional engineer using a model or technique identified in Appendix 5 of this Ordinance or otherwise approved by MCSC or IDNR/OWR.

b.	The limits of a Zone AO floodplain shall be the projection of the BFE onto the development   site  topography.	The  Building  Protection  Standards  for  Flood Hazard Areas of this Ordinance apply to a building within a mapped Zone AO floodplain until a LOMC is obtained from FEMA.

7.	Determining the Limits of Floodways

a.	The designated floodway boundary shall be as depicted on the FIRM. The non­ designated floodway boundary shall match the floodplain boundary as depicted on the FIRM. The location of the floodway boundary shall be scaled onto the development plan using references common to both the FIRM and the development plan. IDNR/OWR shall determine the exact location of the floodway boundary wherever an interpretation is needed, including  non-designated floodways not depicted on the FIRM.

b.	Any area of land that can be shown to be higher than the BFE and is located within the  boundary of a designated or non-designated floodway is considered a floodway  until a LOMR has }?een obtained from FEMA to revise the floodway boundary.

8.	Basic Requirements

The following requirements apply to all regulated development in a flood hazard area. except regulated development authorized by a Genera l Permit. and where these requirements are modified in the Public Flood Control Project Standards of this Ordinance.

a.	Regulated developm ent within a flood hazard area, including both permanent and temporary measures, shall meet the following criteria:

(1)	Regulated development shall not result in increased flood damage at the development site or upstream of the development site.

(2)	Any water surface profile increase shall:

i.	Be contained within the banks of the water body; or

ii.	Be contained within the developm ent site, prop erty in which the
applicant has an ownership interest, or a deed or plat restriction; or

iii.	Not exceed 0.1 foot upstream flood height increase for the ba se flood event, except as allowed by the Bridge and Culvert standards of this Ordinance.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 8. 	55


(3)	Any increase in average channel velocity shall:

i.	Not exceed the scour velocity of the predominant soil type of the
channel; or

ii.	Provide  stabilization  measures  to  prevent  increased  scour  and erosion.

b.	Any regul ated development involving a channel modification, fill, stream maintenance, or a levee, shall not decrease the flood carrying capacity of the flood hazard area.

c.	All regulated development in a flood hazard area shall meet lDNR/OWR requirements for floodway construction, dam safety, and public bodies of water, if applicable.

d.	A LOMC from FEMA shall be required, with concurrence from IDNR/OWR, for any
regulated development that:

(1)	Increases the water surface profile by 0.1 foot or more in a floodplain for
the base flood event;

(2)	Increases the water surface profile by more than 0.0 foot in a floodway for the base flood event;

(3)	Revises the boundary of a floodplain for a future building by the placement
of fill;

(4)	Revises the boundary of a floodway: or

(5)	Establishes the BFE for a regulated development equal to or exceeding 50
lots or 5 acres.

e.	A CLO MR is required prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit when a regulated development within a floodplain would increase flood heights more than 0.1 foot, or when a regulated development within a floodway would increase flood heights more than 0.0 foot. Once a CLOMR has been issued by FEMA, with concurrence from lDNR/OWR, the Enforcement Officer may allow filling, the construction or reconstruction of bridges and culverts, and similar regulated development within the floodplain necessary to obtain the LOMR.

9.	Additional Standards for Designated Floodways

a.	The only development in a designated floodway which will be allowed is an appropriate use, which will not cause a rise in the BFE, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrolog ic and hydraulic  functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construct i on impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Ordinance. Only thos e appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:








Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 9. 	56


(1)	Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or pr ivate improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.

(2)	Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.

(3)	Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls.

(4)	Underground and overhead utilities.

(5)	Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage.                                                                             ·

(6)	Detached   garages,  storage  sheds,  or  other  non-habitable   accessory
buildings that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage.

(7)	Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and
any modification thereto.

(8)	Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:

i.	The depth of flooding at the base flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot; or

ii.	The depth of flooding can be greater than 1.0 foot for parking lots used for short-term outdoor recreational use facilities, provided the applicant agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and agrees to accept liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank flooding events.

(9)	Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive non-erosive slope toward a channel.

(10)	Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful buildings including the construction of water tight window wells, elevating buildings, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercia l or industrial principal buildings where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than 10-feet away from the exterior wall of the existing building, and which are not considered substantial improvement s to the building .

(11)	The replacement, reconstruction, or repair ofa damaged building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased and provided that the Building Protection Standards are met if the replacement, reconstruction, or repair is a substantia l improvement or if the building is considered substantially damaged.

(12)	Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the BFE, and which will not block flood flows, including but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and second story additions . Substantial improvements shall meet the Building Protection Standards.


Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Article VJ: Performa nce Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas; Paragraph 9. 	57


b.	Appropriate uses do n ot include the construction or placement of any new buildings, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done  to accommodat e otherwise non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or plantin g designed to act as a fence) and storage of materi als except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use.

c.	Development of an appropriate use will be considered permissible provided that the development meets the following criteria:

(1)	All effective designated floodway conveyan ce lost due to the development will be replaced for all flood events up to and including the base flood event. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:

i.	K = (1.486/n)(ARZ/3)

where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.

ii.	The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative land cover.

iii.	Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used (unless alternate ratios are approved by IDNR/OWR) for excavations in the designated floodway, between cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions, and when matching the designated floodway boundary on an adjoining property:

(a)	Water will expand no faster than at a rate of 1horizontal foot
for every 4 feet of the flooded stream's length.	·

(b)	Water will contract no faster than at a rate of 1horizontal foot
for every 1foot of the flooded stream's length.

(c)	Water will not expand or contract faster than 1vertical foot for
every 10 feet of flooded stream's length.

(d)	All cross-sections used in th e calculations shall be located perp endicular to the flood flows.

(e)	In the design of excavations in the d esignated fl oodway, erosion or scour protection shall be provided on land upstream and downstream  of proposed transition  sections.

10.	Public Health Protection Standards

The following requirements apply to all regulated development in a flood hazard area,
except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.




Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlin ed terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Article VJ: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 10.	58



TABLE4	Minim um Elevation Standards for Public Health Protection







Type of Flood Hazard Area	


Storage of Material s Outside a Building
C.10.a	



Water Supply Systems
C.10.b	




Sanitary
Sewers
C.10.b	





Wells C.10.c	


NewOnsi te Waste Disposal Systems
C.10.d	

Replacement Onsite Waste Disposal Systems
C.10.d	



Wastewater Treatment Plants
C.10.e


Flood Prone Area	

Waived	

Waived	

Waived	

Waived	

Waived	

Waived	

FPE

Floodplain: Flood Fringe and Floodway	

BFE	

FPE	

FPE	

FPE	

N/A	

Waived	

FPE

a.	No regu lated development in a fl oodplain shall include the outside storage of chemicals,	explosives, buoyant materials, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardou s or toxic materia ls below the BFE.

b.	New  and  replacement water supply  systems and  sanitary sewer  lines in  a
floodp lain shall consist of watertight construction below the FPE.

c.	The wellhead for new wells in a floodplain shall be elevated to the FPE to prevent floodwaters from entering the well. The Enforcement Officer may provide an approxim ate BFE for the purpose of well prot ection .

d.	New onsite waste disposal systems, such as septic systems, shall not be installed in the flood pla in. Replacement onsite waste disposal systems may be installed in the flood hazard area below the BFE if no reasonable alternative exists, as determined by the Enforcement Officer, and provid ed that the system has a watertight holding tank and all m echanica l and electrical components and above ground openings of the system below th e BFE are watertight.

e.	Wastewater treatment pl ants in a flood hazard area shall be equipped with watertight openings below the FPE. These faciliti es shall be located to avoid impairment to the facility or contami nation of floodwaters during the base flood.

11.	Building Protection Standards for Flood Hazard Areas

The following requirements apply to: all new buildin gs. building additions, and substantial improvements located within a floodplain ; and to all new buildin gs and building additions in a flood pron e area after D ecember 1, 2014 that increase total enclosed area below the BFE by more than 600 square feet. These requirements apply to a building within a mapped floodplain until a LOMC is obtained from FEMA.

a.	Basic Requirements

(1)	A buildin g may be constructed in a flood hazard area, provided that it meets the  FPE and lowest floor elevation requirements listed in Table S by utilizing an acceptable protection measure listed in Table 6. Lowest floor elevation requirements do not apply to buildings utilizing dry flo odproofi n g as the flood protection measure.



Refer to Appendix 12for the definit ion of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flow charts.
 
Article VJ: Perform ance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 11.	59


(2)	All  buildin g  protection  m easures  shall  meet  the  Standards  for  Flood
Protection Measures in this Ordinance.

(3)	An elevation certifi cate or a floodproo fing certificate shall be requ ired for any bu ildin g, buildin g addition, or substantial improvements to a buil ding within a floodplain. The elevation certifi cate or a floodproofing certifi cate shall be prepared on forms published by FEMA, except for small accessory buildings, the Enforcemen t Officer may allow alternate documentation that the constructed buildin g complies with th e Building Protection Standards for Flood Hazard Areas of this Ordinance.




















 


6.	This requ irement does not apply to dry tl oodproofed buildings.
 
<BFE
 



TABLE 6	Acceptable Measures for Flood Protection




Type of Building	



Type of
Flood Hazard Area	

Construction on Permanent Fill
C.11.b(l)	Elevation on Crawl Space, Stilts, Piles, Walls, etc. C.11.b(2)	


Dry Floodproofing C.11.b(3)	


Wet
Floodproofing C.11.b(4)

Residential	Flood Pron e Area	YES	YES	YES	NO
	Floodplain	YES	YES	NO	NO

Attached Garage	Flood Prone Area	YES	YES	YES	NO
	Floodplain	YES	YES	NO	NO

Accessory	Flood Pro ne Area	YES	YES	YES	YES
	Floodpla in	YES	YES	YES	NO

Small Accessory	Flood Prone Area	YES	YES	YES	YES
	Floodpla in	YES	YES	YES	YES

Non -Residenti al	Flood Prone Area	YES	YES	YES	NO
	Floodplain	YES	YES	YES	NO

Agricultural	Flood Prone Area	YES	YES	YES	YES
	Floodplain	YES	YES	YES	YES
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 11. 	60


b.	Standards for flood protection measures:

(1)	Elevation on permanent fill

A building elevated on fill shall meet the following criteria:

i.	The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the lowest floor elevation shown in Table 5, based on the type of building and the type of flood hazard area;

ii.	Fill shall be placed following the FEMA guidelines for ensuring that buildings placed on fill (FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, or current guidelines) are reason ably safe from flooding, except where the requirements of this Ordinance exceed FEMA guidelines;

iii.	All building components shall be constructed of flood damage­ resistant materials up to the FPE shown in Table 5, based on the type of building and the type of flood hazard area;

iv.	Manufactur ed homes, recreational vehicles or travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days shall be elevated to or above the FPE; and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870; and recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements above unl ess:

(a)	They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and,

(b)	They are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle or travel trailer is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
 
Article VI: Performa nce Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 11. 	61


FIGURE 1

How to Elevate Your Floodplain Building
(IDNR Floodplain Management in lllinois Quick Guide, 2001)


Elevate on Foundation Walls	Elevate on Fill

 
SERVICE
EQUIPMENT
SUCH AS UTILITIES AND ELECTRICAL  CIRCUITS, ABOVE FLOOD
LEVEL
 


ENCLOSED AREA USED ONLY FOR PARKING,  ACCESS, OR LIMITED STORAG E
 

SERVICE EQUIPMENT
SUCH AS UTILITIES AND ELECTRICAL
CIRCUITS
 















(2)	Elevation on a crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, etc.

A  buildin g  elevated  on  a  crawl  space,  stilts,  piles,  etc., shall  m eet  the following criteria:

i.	Th e lowest floor (including basem ent) shall be at or above the lowest floor elevation shown in Table 5, bas ed on the type of building an d the type of flood h azard area;

ii.	The lowest inside grade shall not be below the existing and proposed
l owest adjacent grade;

iii.	The building or improvements may be elevated on stem walls or may
be elevated on a crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation
I
that is permanently open to floodwaters and not subject to damage by
hydrostatic pressures of th e base fl ood.

iv.	The permanent openings shall meet all of the following criteria:

(a)	The bottom of the permanent openings shall be no more than 1
foot above the l owest adjacent grade;

(b)	The total net area shall be pr ovided below th e BFE and consist of a minimum  of 2 openings for each enclosed area with each opening of an enclosed area on a different exterior wall;

(c)	Any louvers, screens, or other opening covers shall not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of th e enclosed area; an d




Refer to Appendix 12fo r the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 11. 	62


(d)	The openings shall have a total net area of not less than 1square inch for every 1square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE. unless the building is equipped with engineered openings meeting the FEMA guidelines for openings in foundation walls and walls of enclosures (FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-08, or current guidelines), except where the requirements of this Ordinance exceed FEMA guidelines;

FIGURE 2

Enclosures Below the BFE
(IDNR Floodplain Management in Illinois Quick Guide, 2001)






NOTE:
TOTAL OPENING AREA IS 1 SQ. IN. PER SQ.FT. A 25' X 45' BUILDING NEEDS 1 125 SQ. INCHES OF OPENINGS



CRAWLSPACE
BUILDING


AT LEAST lWO FLOOD OPENINGS ---
ON DIFFERENT SIDES



v.	The foundation and supporting memb ers  shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodyn amic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris;

vi.	All building components below the FPE shown in Tabl e 5 shall be
constructed of flood damage-resistant materials;

vii.	All electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE shown in Table S;

viii.	Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps,  and  other waterproofed  service  facilities may be  located below the FPE shown in Table 5;

ix.	The areas below the FPE shown in Table 5 may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement;

x.	All interior  storage  within  a  building  in  the  floodplain  shall  be elevated at least 0.5 feet above the BFE;



Refer to App endix 12for the definition of und erlined terms or to Appendix J3for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for p ermitting flowcharts .
 
Article VI: Perform ance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 11. 	63


xi.	Manufactured homes. recreational vehicles or travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days shall be elevated to or above the FPE; and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulati ons for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870; and

xii.	Recreational vehicles or travel trail ers shall be required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements above unl ess:

(a)	They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and,

(b)	They are fully licensed  and  ready  for  highway  use.  A recreati onal vehicle or travel trailer is ready for highway use if it is on its whe els or j acking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached  additions.

(3)	Dry floodproofing

A building that is dry floodproofed shall meet the following criteria:

i.	Dry floodproofing shall be provided to the FPE shown in Table 5.

ii.	Dry floodproofing shall follow current FEMA guidelines, except where the requirements of this Ordinance exceed FEMA guidelines; and

(4)	Wet tloodproofing

A building that is wet tloodproofed shall meet the following criteria:

i.	The building shall not be used for human habitation;

ii.	All buildin g components below the FPE shown in Table 5 shall be constructed with flo,od damage-resistant materials:

iii.	The building shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;

iv.	All electrical,  heating,  ventilating,  plumbing,  and  air  conditi oning equipm ent and utility  meters shall be  located  at or above  the  FPE shown in Table 5;

v.	Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPE shown in Table 5; and

vi.	The permanent openings shall meet all of the following criteria:

(a)	The bottom of the permanent openings shall be no more than 1
foot above the lowest adjacent grade;

(b)	The total net area shall be provided below the BFE and consist of a minimum of 2 openings for each enclosed area with each opening of an enclosed area on a different exterior wall;

(c)	Any louvers, screens, or other opening covers shall not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area; and
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 11. 	64


(d)	The openings shall have a total net area ofnot less than 1square inch for every 1square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE, unless the building is equipped with engineered openings meeting the FEMA guidelines for openings in foundation walls and walls of enclosures (FEMA Technical Bulletin	1-08, or current guidelines), except  where the requirements of this Ordinance exceed FEMA guidelines.

FIGURE 3

Accessory Structures
(IDNR Floodplain Management in Illinois Quick Guide, 2001)










ELEVATED UTILITIES














FLOOD OPENINGS



12.	Substantial Improvement Standards

In addition to other applicabl e Flood Hazard Area Performance Standards, the following requirements apply to any repa ir, reconstruction, rehabilitation , addition, or other activity to a building within a floodplain.

a.	Determining substantial improvement

The repair  or improvem ent of a building  shall be  considered  a  substantial improvem ent if either of the following criteria is met:

(1)	The cost of a single project or the value of damage caused by a singl e event equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market valu e of the buildin g before the improvem ent or repair is started; or
 
Article VI: Perform ance Standards, Section C.: Fl ood Ha zard Areas, Paragraph 12.	6S


(2)	Th e cumulative cost of two or more projects requiring a buildin g permit or a stormwater managem ent p ermit over a S year period equals or exceeds SO percent of the market value of the buildin g tracked on a percentage basis for each proj ect.

b.	Determining the cost

(1)	A deta iled and complete cost estimate shall be prepared by the applicant on a form provid ed by McHenry County. The cost estimate may exclude items not considered a perm anent part of th e building (i.e., plan s, surveys, or permits), but shall include the cost of:

i.	Damages of any origin, regardless of the actual repair work; and

ii.		Maint enance of existing buildings that was or will be part of a larger project requiring a building permit or a stormwater managem ent permit.

(2)	Th e cost estimate shall be bas ed on pre-d amage costs, if applicable.

(3)	Th e cost of all material s shall be equal to the actual or estimated fair market value of th e materials. Where materials or servicing equipment are donated or discounted below norma l market value, the cost sh all be adjusted to fair market value.

(4)	The cost of all labor shall be equal to the actual or estimated fair market va lue of th e labor. Where volunt eer or discounted labor is involved, the cost of the labor shall be adju sted to fair market value.

c.	Determining th e market value

(1)	A signed and n otarized market value determination shall be prepared on a form provided by McHenry County. The market value may be determined by :

i.	Multiplying the current tax assessed va lue of the building by thre e.
The current tax assessed value shall exclud e:

(a)	Th e value of the land; and

(b)	The value of any other buildings or exterior improveme nts on
the land; or

ii.	A  certified   appraisal   pr epared  by  a  state  licensed  appraiser, compl eted within th e previous two years, and based on  the comparable sales method;

iii.	An estimate pr epared and sealed by a licensed archite ct; or

iv.  An  alternate  approach,   approved   by   the   Enforcement   Officer, provid ed that the buildin g does not have a tax assessed va lue an d the cost estimate is clearly less than SO percent of the market value .

(2)	The market value shall be based on the value prior to any construction or
damages, if applicable.
 
Article VI : Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 12.	66


d.	Determining th·e cumulative percentage

(1)	The percentage for each individual project shall be determined by dividing th e cost of the project (at the time the project was completed, including the full cost of any damage, if applicable) by the value of the structure (at the time the project was completed, or prior to any damage, if applicable); and

(2)	Adding the percentages of each individual project.

e.	Substantial  improvem ents  to  buildings shall  m eet  the  Building  Protection
Standards for Flood Hazard Areas of this Ordinance.

13.	Compensatory Storage Volume Standards

The following requirements apply to all regulated development resulting in flood storage volume lost or displaced due to the placement of fill, materials, or structures in a flood hazard area, or due to draining a depressional storage area, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit or specifically exempted below.

TABLE 7	Compensatory Stora •e Exemptions






Type of Flood Hazard Area	
Fill Less	
Replacement	

Floodproofing	

Artificially	

All Other
	than 5	Septic			
	Cubic	Systems and	Habitable	Created	Regulated
	Yards	Wells	Buildings	Storage	Development
	C.13.a(l)	C.13.a(Z)	C.13.a(3)	C.13.a(4)	C.13.b
Flood Prone Area	Exempt	Exempt	Exempt	Exempt	Not Exempt

Floodplain: Flood Fringe	
Exempt	
Exempt	
Exempt	
Exempt	
Not Exempt

Floodplain: Designated or Non- Designated Floodway	

Not Exempt	

Not Exempt	

Exempt	

Exempt		

Not Exe	

mpt

a.	Compensatory storage exemptions

(1)	Compensatory storage may be waived through a written waiver by the Enforcement Officer for up to 5 cubic yards of fill within the flood fringe or a flood prone area. This waiver may only be exercised one time per parcel. The Enforcement Officer may deny the waiver for reasons including, but not limited to:

i.	A determination  that the fill would  create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity; or

ii.	That a parcel h as been subdivided to qualify for more than one waiver.

(2)	Compensatory storage shall not be required for replacement onsite waste disposal systems within the flood fringe or a  flood prone area. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Enforcement Officer that no reasonable alternative location exists outside of the flood h azard area and that the fill volume is the minimum n ecessary.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 13.	67
(3)	Compensatory storage shall not be requi red for the floodproofing of existing lawful habitable residentia l or commercial buildings within 10 feet of the outside face of the building.
(4)	Compensatory storage shall not be required to replace th e loss of artificially created storage due to a reduction in upstr eam head loss caused by a bridge, culvert, storm sewer, or constructed embankment.

TABLE 8   Required Compensatory Storage Ratios


Type of Flood Hazard Area	Regulated Development without As-Builts7	Regulated Developm ent with As-Builts	
Public Road
Development


Riverine Floodplain	

1.5:1	

1.2:1	

Minimum 1:1


River ine Flood Prone Area	

1.5:1	

1.2:1	

Minimum 1:1


Non -Riverin e Floodplain	

1:1	

1:1	

1:1


N on-Riverine Flood Prone Area	

1:1	

1:1	

1:1
7.	As-bu ilt plans ·shall be required for any regulated development resulting in 100 cubic yards or more of fill in a fl.QQ.d
hazard area.


a.	Compensatory storage requ irements

(1)	Compensatory storage volume shall be provided bel ow th e BFE and above
the normal water level.

(2)	As-built plans shall be requir ed for any regulated devel opment resulting in 100 cubic yards or more of fill in a flood hazard area. The Enforcement Offic er may require as-built pl ans for regulated development resu lting in smaller amounts of fill in a flood hazard area based on developme n t site specific considerations.

(3)	For regulated developme nt in a riverine flood hazard area:

i.	Hydra uli cally  equi valent  compen satory  storage  vol um e  shall  be
provided at ratios at least equ al to:

(a)	1.5 tim es the flood storage volume lost or displaced; or

(b)	1.2 times the flood storage volume lost or displaced, provided
that as-built plan s are submitted.

ii.	For a Publi c Roa d Development that cannot reasonably provid e the compensat ory storage volume required by this Ordinance :

(a)	The  hydraulically  equivalent compensatory storage volume
required at a minimum  1:1ratio may be waived by the
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 13. 	68


Enforcement Officer as long as the total compensatory storage ratio is at least equal to 1:1. The waiver shall be the minimum necessary to afford relief. Any compensatory storage within a designated floodway shall be approved by IDNR/OWR.

(b)	The additional compensatory storage volume required beyond a 1:1 ratio may be waived by the Enforcement Officer. The waiver shall be the minimum necessary to afford relief.

iii.	Any additional compensatory storage volume required beyond a 1:1 ratio may be provided above or below the 10 year flood elevation.

iv.	The compensatory storage area shall be located in close proximity to the fill area and shall drain freely and openly to the channel.

(4)	For regulated development in a non-riverine flood hazard area:

i.	The compensatory storage volume shall be at least equal to the flood storage volume lost or displaced; and

ii.	The compensatory storage volume lost by filling or draining a depressional storage area shall be based on the critical duration storm.

14.	Public Flood Control Project Standards

The Flood Hazard Area Performance Standards of this Ordinance shall be considered met for any public flood control project that meets all th e following criteria .

a.	Flood heights shall not be increased outside a deed or plat restriction for all flood
events up to and including the base flood event.

b.	The improvements shall be own ed and maintained by a public agency. A land stewardship corporation, or similar entity, may own and maintain the improvem ents, provided that a public agency executes an agreement with the corporation   to  take  over  ownership,   operation,  and  m aintenance  if  the
corporation dissolves or fails to meet its obligations.

c.	A CLOMR and a LOMC from FEMA shall be required, with approval from IDNR/OWR, for any regulated development that:

(1)	Increa ses the water surface profile by 0.1foot or more in a floodplain for any storm event up to and including the base flood event;

(2)	Revises the boundary of a floodpl ain by the placement of fill; or

(3)	Revises the boundary of a floodway.

15.	Standards for On-Stream Structures Built for the Purpose of Backing Up Water

a.	Any water surface profile increase shall:

(1)	Be contained within the banks of the water body; or

(2)	Be contained within the development site, property in which the applicant
has an ownership interest, or a deed or plat restriction; or

(3)	Not exceed 0.1 foot upstream flood height increase for all events up to and including the base flood event.
 
Article VJ: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 15. 	69


b.	All dams and impoundment structures shall meet the applicable requirement s of
17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams).

c.	If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundm ent, it shall be demonstrated that:

I	(1)	The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or region al stormwater detention;

(2)	The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenou s fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning;

(3)	The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat cond itions. lmpoundment design shoul d includ e gradua l bank slopes, appropriate bank stabiliza tion m easure, and a pre-sedimentation basin; and

(4)	A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstr eam watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimi ze the input of nutri ents, oil and grease, metals and other pollutant s. If there is more than one municip ality in th e upstream watersh ed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipaliti es to ensure compreh ensive watershed control.

16.	Bridge and Culvert Standards

a.	Designated Floodways

(1)	New bridg es and culverts

i.	Any water surfa ce profil e increase shall :

(a)	Be contained within the banks of the water body; or

(b)	Be contained within the development site, property in which the applicant has an ownership interest, or a deed or plat restriction; or

ii.	The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot for all flood events up to and including the base flood event; and

iii.		If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot within a designated floodway. the applicant shall contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit for a dam or wa iver.

(2)	Reconstruction  or modification  of existing bridges, culverts and approach
roads

i.	The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modifi cation shall be constru cted with no more than 0.1 foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including th e base floo d event, if the existing bridge or culvert is not a source of flood damage.

ii.	If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood  damage to build ings in  the upstream floodplain , the applicant's
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 16. 	70


engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.

iii.	The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with 17 Ill.  Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.

b.	Non-Designated Floodways and Flood Prone Area s

(1)	New bridges and culverts

i.	Documentation must be provided that the proposed crossing will not cause demonstrable flood damage; and

ii.	Any water surface profile increase shall:

(a)	Be contained within the banks of the water body; or

(b)	Be contained within the developm ent site, property in which the applicant has an ownership interest, or a deed or plat restriction; or

iii.	In urban areas, the water surface profile increas e would not exceed
0.5 foot at the structure, nor 0.1 foot at a point 1000 feet upstr eam of
the sb·ucture, for all flood events up to and including the base flood event, as determined by the horizontal projection of the increase and the slope of the hydraulic grade line for the existing and proposed conditions hydraulic models; or

iv.	In rural areas, the water surface profile increase would not exceed 1.0 foot at the structure, nor 0.5 foot at a point 1000 feet upstream of the structure, for all flood even ts up to and including the base flood event, as determin ed by the horizontal projection of the increase and the slope of the hydrauli c grade line for the existing and proposed conditions hydraulic models; and

v.	Any increase in the average channel velocity would not be beyond the
scour velocity of the predominant soil type of the channel; or

vi.	Increased scour, erosion and sedimentation would be prevented by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.

(2)	Reconstruction  or modification  of existing bridges, culverts and approach
roads

i.	The reconstruction (including approach roads) shall be  no more restrictive to norm al and flood flows than the existing bridge or culvert crossing; and

ii.	Documentation must be provided that the existing crossing has not caused demonstrable flood damage. In the case of public projects, certification by a District Engineer of the Department of Transportation's Division of Highways, a County Engineer (if a registered professional engineer), or a Municipal Engineer (if a
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section C.: Flood Hazard Areas, Paragraph 16. 	71
 





D.	Wetlands and Waters
 


registered professional  engineer) that the existing crossing has not
caused demonstrable flood damage will be adequate documentation.
 

1.	Minimization of Impacts

All reasonable measures shall be taken to avoid and minimize impacts to wetlands, streams, ponds and lakes.

2.	Jurisdictional  Determination

a.	The applicant shall obtain a Jurisdictional Determination from the USACE for any regulated development that impacts wetlands or waters or  is  adjacent  to wetlands or waters. This requirement may be waived by the Enforcement Officer when the USACE issues a Letter of No Objection for the regulated development.

b.	Impacts to WOTUS shall be mitigated according to the requirements of the USACE.

c.	Impacts to IWMC shall be mitigated according to the requirements of this Ordinance. No IWMC impacts shall be allowed without a clear purpose and need for the regulated development and without demonstrating the measures taken to avoid and minimize IWMC impacts to the satisfaction of the Enforcement Officer.

3.	Boundary Determination Requirements

The following requirements apply to all regulated development within or adja cent to
IWMC, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	A Letter of No Impa ct prepared by a wetland specialist may be accepted by the Enforcement Officer, in lieu of a Wetland Determination Report, when a field investigation by the wetland specialist reveals the closest wetland or waters to a regulated developm ent is clearly beyond the limits  of the required  buffer.  A Letter of No Impact shall include:

(1)	The date of the field investigation;

(2)	A written description of the development site closest to the IWMC;

(3)	Color photographs representative of the development site closest to the
IWMC;

(4)	A grading plan sh owing the limits of development site and the approximate
boundary of the IWMC closest to the development site; and

(5)	An  aerial photograph  showing the limits of  development  site and  the approximate boundary of the IWMC closest to the development site.

b.	The presence and boundary of waters shall be determined by a wetland specialist.
Waters shall include the entire area inundated at the ord inary high wate r mark.

c.	The presence and boundary of farmed  wetlands  within  or  adjacent  to  a development site shall be determined by the NRCS or a wetland specialist, in accordance with the current NRCS wetland delineation methodology.

d.	The presence, boundary, and quality of non-farmed wetlands within or adjacent to a development site shall be determined by a wetland delineation conducted in accordance with the current USACE wetland delineation methodology.  The
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section D.: Wetlands and Waters, Paragraph 3. 	72


findings of this determination shall be documented in a Wetland Determination
Report prepared by a wetland specialist.
e:	A Wetland Determination Report shall be prepared by a wetland specialist and
shall include:

(1)	A plan showing the location and extent of all wetlands and waters within or adj acent to the development site. The boundaries of these wetlands and waters shall be flagged in the field and surveyed. The approximate location and extent of offsite wetlands and waters within 100 feet of the development site shall also be shown. The approximate offsite boundaries shall be established using the best available information, as approved by the Enforcement Officer. The best available information may include:

i.	Aerial photography;

ii.	A previously  approved  Wetland  Determination  Report,  even  if the report was prepared  more than S years ago;

iii.	The ADID Map or other wetlan d map; and

iv.	McHenry County Soil Survey;

(2)	An aerial photograph delineating all  wetlands  and  waters  within  or adj acent to the development site, as well as the approximate location and extent of wetlands and waters within 100 feet of the development site;

(3)	The most recent version of the following maps, delineating the limits of the development site:

i.	USGS Quadrangle Map;

ii.	NRCS Wetland Inventory Map;

iii.	FEMA FIRM;

iv.	McHenry County Soil Survey;

v.	USGS Hydrologic Investigations Atlas, and

vi.	ADID Map;

(4)	USACE data sheets with color photographs provided for representative upland and wetland data points; and

(5)	A narrative description of the wetlands, including a Floristic Quality Assessment, as determined by the methodology described in Plants of the Chicago Region (Swink, F. and G. Wilhelm, 1994, 4th Edition, Indianapolis:
I ndiana   Academy   of   Science).   Floristic   Quality   Assessments   shall   be
conducted during the local growing season, generally between May 15 and
October  1. Non-growing  season  assessments  may  require  additional
sampling during the growing season prior to approval.

f.	Approval of a Wetland Determination Report shall remain valid for 5 years.
 
Article VI: Performa nce Standards, Section D.: Wetlands and Waters, Paragraph 4.	73


4.	Hydrology Requirement

The following requirement applies to all regulated developm ent within or adjacent to
IWMC, except regulated development authorized by a Genera l Permit.

a.	The regulated development shall maintain 80%-150% of the existing condition runoff volume from the development site to each IWMC for the 2 yea r, 24 hou r storm event; otherwise the IWMC shall be considered impacted and shall be subject to the Mitigation Requ irements of this Ordinance.

5.	Mitigation Requirements

The following requ irements apply to all regula ted development resulting in an IWMC
impact, except regulated development authori zed by a Gen eral Permit.

a.	IWMC miti gat ion is required for regulated development resulting  in IWMC impacts greater than or equal to 0.10 acre to IWMC. The Enforcement Officer may require mitigation for IWM C impa cts less th an 0.10 acre for reasons including, but not limited to:

(1)	The proposed regul ated development would result in a cum ulative IWMC impact greater than or equal to 0.10 acre, due to a prior unmitigated impact to the same IWM C; or

(2)	A prior  unmitigated  impact to  another IWMC within  the  contiguous
prop erty.

TABLE9	IWMC Mitigation Ratios

Cat	IWMC
Quality	Impact Area	Regulated Development Type	
D.5.a	
D.5.c.(11	
D.5.c.(21	
D.5.c.(31	
D.5.c.(41	
D.5.c.(51

I	
Any	.s. 0.10 ac	
Any	
Exempt					

I	
StandardB	
0.1-1.0 ac	
Any		
1.5:1or
1:1				

II	
Stand ardB	
1.0-2.0 ac	
Any		
1.5:1or
1:1				


Ill	
Standard8	
> 2.0 ac	
Any		
1.5:1or
1:1				

III	
HFVW	
Any	
Any			
3:19			

III	HQARor
HQHS	
Any	
Any				
5:19		

Impacts Prior to Permit Issuan ce					
5:19	

IV	
Any	
Any	
Restoration, Creation, and Enhancemen t						
1:1
v	
Any		
Any	
Temporaty Impac t							
1:1
a.	Standard mean s any IWMC that is not a HFVW, HQAR. or H QHS.
9.	May be reduced to 1:1. Refer to D.5.c(6).
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section D.:Wetland s and Waters, Paragraph 5.	74


b.	IWMC imp acts shall be categorized as follows:

(1)	Category I : IWMC impacts with a cumulative impact area less than or equal
to 1acre and not impacting HQAR, HFVW; or HQHS;

(2)	Category II: IWMC impacts with a cumulativ e impact area greater than 1 acre and less than or equal to 2 acres and not impacting HQAR. HFVW, or HQHS;

(3)	Category III: IWMC impacts with a cumulative impact area greater than 2 acres or impacting HQAR, HFVW, or HQHS;

(4)	Category IV: IWMC impacts necessary for wetland restoration, wetland creation and/or wetland enhancement. including streambank and shoreline stabilization projects that utilize appropriate bioengine ered practices; or

(5)	Category V: Tempor ary IWMC impacts.

c.	IWMC mitigation shall replace the area of IWMC impacted by regulated developm ent at the following proportional rates (i.e., creation acreage to IWMC impact acreage):

(1)	1.5:1 ratio for IWMC impacts under Categori es I, II and III that are not designated as HQAR, HQHS. or HFVW. or a minimum 1:1ratio for USACE ­ certified wetland mitigation bank credits;

(2)	3:1 ratio is requir ed for IWMC impacts that are designated as HFVW;

(3)	5:1 ratio is required for IWMC impacts that are designated as HQH S or
HQAR;

(4)	5:1 ratio is required for IWM C impacts prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit, if the Enfor cement Officer determines that  IWMC miti ga tion is an acceptable alternative to wetland restorati on; and

(5)	1:1•ratio is requir ed for IWMC impacts under Categories IV and V; or

(6)	1:1 ratio may be allowed for IWMC impacts under Categories I, II and III, including HQAR. HQHS. an HFVW, provid ed that IWMC mitigation occurs onsite according to the requirem ents of this Ordinance.

d.	A mitigation plan shall be prepared by a wetl and speci alist for any regulated developm ent that requir es IWMC miti gation. A mitigation plan shall include:

(1)	A statement of th e purpose and need for the project;

(2)	A statement of th e area, type, and Category of the IWMC im pa ct;

(3)	A statement of the selected miti ga tion option;

(4)	A n arrative describing the alternative measures taken to avoid, minimize, or mitigate IWMC impacts;

(5)	A narrative describing any ben efits to the aquatic environm ent;

(6)	A narrative describing how the selected mitigation alternative is consistent
with th e Mitigation Hierarchy of this Ordinan ce; and
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section D.: Wetlands and Waters, Paragraph 5. 	75


(7) A narrative describing the monitoring and maintenance tasks necessary to ensure the long-term success of the mitigation.

6.	Mitigation Options

The following requirements apply to all regulated development resulting in an IWMC impact requiring IWMC mitigation.

a.	IWMC  mitigation  shall  be  designed  to  duplicate  or  improve  the  hydrologic, biologic, botanic, and wildlife features of the IWMC.

b.	Onsite IWMC mitigation

(1)	Onsite IWMC mitigation includes mitigation on a parcel adjacent to the development site, even if the adjacent parcel has a different owner.

(2)	Onsite  IWMC  mitigation  shall  only  be  allowed  for  IWMC  impacts  in
Categories IV and V, or if the mitigation area is 1.5 acres or larger and:

i.	The IWMC mitigation area is located within a conservation easement managed by a conservation agency; or

ii.	The applicant establishes performance standards approved by the Enforcement Officer, and provides a performance guarantee payable to the MCSC Wetland Restoration Fund in the event the performance standards are not met.

(3)	Temporary IWMC impacts shall be restored in place. The disturbed area shall be:

i.	Returned to its original contour and general soil profile;

ii.	Restored to a comparable IWMC community type; and

iii.	Exhibit an FQI no lower than that of the IWMC prior to disturbance.

(4)	The Buffer Area Performance Standards of this Ordinance shall apply to IWMC mitigation areas, except mitigation for IWMC impacts in Categories
!Vand V.

(5)	The area of wetland restoration shall not be less than the area of IWMC impact.	The  additional   mitigation	area may consist of wetland enhancement; however, only 0.25 acre of mitigation shall be credited for each acre of wetland enhancement.

(6)	Wetland creation shall not be credited for mitigation of IWMC impacts.

c.	Wetland mitigation banking

(1)	Wetland mitigation banking shall be required if the IWMC mitigation area
is l ess than 1.5 acres.

(2)	Mitigation credit may be obtained by payment into a Wetland Bank or the MCSC Wetland Restoration Fund. A receipt for payment into a Wetland Bank or the MCSC Wetland Restoration Fund shall be provided prior to issuance of a stormwater management  permit.

(3)	To provide credit for mitigation, a Wetland Bank must be certified by the USACE and comply with the lnteragency Coordination Agreement on
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section D.: Wetlands and Waters, Paragraph 6.	76


Wetland Mitigation Banking within the Regulatory Boundaries of Chicago District, dated January, 1997, or current version.

(4)	Payment into the MCSC Wetland Restoration Fund shall not be allowed if the IWMC impact is in the same watershed as a Wetland Bank in existence at the tim e the MCSC Wetland Restorati on Fund was established, provid ed the Wetland Ba nk has mitigation credits available. The following Wetland Banks were in existence at the time the MCSC Wetland Restoration Fund was  established:

i.	Sybaquay Girl Scout Camp (Kishwaukee River Watershed);

ii.	Kishwaukee Bottoms (Kishwauke e River Watershed);

iii.	Marengo (Kishwaukee River Watershed); and

iv.	Slough Creek (Nippersink Creek Watershed).

7.	Mitigation Hierarchy

In  addition  to  other  applicabl e  Wetland  and  Waters  Perform ance  Standards,  the
following requirements apply to all regulated development requiring IWMC mitigation .

a.	IWMC mitigation shall be provided as close to the IW MC impa ct site as possible, with respect to the following hierarchy:

(1)	Onsite, provided the criteria for onsite mitigation are met;

(2)	Wetland mitigation banking within the same sub-watershed;

(3)	Wetland mitigation banking within an adjacent sub-watershed and within
the same watershed;

(4)	Wetland mitigation banking within the same watershed;

(5)	W etla nd m itigation banking within an adjacent wate rshed; or

(6)	W etland miti ga tion b anking within McHenry County.

b.	Any funds paid into the MCSC Wetland Restoration Fund shall only be used to fund wetland restoration activities located fully within McHenry County.

8.	Requirements for Und erground Utilities

The following requirements apply to all regulated development involving the installation of underground utiliti es, except regulated development authorized by a General Permit.

a.	In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement shall be buried a minimum of 3 feet below the existing stream bed.

b.	In IWM C, any excavation shall be backfilled with soil excavated from the trench
in the same stratification in which it was removed.

c.	A contingency plan for frac-out shall be required for any utility proposed to be
installed by directional boring.
 
Article VI: Performance  Standards, Section E.: Buffer Are as, Paragr aph 1. 	77


E.	Buffer Ar eas

1.	Buff er Requirements

The following requirements apply to all regulated development adjacent to WOTUS or IWMC,  except  regu lated  development  authorized  by  a  General  Permit.	These requirements are minimum standards and may be superseded by more restrictiv e USACE requir ements.


TABLE 10   Buffer Widths
Buffer Type	
Criteria	
E.1.b.(1)	
E.1.b.(2)	
E.1.c.(1)	
E.1.c.(2)	
E.1.c.(3)


Lin ear	

Tributary Area > 20 ac	
so ft				


Linear	

HFVW, HQHS, or HQAR		

100 ft			


Non-Linear	

0.25 ac .$.Surface Area < 0.50 ac			

30 ft		


Non -Linear	

0.50 ac .$. Surface Area				

50 ft	


Non-Lin ear	

HFVW, HQH S, or HQAR					

100 ft

a.	Roadside  drainage  ditches,  detention  facilities,  borrow  pits,  quarries,  and improvements to public roads shall be exempt from these Buffer Requirements.

b.	Buffers shall be designated along both sides oflinear WOTUS and IWMC using the following widths:

(1)	SO feet on each side of linear WOTUS an d IWM C having a tributary area greater than 20 acres; or

(2)	100 feet on each side of linear WOTUS and IWMC that are HFVW, HQHS, or
HQAR.

c.	Bu ffers shall  encompass  all non-linear  WOTU S and  IWM C using the  following
widths:

(1)	30 feet for all non-linear WOTUS and IWM C with a surface area of at least
0.25 acre bu t l ess than 0.50 acre;

(2)	SO feet for all non-linear WOTU S and IWM C with a surfa ce area of at least
O.SO acres; or

(3)	100 feet for all non-lin ear WOTUS and IWMC th at are HFVW, HQHS, or
HQAR.

d.	Buff er areas for wetlands shall extend landward from the wetla nd bound ary.
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section E.: Buffer Areas, Paragraph 1. 	78


e.	Buffer areas for water bodies which are WOTUS or IWMC shall extend landward
from the ordinary high water mark.

f.	A property  may contain  a buffer  area  originating from WOTUS or IWMC on
another property.

g.	Buffer width s may be increased by the Enforcement Officer where State or Federal threatened and endangered species may be present or for Illinois Natural Area Inventory sites following consultation with IDNR and USFWS.

h.	Buffer areas within subdivisions, Plann ed Unit Developments, and manufactured home parks with 5 or more parcels platted after Decemb er 1, 2014 shall be located within an outlot with adjacent stormwater  management  facilities. WOTUS. and/or IWMC.

i.		Buffer areas within regulated developmen t disturbing 5 acres or more shall be located within a deed or plat restriction with adjacent stormwater management facilities. WOTUS, and/o'. IWMC.

j.	A maintenanc e plan  shall be prep ared for the buffer areas. The Enforcem ent Officer may waive this requirement for Minor and Intermediat e Development.

k.	Filling WOTUS or IWMC to meet these Buff er Requirement s or any other regu latory program sh all not be allowed.

2.	Buffer Use

The following requirements apply to all regulated development within buffer areas for WOTU S or IWMC. except regulated development authorized by a General Permit. These requirements may be superseded by more restrictive U SACE requir em ents.

a.	Buffer areas shall be maintained free from developm ent includin g disturbance of the soil, dumping or filling, erection of buildings and placement of impervious areas except as follows:

(1)	Buildings. trails, water depend ent faciliti es, other new imperviou s areas occupying a maximum of 20% of the buff er area, provided that th e stormwa ter runoff from the new imperviou s areas is not concentrated;

(2)	Grading or filling, provided the that the hydrologically disturbed area is revegetated according to the Na tive Plant Guidefor Streams and Storm water Facilities in Northeastern Illinois, NRCS, et al., (as amended);

(3)	Redevelopment with in the footprint of legal non-conforming  development
in existence within a buffer area prior to the effective date of this Ordinance;

(4)	BMPs;

(5)	Stormwater m an agement facilities; and

(6)	Utiliti es, includin g wastewater wetland s, but not including septic leach
fields.

b.	Regu lated development within buff er areas which  does not conform to the
allowabl e uses shall be mitigated by:

(1)	Varying the buff er width to a minimum of 1h the prescrib ed buff er width, provided that the total area of the buff er adjacent to WOTUS or IWMC is not reduced and that the buffer is located within a deed or plat restriction; or
 
Article VI: Performance Standards, Section E.: Buffer Areas, Paragraph 2. 	79


(2)	Replacing the impacted buffer area with BMPs, such as a rain garden or replacement of existing turf grass with native vegetation, at a 1:1 proportional rate.

(3)	The consultation of the USAC E, IDNR, or USFWS may preclude the use of
either mitigation approach .

3.	In the event the implementation of these Buffer Requirement s preclude an otherwise legally buildable parcel from being developed, the Enforcement Officer may allow the minimal amount of reli ef from the Buffer Area Performanc e Standards in order to restore the parcel to a buildable condition.
 
Article Vil: Variances and Appeals, Section A: Variances, Paragraph 1. 	80


Article VII

§15.60.070	Variances and Appeals

A  Variances

Variances to the provisions of this Ordinance may be granted subject to the process and standards that follow.

1.	Process

a.	In order to be considered for a variance, a variance petition sh all be submitted to the Enforcement Officer.

b.	The Enforcement Officer shall submit a written recommendation to the oversight committee regarding each variance petition within 30 days after receipt of a complete variance petition. The oversight committee may also request an opinion from the McHenry County Stormwater Technical Advisory Committee.

c.	The oversight committee shall have the authority to grant variances to the provisions of this Ordinance.

(1)	A public hearing is required for a variance petition that affects adjoining properties or has the potential to affect adjoining properties, as determined by the Enforcement Officer .

i.	When required, the petitioner shall schedul e a public hearing before the   oversight committee and shall be responsible for  all  fees associated with the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published once in a n ewspaper having a general circulation within the community. Th e publication shall not be less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days prior to th e h earing. All owners of record of land within 250 feet of the contiguous property shall be served notice of the public hearing not less than 15 days,  nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. All notices shall include at least the following information:

(a)	The street address of the development site, or if there is no street address, then the location of the development site with reference to well-known landmarks;

(b)	A description of the regulat ed development;

(c)	id entification of each Ordinance provision for which a variance is requested;

(d)	A statement that any person may attend the hearing and submit verbal comments regarding the variance petition with the date, time, and location of the hearing;

(e)	A statement that any person may submit written comments regarding the  variance  petition  with  the  address  to  which written comments shall be mailed and the date by which written comments shall be received; and

(f)	A statement that any and all documents that concern the variance petition which are subject to public disclosure, will be
 
Article VII: Variances and Appeals, Section A: Variances, Paragraph 1. 	81


made  availabl e  for  inspection  by  the  community  with  the
location where the documents will be available for inspection.

(2)	The oversight committee shall grant th e variance, grant the variance with conditions, or deny the variance in writing within 45 days after receipt of the written recommendation from the Enforcement Officer.

(3)	Written decisions shall be made public for all variance petitions and shall
be on file with the community.

(4)	The MCSC Chief Engin eer shall be notified of every variance hearing in a Certified Community and of every variance granted by a Certifi ed Community.

(5)	Any person with an affected interest in the variance petition may appeal a
variance decision according to the Appeal s standard s of this Ordinance .

2.	Standards

a.	The oversight committee may grant variances to the provi sions of this Ordinance
if the petitioner provides evidence demonstratin g that:

(1)	Failure to grant the variance would result in an unreasonable hardship; and

(2)	The  variance  is  n ecessary  due  to  unique  and  exceptional  physical
circumstances or a condition of a particular property ; and

(3)	The variance is the minimum necessary to afford reli ef, and

(4)	The variance will not cause detriment to the public good, safety or welfare;
and

(5)	The variance will not cause an increase in the water surface profile within
a floodway; and

(6)	The variance  will  not  cause  an increase in  the water  surface profile upstream of the development site, unless:

i.	The increase is contained within the banks of the water body; or

ii.	The increase is contained within the developm ent site, property in which the applicant has an ownership interest, or a deed or plat restriction; or

iii.	The increase does not exceed 0.1foot for the ba se flood event.

(7)	The variance will not be contrary to the spirit, purpose and intent of this
Ordinance; and

(8)	The regu lated development meets the minimum Federa l, State, and other local regulations, including those of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for participation in the NFIP.

b.	The Enforcement Officer shall notify a petitioner in writin g that a variance from the requirements  of  the Building  Protection  Standards  of  this  Ordinance,  that l essens the degree of prote ction to a building may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and may increase th e risk of loss of life and property. The Enforcement Officer shall requir e the petitioner to acknowledge the assumption of the risks and liability in writing.  If the variance is approved, the
 
Article VII: Variances and Appeals, Section A.: Variances, Paragraph 2. 	82


document shall be recorded against the property with the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds Office and the petitioner shall pay the fee for recording the exception.

3.	Conditions

a.	In granting a variance . the oversight committee may impose specific conditions and limitations on the petitioner concerning any matter relating to the purposes
,of this Ordinance.

b.	Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition to be met by the petitioner, the petitioner shall submit evidence that the condition has been met.

4.	A variance petition shall include:

	a.

b.	A stormwater management  permit  application;

Payment of the initial applica tion fee;
	c.	Payment of the variance fee;
	d.	A description and depiction of the regulated development;
	e.	Plans, reports, calculations and any other documentation listed in the Application
		Requirements of this Ordinance which the Enforcement Officer deems necessary
in order to make a written recommendation to the oversight committee;
	f.	I dentification of each Ordinance  provision  for which  a variance  is requested;
	g.	A written statement describing the effect on adjoining properti es; and
	h.	A legal description or PIN for all parcels impacted by the regul ated development.
B.	Appea ls	
1.	Any person aggrieved by the following decisions of the Enforcement Officer shall have the right to appeal the decision to the oversight committ ee:

a.	The denial of a stormwater managem ent permit;

b.	The conditions imposed on a stormwater management permit; and

c.	The issuance of a stop work order.

2.	Any person aggrieved by a ruling of the oversight committee , including rulings related to variance petitions, may appeal that ruling to the MCSC.

3.	After exhausting the administrative reviews set forth in this Section, any aggrieved person contesting a ruling of the MCSC may appeal to the Illinois circuit courts under the Illinois Administrative Procedures Act (5ILCS100/1-1 et. seq.).

4.	All appeals to the oversight committee and the MCSC shall be made in writing, shall specify the reasons for the appea l, and shall include all information pertinent to the appeal. For appeals regarding permit denials or permit conditions, the appeal must b e submitted within 30 calendar days from the date of denial or conditiona l issuance of a stormwater man agement permit. An appeal of the issuance of a stop work order must be served within 14 calendar days from the date of posting the stop work order.

5.	The oversight committee and the MCSC shall rule in favor of or against an appeal, in
whole or in part, within 45 days after receipt of the appeal.
 
Article VII: Variances and Appeals, Section B.: Appeals, Paragraph 6. 	83


6.	Any person who has been issued a stormwater management permit, and appeals a condition of the permit, may commence construction of the subject development prior to the resolution of the appeal; however, any commencement of construction must comply with all the terms and .conditions of the stormwater management permit as issued.

7.	Any person whose stormwater management pe rmi t was denied is prohibited from commencing construction gf the subject development while the appeal is pending. Und er no circumstances shall construction commence prior to the issuance of a stormwater management permit.

8.	Any person who requests an appeal of the issuance of a stop work order must suspend construction of the subject development while the appeal is pending.
 
Article                         VIII:                         Inspections                         and                         Access 	84


Article VIII

§15.60.080      Inspections and Access

Representat ives of the MCSC and of any Federal, State and local unit of government are authorized to enter upon any land or water to inspect for development activity that is or appears to be regulated development.

Pursuant to the authority granted by 55 ILCS 5/5-1062, representatives of the MCSC may, after 10 calendar days' written notice to the owner or occupant, enter upon any lands or waters within the County for the purpose of inspecting stormwater or flood hazard area facilities, structures, or areas. The MCSC representatives may cause the removal of obstructions to an affected watercourse.

The 10 calendar day notification requirement shall not apply in an emergency situation, as determined by the Enforcement Officer, or on any lands or waters that are the subject of an active stormwater management permit or permit application.
 
Article                IX:               Violation                and                Penalty,                Section                A. 	85


Article IX

§15.60.090     Violation and Penalty

Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, n eglects, refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any provision of this Ordin ance, including but not limited to: obtaining a required storm water m anagement permit. violating a condition of an issued stormwater management perm it, or violating a stop work order shall be in violation of this Ordinan ce and subject to various available legal or equitable actions, remedies and p enalties.

A. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinan ce shall constitute a violation, and any person convicted thereof shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

B.	Any legal action resulting in a guilty verdict shall be subject to a minimum  fine totaling not
less than one hundr ed dollars ($100.00) plus court costs.

C.	Whenever the Enforcement Officer finds a violation of this Ordinance, or of any stormwater managem ent permit or stop worl.{ order, within his or her respective ju risdiction, the Enforcement Officer may pursue any one or more of the followin g legal or equ itable actions, remedies and pen alties against any person found to be in violation of this Ordinance including but not limited to:

1.	The Enforcem ent Officer may initiate a complaint and civil legal action in a court of competent juri sdiction again st any person in viol ati on of this Ordinan ce;

2.	The Enforcement Officer may revoke any stormwater management permit issued;

3.	The Enforcement Officer may require the person to apply for an "after-th e-fact'' stormwater management permit, includin g any and all supporti ng documentation required ther eto, for any  unpermitted, unauthori zed regulated development, disturbance, or impact; ·

4.	The Enforcement Officer m ay require the deve lopm ent site or impacted area to be fully restored to its condition existing prior to the violation.  If it is not feasible or practical to fully restore th e developm ent site or impacted area to the condition existing pri or to the violation, the Enforcem ent Officer may allow the development site or impacted area to be  restored  to  a  condition  that increases  flood  storage  or decreases  stormwater run off compar ed to the condition existing prior to the viola tion;

5.	The Enforcement Officer may issue a stop work order requiring the suspension of any further work on the developm ent site. Such stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the  reason  for  its  issuan ce,  and  require  complia nce  with  this  Ordinance  prior  to completion of the activity in violation;

6.	The Enforcement Officer may take other legal action including bu t not limited to a temporary restraining order and other preliminary or permanent injunctive relief necessary to prevent further harm or violation  and/or remedy any harm or violation that has already occurred, and if applicable require removal,  correction, remediation and/or m i ti gation for said harm and violation. In addition to any fine or other relief, all costs and expenses, includin g reasonable attorney's fees incurred, may be recovered;
 
Article IX: Violation and Penalty, Section C., Paragraph 7. 	86
7.	The Enforcem ent Officer may require remova l, correction,  remediation  and/or mitigation for any harm and violat ion that has occurr ed and require that the area be fully restored to its condition prior to such regulated development, disturbance or impact; and
8.	The Enforcement Officer may, after notice is sent to the owner(s) of the parcel(s) upon which the violation is located, record the complaint filed, the notice of violation or any stop work order against the property at the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds Office.
 
Article X: Procedure and Enforcement, Section A.: Respon sibility for Enforcement, Paragraph 1.   87


Article X

§15.60.100	Procedure and Enforcement

A.	Responsibility for Enforcement

1.	The MCSC shall oversee the enforcement of this Ordinance .

2.	The MCSC Chief Engineer. and th e Enforcement Officers in Certifi ed Communitie s, shall enforce this Ordinan ce. In performing their duties, th e MCSC Chief Engineer and the Enfor cement Officers in Certified Communities may delegate routine responsibiliti es to a designee.

3.	A Certified Community shall enforce the requirement s of this Ordinan ce on municip al projects that are regulated by  this  Ordinance  and  are  within  the  community's juri sdi ction.

4.	Upon the request of a Certified Community, the M CSC Chief Engineer may be the Enforcement Officer for any regulated development :

a.	Located within multiple Certified Communities; or

b.	Partially located within a C ertified Community and parti ally located within a non­
Certified Community; or

c.	Meeting the terms and conditions of a Letter of Understandin g issu ed by McHenry County.

5.	Each communi ty shall remain solely responsible for its standing in the NFIP.

B.	M ulti-County  Municipalities

1.	A multi-county municip ality may adopt and enforce one of the following ordinances of an adjacent county if the municipality has corporate authority within that county:

a.	The Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance, as amended from tim e to tim e by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago Board of Commissioners, provided that the municipality also adopts a NFIP compliant ordinance;

b.	The Kane County Stormwater Ordinan ce, as amended from time to time by the Kane County Board; or

c.	The Lake County Watersh ed Development Ordinance, as amende d from tim e to
time by the Lake County Board.

2.	A stormwater management permit shall not be required from M cH enry County for any regul a ted development within a multi- coun ty munici pa lity. in which the multi-county municipality meets all of the following criteria:

a.	Elects to adopt an adj acent county's ordinance;

b.	Has authority to adopt an adj acent county's ordinance;

c.	Retains qualified staff or consultants per the adopted ordin ance;

d.	Enters into an intergovernmental agreement with McHenry County; and

e.	Administers and enforces the adopted ordinance per th e requirem ents of the adopted ordinance.
 
Article X: Procedure and Enforcement, Section C.: Duties of the MCSC ChiefEngineer, Paragraph 1.
88

C.	Duties of the MCSC Chief Engineer The MCSC Chief Engineer shall:
1.	Supervise the enforcement of this Ordinance in Certified Communities by periodic ally reviewing the community's Ordinance enforcement records and making remedial recommendations to the community;

2.	Notify all the communities of the County, FEMA, and IDNR/OWR of any amendments to
this Ordinance; and

3.	Maintain a current list of all maps considered regulatory under this Ordinance.

D.	Duties of the Enforcement Officer

The Enforcement Offi cer shall:

1.	Attend a minimum of 4 hours of annual training for Enforcement Officers, as scheduled by the County;

2.	Ensure that all applicable consultations, waivers, approvals, and permits from Federal, State, and other local authorities are received prior to issuing a stormwater management permit;

3.	Utilize a form to document the following characteristics for each stormwater management permit issued :

a.	The proposed hydrologically disturbed area;

b.	The existing and proposed imp ervious area and the impervious area that existed at the development site prior to the effective date of this Ordinance;

c.	Whether a flood hazard area exists on the development site;

d.	Whether an IWMC exists on the development site;

e.	The development classification;

f.	The signature of the licensed professional engineer that  has reviewed and recommends approval the stormwater management permit application, if applicable;

g.	The signature of the wetland  specia list that has reviewed  and recommends
approva l of the stormwater management permit application, if applicable;

h.	The signature of the Enforce m ent Officer issuing the stormwater management
permit.

4.	Approve the BFE for a regulated development, if applicable;

5.	Ensure that a licensed professional engineer reviews or supervises the review of any plans, calculations or analyses prepared by a licensed professional engineer as part of a stormwater management permit application. The review and design engineers shall not be the same person;

6.	Ensure that a wetland specialist reviews or supervises the review of any documents prepared by a wetland specialist as part of a stormwater management permit application . The review and design wetland specialist shall not be the same person;

7.	Determine whether as-built plans and/or a perform ance guarantee are necessary to
ensure r egulated  development  is  built  and  maintained  in  accordance  with  the
 
Article X: Procedure an d Enforcement, Section D.: Duties of the Enfor cement Officer, Paragraph 7.
89

stormwater management permit. The amount of a performance bond, surety, or other such security may be up to 150 percent of the estimated cost to complete constru ction of the approved stormwater management system. The estimated cost to complete construction shall be prepared by a licen sed p rofes sional engi neer and approved by the Enforceme nt Officer;

8.	Ensure that th e required notice of a petiti on for a variance has been given and published as required by this Ordinance;

9.	Notify the MCSC Chi ef En gin eer of every scheduled variance hearing not less than 15
days, nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing;

10.	Notify a petition er for a variance that such variance may result in increased rates for
flood insuran ce, if applicable;   .

11.	Notify the MC SC Chief Engin eer of an application for a CLOMR or LOMR;

12.	Provide for inspections ofregul ated development as required by this Ordinance;

13.	Investigate complaints of violations of this Ordinance within his or her community;

14.	Notify violators within floodplains that failure to comply wi th the provisions of the NFIP could make them ineligible to receive flood insurance;

15.	Utilizes the legal or equitabl e actions, remedies and penalties necessary to enforce this
Ordinance within his or her comm unity:

16.	Advise, consult, and cooperate with other governmental  agenci es to promote  the purposes of this Ordinance;

17.	Maintain copies of all the following documents for public inspection:

a.	Storm water management pe rmit applications;

b.	Applicab le Federa l, State, and other local permits;

c.	Variances;

d.	Records  required  for  eligibility  in  the  NFIP ,  including  el evati on  certificates,
floodproofing certificates, and lowest fl oor elevations;

e.	Documentation and data on the cost of any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvem ent to a buildin g in the floodplain in order to enforce the substant ia l i mprovement requirem ents of this Ordinance;

f.	CLOMRs, LOMRs, LOMAs; and

g.	Any additional docum entation subm itted to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance;

18.	Inspect damaged buildings, regard less of th e source of the dam age, located within the
floodplain, to determine whether they have been substantially damaged;

19.	Notify the MCSC Chief Engineer, FEMA, and IDNR/OWR of any proposed amendment to
this Ordinance;

20.	Notify IDNR/OWR of any dam that does n ot have a permit from IDNR/OWR;

21.	Notify IDNR/OWR, IEMA, and the owner of the dam. if a dam is believed to be in an
unsafe condition; and
 
Article X: Procedure and Enforcement, Section D.: Duties of the Enforcement Officer, Paragraph 22.
90

22.	Notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a stormwater
management permit involving a channel modification.

E.	Representative  Capacity

In all cases when any action is taken by the MCSC Chief Engineer or the Enforcement Officer, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, such action shall be take either in the name of the County or the Certified Community, as the case may be, and neither the MCSC Chief Engineer or the Enforcement Officer nor his or her designee, in so acting shall be rendered personally liable.

F.	Community Certification

1.	Certification Criteria

Any community of McHenry County, including multi-county municipalities, that meets the following criteria may be certified by MCSC to enforce the provi sions of this Ordinance within the community's juri sdiction .

a.	The community shall be participating in the regular phase of the NFIP and shall
not be a NFIP sanctioned community;

b.	The community shall have adopted this Ordinance or an ordinance that is at least
as stringent and contains all the criteria of this Ordinance; and

c.	The community shall agree to perform the duties of the Enforcem ent Officer within the community's jurisdiction.

2.	Certification Process and Duties

a.	A petition for certification shall be submitted to the MCSC indicating how the community meets the Certification Criteria of this Ordinance. A copy of the community's adopted ordinance shall be included with the petition.

b.	Within 90 days ofreceiptofthe petition and in conjunction with the next regularly scheduled MCSC meeting, the MCSC ChiefEngineer shall make a recommendation to the MCSC, based on his or her review of the petition recommendation shall be presented.

c.	Within 60 days of the MCSC Chief Engineer's recommendation, the MCSC may approve the petition as submitted, may approve the petition with conditions, or may  deny the petition. A notice of the MCSC action shall be submitted to the petitioning community.

d.	Certified Communities shall notify the MCSC Chief Enginee.r within 2 weeks of any
change in:

(1)	The community's Enforcement Officer; or

(2)	The licen sed professional engineer(s) or wetland specialist(s) responsible for review of stormwater management permit applications for the Certified Community.

e.	Certified Communities shall submit an annual report summarizing the community's stormwa ter management permit activity. At a minimum, the annual report shall include:

(1)	The name and contact information for the Enforcement Officer;
 
Article X: Proced ure and Enforcement, Section F.: Community Certification, Paragraph 2. 	91


(2)	The name and contact information for the li censed professional engineer respon sible for reviewing or supervising the review of any plans, calculation s or analyses prepared by a licensed professional engineer as part of a stormwater manag ement permit application;

(3)	The name and contact information for the wetland specialist responsible for reviewing or supervising the review of any documents prepared by a wetland specialist as part of a stormwater man agement permit application;

(4)	Docum entation  of  the  following  characteristics  of  each  stormwater
management permit issu ed:

i.	The proposed  hydrologic ally disturb ed area;

ii.	The existing and propo sed imperviou s area and the imp ervious area that existed at the development site prior to the effective date of this Ordinance;

iii.	Wh ether a flood hazard area exists on the development site;

iv.	Whether an IWMC exists on the developm ent site;

v.	The development classification;

vi.	The signature of the licensed profession al engineer that has reviewed and recommends approval the stormwater m anagem ent permit application, if applicabl e;

vii.	The signature of the wetland specialist that has reviewed and recommends approval of the stormwater management permit application. if applicable;

viii.	Th e signature of the Enforcement Officer issuing the stormwater management permit;

(5)	A  list  of  any  stormwater  management  permits  issued  for  regulated
developm ent that was designed and reviewed by the same firm;

(6)	A summary of any variance s granted to the provisions of this Ordinance; and

(7)	A list of any pending violations to the provi sions of this Ordinance.

f.	Certified Communities shall petition for recertific ation every 5 years.

3.	Committee Revi ew of Performance

a.	Within the 5 year certification period, the MCSC or the MCSC Chief Engineer may periodically review the community's ordinance enforcement records and make remedial recommendations to the community, if necessary. Review findings will be used in the assessment of petitions for recertification from Certified Communities.

b.	The MCSC may rescind a community's certification for the following reasons:

(1)	The community is no longer a participant in the NFIP;

(2)	The community adopts an ordinance or amends its ordinance so that its ordinance is less restrictive than this Ordinance; or         '
 
Article X: Procedure and Enforcement, Section F.: Community Certification, Paragraph 3. 	92


(3)	The community fails to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance or issues a
permit not meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.

c.	The MCSC Chief Engineer may immediately rescind a community's certification for the above reasons until the MCSC can discuss the reasons at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
 
Article                      XI:                      Disclaim                      er                      of                      Liability 	93


Article XI

§15.60.110     Disclaimer of Liability

It is recognized that the degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engi neering considerations; however, on occasion, greater floods than the base flood will occur and will result in greater flood heights and flood damage. Furthermore, flood heights may be increased by other man-made or natural causes. These provisions do not imply that land outside fl ood haza rd area s or that uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood dam age. These provisions shall not create liability on the part of the MCSC nor any Certified Community nor any officer or employee ther eof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrativ e decision lawfully made there under.
 
Article XII: Severability 	94


Article XII

§15.60.120	Severability

A.	The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable in accordance with the following rules:

1.	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision  of this Ordinance; and

2.	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular parcel of land, a particular structure, or a particular development, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any other parcel ofland, structure, or development.

B.	All such unaffected provisions of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
 
Article                 XIII:                 Abrogation                  and                  Greater                  Restrictions 	95


Article XIII

§15.60.130     Abrogation and Greater Restrictions

This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this Ordinance and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whicheve r imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This Ordinance shall repeal the original ordinance or resolutio n which was adopted to meet the community's NFIP regulations, but shall not repeal the resolution which the community passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the NFIP.






















































Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Article                                                             XIV                                                            :Amendments 	96


Article XIV

§15.60.140    Amendments

No amendment to this Ordinance may be adopted without a public hearing first being held before the MCSC upon notice published. Notice of the hearing shall be published once in a newspaper having a general circulation within the community. The publication shall not be less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days, prior to the hearing. FEMA and IDNR/OWR shall also be notified prior to adoption of any amendment. Amendments to this Ordinance shall become effective when adopted by the McHenry County Board .

From tim e to time the lists in Appendix 11of this Ordinance need to be updated to reflect a new or revised FIRM or FIS. Routine revisions to update these lists are required by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. Public notice and review of a new or revised FIRM or FIS is required by FEMA and IDNR/OWR prior to final adoption. The public notice and review process applies to both the impacted community and individual property owners. For this reason, the lists in Appendix 11 may be updated by MCSC without additional public noti ce over and above that accomplished by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.














































Refer to App endix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a fist of acronyms. Refer to App endix 1for p ermitting flow charts.
 
Appendix 1: Permitting Fl owcharts 	97


Appendix 1

§15.60.150	Permitting Flowcharts

Regulated  Development Flowchart





























































Ref er to App endix 12for the definition  of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acrony ms. Ref er to App endix 1for p ermitting flow charts.
 
Appendix 1: Permitting Flowcharts 	98
Development Classification Flowchart (Page 1of 2)
































































Refer to App endix 12f or the definition  of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flow charts.
 
Appendix 1: Permitting Flowcharts 	99
Development Classification Flowchart (Page 2 of 2)

































































Refer to Appendix 12for  the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 1: Permitting Flowcharts


Runoff Control Submittal Flowchart (Page 1of 2)
 
100
 

Appendix 1:Permitting Flowcharts


Runoff Control Submittal Flowchart (Page 2of2)
 
101
 
Appendix 1: Permitting Flowcharts


Flood Hazard Area Submittal Flowchart (Page 1of 3)
































































Ref er to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for p ermitting flowchart s.
 
102
 

Appendix 1: Permitting Flowcharts


Flood Hazard Area Submittal Flowchart (Page 2 of 3)

































































Refer to Appendix 12for  the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
103
 
Appendix 1: Permitting Flowcharts


Flood Hazard Area Submittal Flowchart (Page 3 of 3)
































































Ref er to App endix 12for the definition of und erlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to App endix 1for permitting flow charts.
 
104
 

Appendix 1: Permitting Flowcharts


Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal Flowchart

































































Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
105
 
Appendix 2: Standard Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Notes 	106


Appendix 2

§15.60.160	Standard Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Notes

1.	Control measures shall meet the minimum standards and specifications  of the Illinois Urban Manual (www.aiswcd.org/ IU M) unless stated otherwise.

2.	Soil disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize erosion. Areas of th e development site that are not to be disturbed shall be protected from construction traffic or other disturbance until final stabilization is achieved .

' 3.	Soil stabilization m easures shall consider the time of year, development site conditions
and the use of temporary or permanent measures .

4.	Stabilization by seeding shall include topsoil placement and fertilization, as necessary .

5.	Native seed mixtures shall include rapid -growing annual grasses or small grains to provide initial, temporary soil stabilization.

6.	Offsite  property  shall  be  protected  from  erosion  and  sedimentation.	Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at concentrated discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel. as necessary to prevent erosion.

7.	Sediment control measures shall be installed prior to the disturbance of tributary areas.

8.	Stabilization of disturbed areas shall be initiated immediate ly wh en ever any clearing, grading, excavating or other earth disturbing activities have permanently ceased on any portion of the development site, or temporarily ceased on any portion of th e development site and will  not resum e for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. Stabilization of disturbed areas shall be initiated within 1working day of perm anent or temporary cessation of earth disturbing activities and shall be completed as soon as possible, but not later than 14 calendar days from the initiation of stabilization work in an area . Exception s to these time frames are specified below:

a.	Wher e  the  initiation  of  stabilization  measures  is  preclud ed  by  snow  cover, stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicab le; and

b.	In areas where construction activity has temporarily ceased and will resum e after
14 days, a temporary stabilization method may be used.

9.	Disturbance of steep slopes shall be minimized. Area s or embankments having slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be stabilized with staked in place sod, erosion control blanket in combination with seeding, or an equivalent control measure.

10.	Perim eter control measures shall be provided downslope and perpendicular to the flow of runoff from disturbed areas, where the tributary area is greater than 5,000 square feet, and where runoff will flow in a sheet flow mann er. Perimeter erosion control shall also be provid ed at the ba se of soil stockpiles.

11.	The   stormwater   management   system   shall   b e  protected	from erosion and sedimentation downslope from disturbed areas. Inlet protection that reduces sediment loading, while allowing runoff to enter the inlet shall be required for all storm sewers. Check dams, or an equivalent control measure, shall be required for all channels. Filter fabric inlet protection and straw bale ditch checks are not acceptable control measures.

12.	If dewatering service s are used, discharges  shall be routed  through  an effective
sediment control m easure (e.g., sediment trap or an equivalent control measure).  The



Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or toApp endix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 2: Standard Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Notes 	107


Enforcement  Officer shall be notified  prior to the commencement  of dewatering
activities.

13.	All temporary soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be remove d within 30 days after final stabilization of th e developm ent site is achieved or after the temp orary measures are n o longer necessary. Trapped sediment shall be removed and disturbed areas shall be permanently  stabilized.

14.	Stockpiled soil and materi als shall be remov ed from flood hazard areas at the en d of each work day. Soil and materials stockpiled in IWM C or buffer areas shall be placed on timber mats, or an equivalent control measure.

15.	Effective control measures shall be utilized to minimize the discharge of pollutants from the development site. At a minimum, control measures shall be implemented in order to:

a.	Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel
wash water, and other wash water; and

b.	Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construct ion wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, vehicle fluids, sanitary was te, and other materi als presen t on the development site to precipitation and to stormwater.

16.	Adequate receptacles shall be provided for the depositing of all construction material debri s generated during the development process.  The applicant shall not cause or permit   the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of construction material debris upon or into any developm ent site, channel. or IWMC. The development site shall be maintained free of construction material debris.

17.	The Enfo rcement Officer may require additional or alternate soil erosion and sediment control mea sures, based on development site specific considerations and the effectiveness of the installed control measu res.




























Ref er to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 3: Standard Drain Tile Notes 	108


Appendix 3

§15.60.170	Standard Drain Tile Notes

1.	Drain tiles disturbed during regulated development shall be reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance, unless the development plans specify abandonment of the drain tiles.

2.	All abandoned drain tiles within disturbed areas shall be removed in their entirety.

3.	Drain tiles within the disturbed area of a development site shall be replaced, bypassed around the development site or intercepted and connected to the stormwater management system for the development site. The size of the replaced or bypassed drain tile shall be equivalent to the existing drain tile.



















































Refer to App endix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 4: Rainfa ll Depth-Duration Frequency Tables for McH enry County


App endix4

§15.60.180	Rainfall Depth -Duration Frequency Tables for M cHenry County


Bulletin 70 Rainfall Depths (ISWS, 1989)
 


109
 



Duration		
Frequency
	1-year	2-year	5-year	10-year	25-year	50-year	100-year
5 min	0.30	0.36	0.46	0.54	0.66	0.78	0.91
10 min	0.55	0.67	0.84	0.98	1.21	1.42	1.67
15 min	0.68	0.82	1.03	1.21	1.49	1.75	2.05
30 min	0.93	1.12	1.41	1.65	2.04	2.39	2.80
1hour	1.18	1.43	1.79	2.10	2.59	3.04	3.56
2 hour	1.48	1.79	2.24	2.64	3.25	3.82	4.47
3 hour	1.60	1.94	2.43	2.86	3.53	4.14	4.85
6 hour	1.88	2.28	2.85	3.35	4 .13	4.85	5.68
12 hour	2.18	2.64	3.31	3.89	4.79	5.62	6.59
18 hour	2.30	2.79	3.50	4.11	5.06	5.95	6.97
24 hour	2.51	3.04	3.80	4.47	5.51	6.46	7.58
48 hour	2.70	3.30	4.09	4.81	5.88	6.84	8.16
72 hour	2.93	3.55	4.44	5.18	6.32	7.41	8.78
120 hour	3.25	3.93	4.91	5.70	6.93	8.04	9.96
240 hour	4.12	4.95	6.04	6.89	8.18	9.38	11.14



























Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Append ix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 4: Rainfall Depth-Duration Frequency Tables for McHenry County
 


110
 

Huff Quartiles for Time Distribution of Heavy Rainfall
 

Duration	6 hours

6 hours < Duration	12 hours

12 hours < Duration	24 hours Duration > 24 hours
 

1st Quartile 2nd Quartile 3rd Quartile 4th Quartile
 

Cumulative
Percent of	Drainage Area under 10	Drainage Area 10 to 50	Drainage Area 50 to 400
Storm	Square Miles	Square Miles	Square Miles

	1st	2nd	3rd	4th	1st	2nd	3rd	4th	1st	2nd	3rd	4th
05	16	03	03	02	12	03	02	02	08	02	02	02
10	33	08	06	05	25	06	05	04	17	04	04	03
15	43	12	09	08	38	10	08	07	34	08	07	05
20	52	16	12	10	51	14	12	09	50	12	10	07
25	60	22	15	·13	62	21	14	11	63	21	12	09
30	66	29	19	16	69	30	17	13	71	31	14	10
35	71	39	23	19	74	40	20	15	76	42	16	12
40	75	51	27	22	78	52	23	18	80	53	19	·14
45	79	62	32	25	81	63	27	21	83	64	22	16
50	82	70	38	28	84	72	33	24	86	73	29	19
55	84	76	45	32	86	78	42	27	88	80	39	21
60	86	81	57	35	88	83	55	30	90	86	54	25
65	88	85	70	39	90	87	69	34	82	89	68	29
70	90	88	79	45	92	90	79	40	93	92	79	35
75	92	91	85	51	94	92	86	47	95	94	87	43
80	94	93	89	59	95	94	91	57	96	96	92	54
85	96	95	92	72	96	96	94	74	97	97	95	75
90	97	97	95	84	97	97	96	88	98	98	97	92
95	98	98	97	92	98	98	98	95	99	99	99	97
















Refer to App endix 12for the d efinition  of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of a cronyms.
 
Appendix 5: Hydrologic and Hydraulic Models and Techniques Approved by M CSC 	111
Appendix 5
§15.60.190	Hydrologic and Hydraulic Models and Techniques Approved by MCSC












































10.	Only allowed where all habitable buildings are above the BFE.


1.	The hydrologi c model s or techniqu es approved by MCSC incl ude, but are not limited to:

a.	HEC-HM S, TR-20, HEC-1, TR-55, and th e Ration al Method for trib utary areas less
than 20 acres;

b.	HEC-HM S, TR-20 , HEC-1, TR-55, USGS Regression Equations , and StreamStats for
tributary areas less than 100 acres but greater than or equal to 20 acres; or

c.	HEC-HM S, TR-20, HEC-1,  U SGS Regression Equa ti ons, and StreamStats for trib utary ar eas of 100 acres or more.
 
Appendix 5: Hydrologic and Hydraulic Models and Techniques Approved by MCSC 	112


2.	The Rational Method may be used to determine the peak stormwater runoff rate, but neither the Rational Method nor the Modified Rational Method shall be used to determine the required stormwater storage volume.

3.	The Rainfall  Depth Duration  Frequency  Tables in Appendix  4 shall be used  for all
hydrologic models.

4.	Peak stormwater runoff rates determined using hydrograph producing models shall be based on the critical duration storm event using the appropriate Huff Rainfall Distributions in Appendix 4.

S.	Peak stormwater runoff rates determined using TR-55 shall be based on the 24 hour
NRCS (SCS) Type II distribution .

6.	BFE determinations  using USGS Regression  Equations and StreamStats shall only be
all owed where all habitable buildings are above the BFE.
 
Appendix 6: Detention Volume vs. Percent Impervious Chart for M cH enry County 	113


Appendix 6

§15.60.200	Detention Volume vs. Percent Impervious Chart for McHenry County



Unit Ar ea Detention Volum e (NIPC, 1991)

DETENTION VOLUME VS PERCENT IMPERVIOUS
2-YEAR AND 100-YEAR UNIT AREA DETENTION
 










.......
 
0.6


0.5


0.4 -
 
E-1	0.3
I

 
0.2

0.1 c


0 >
0
 








10	20
 




..... . '



30	40	50
 








60	70
 








80	90	100
 
PERCENT IMPERVIOUS
2-year release =  0.04 cfs/acre, 100-year release =  0.15 cfs/acre

2-YEAR	-S- 100-YEAR
 
 
Appendix 7 : IDNR/OWR Dam Safety Permit Flowchart 	114
Appendix 7
§15.60.220	IDNR/ OWR Dam Safety Permit Flowchart
 
J!I
Ji	DC:>	i
 
!.....
 
..	!
 
Zl
II.	[	"
 
...		.. 	
 
;;
s Ii  :>
 
:2	111	J	1
..	!,g	f
-	! l I
io }
i
s.\2
>-	i
l.	c	J
 
C.l.) s
c
 
'!
I
 
e..n..
 
i I j
 
w	z	ji	-	.!!
N-	i	w	iif i	f
 
"'	1	w-
 
iHit I
 
z
..J
 
.,!!:.	a:
 
;i	...	::::>	'-g .?;g- I	u
::!	...	w	! !j
 
"-'
 
a:	C    noo   ...
I::
l	:aE:
 
"'	al	--	l	A.	ii
 
>-	J
 
1;
i j !
·gI
 
i	0
 
:::>	i
w
a:
 
i ..
 
I	Ii1!
I1!	]]I
II.	1; l t
.   J1i"h'z.Ji.,'1J..
 
--	a:i
 
J i .2
 
II.
11	15...   0 I!?
0:	f9 Ji1i
.COU'OC>
 
Appendix         8:         Public         Bodies         of         Water         in         McHenry          County 	115


Appendix 8

§15.60.230     Public Bodies of Water in McHenry County

The following public bodie s of water were navigable in their natural condition or we re improved for navigation and open ed to public use. The entire length and surface area in Illinois, including all backwater lakes and sloughs open to the main ch annel or body of water at normal flows or stages, which are open to th e public.

1.	Fox River (Illinois River Basin)

2.	Fox Chain-O-Lakes (Lake and McHenry Counties) : Bluff  Lake, Lake Catherine, Channel Lake, Fox Lake, Grass Lake, Lake Marie, Nippers ink Lake, Dunns Lake, Pistakee Lake, Lake Jerilyn, Lac Louette, Redhead  Lake;

3.	Griswold Lake including the connecting channel to the Fox River.

The following public bodies of water are navigable waters that were dedicated to public use. This list is incomplete. It is believed there are numerous chann els and slips in subd ivisions on the margins of publi c bodies of water which have been dedicated by plat. Additional channel s and slips have been dedicated by common Jaw.

1.	No list for McHenry County.

NOTE: The above lists are provided by IDNR/OWR. An IDNR/OWR permit is required for regulated
development within the listed waterways and adjacent wetlands.






































Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 9: M cHenry County Watersheds


Appendix 9

§15.60.240	McHenry County Watersheds




McHenry County, Illinois Watersheds
 
116
 





 
Piscasaw Creek Watershed
 


Nippersink l reek
I
 
--- ·----- Watersjed








\	I



K shwaukee River Watershed





 

I
Coon «:rreek
Waterf.he
 



Lower Fox River
t1  ,, ' '
""	Watershed
 

 






Kiihwaukee
 

c:::J McHenry County Watersheds Crystal    Lake  Watershed

Fox-Kishwaukee Watersheds Divide


-=--====---6	Q·
 
TOWNSHIPS
 






......,.
 






Refer to App endix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to App endix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 10: McHenry County Watershed Plans


Appendix 10

§15.60.250	McHenry County Watershed Plans

Boone-Dutch Creek Watershed-Based Plan

Crystal Lake Watershed Design Manual and Implementation Plan Lawrence Creek Watershed Plan
Nippersink Watershed  Plan

Preserving the Kishwaukee Watershed  (Greater Marengo-Union Area Watershed Plan)

Silver Creek and Sleepy Hollow Creek Watershed Action Plan Upper Kishwaukee River Watershed Plan
Watershed Protection and Restoration Strategy for Boone Creek Woods Creek Watershed Plan













































Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlin ed terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
117
 
Appendix 11: Floodpl ain and Floodway Maps 	118
Appendix 11
§15.60.260	Floodplain and Floodway Maps

		DATE OF CURRENT	MCHENRY COUNTY	MCHENRY COUNTY
	COMMUNITY	EFFECTIVE MAP	FIRM	FIS
COMMUNITY   NAME ALGONQUIN, VILLAGE OF	NUMBER 170474	(QB. MAf l llEXJ
NOV. 16, 2006	PANEL NUMBER
17111C	0320)	EEEECTJVE DATE
NOV. 16, 2006

	NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	0334)	NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0335)	
NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0336)	
NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03371	
NOV. 16,2006
	
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0340)	
NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0341)	
NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03421	
NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0343)	
NOV.16, 2006

BARRINGTON HILLS, VILLAGE OF	
170058	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0342)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0353)	
NOV.16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03541	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0356)	
NOV. 16,2006

BULLVALLEY,VILLAGEOFI,	
170977	
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
0183)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
0200)	
NOV.16, 2006
		
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
0205)	
NOV.16, 2006
		
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
0215)	
NOV.16, 2006

CA RY, VILLAGE OF	
170475	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0334)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0335)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03511	
NOV.16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03521	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03531	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0354)	
NOV. 16, 2006

CRYSTA L LAKE, CITY OF	
170476	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02001	
NOV.16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02151	
NOV.16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0220)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0310)	
NOV. 16, 2006




Ref er to App endix 12for the definition .of underlined terms or to Appe ndix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to App endix 1for permitt ing flow charts.	,
 
Appendix 11: Floodplain and Floodway Maps 	119



COMMUNITY	DATE OF CURRENT EFFECTIVE MAP	MCHENRY COUNT Y FIRM	MCHENRY COUNTY FIS
CQMMI.!NIIY l'MMll	NI.!MBER	(OR MAr INDEX)	rANllL Nl.!MBllR	 	EFFECil ll [!ATll 	
		NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	0326)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0327)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0328)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0329)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0334)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0335)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0336)	
NOV. 16, 2006

FOX LAKE, VILLAGE OF	
170362	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0112)	
NOV. 16, 2006

FOX RIVER GROVE, VILLAGE OF	
170477	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	0353)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0354)	NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0365)	
NOV. 16,2006

GREENWOOD, VILLAGE OF	
171057	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0074)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	0086)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0088)	
NOV. 16, 2006

HARVARD, CITY OF	
170479	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0017)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0025)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0036)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0050)	
NOV. 16, 2006

HEBRON, VILLAGE  OF	
170086	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0075)	
NOV. 16, 2006

HOLIDAY HILLS, VILLAGE OF	
170936	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	0236)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	0237)	NOV. 16, 2006

HUNTLEY, VILLAGE OF	
170480	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0304)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	0308)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0309)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0312)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0314)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0315)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0316)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0318)	
NOV. 16, 2006




Refer to Appendix 12for the def inition of underlined terms or to Appe ndix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for permitt ing flowcharts.
 
Appendix 11: Floodplain and Floodway Maps 	120


		DATE OF CURRENT	MCHENRY COUNTY	MCHENRY COUNTY
	COMMUN TY	EFFECT  VE MAP	F RM	F S
CQMMUNi n'. NAME	NUMBER	(OR MAP INQElO	PANEL NUMBER	EFFECTIVE QArn
		NOV. 16, 2006	17111C    0320)	NOV. 16, 2006

ISLAND LAKE, VILLAGE OF	170370	NOV.16, 2006	17111C	0236)	NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0237)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0238)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0239)	
NOV. 16,2006

JOHNSBURG,VILLAGE OF	
170486	
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0093)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0094)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0111)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01121	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01131	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0114)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0206)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0207)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0226)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0230)	
NOV. 16, 2006

LAKE IN THE HILLS, VILLAG E OF	
170481	
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
03081	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0309)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0316)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0320)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0328)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0329)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03341	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0335)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03361	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
0337)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0341)	
NOV. 16, 2006

LAKEMOOR, VILLAGE OF	
1709 15	
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
02261	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
02301	
NOV. 16, 2006

LAKEWOOD, VILLAGE OF	
170805	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0309)	
NOV. 16,2006




Refer to App endix 12for the d efinition of und erlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to App endix 1for p ermitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix  11: Fl oodplain and Floodway  Maps 	121


		DATE OF CURRENT	MCHENRY COUNTY	MCHENRY COUNTY
	COMMUNITY	EFFECTIV E MAP	FIRM	FIS
COMM!.!l':llTY l':IAMll	1':1!.!MBER	(QR MAe ll':lllllX)	eAl':lf;L l':llJMBllR	 	! WEllCIIYE DAiil 	
		NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	03101	NOV. 16, 2006

	NOV. 16,2006	17111C	03261	NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03281	
NOV. 16, 2006

MARENGO,CITY OF	
170482	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01631	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01641	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02751	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02761	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02771	
NOV. 16, 2006

MCCULLOM LAKE, VILLAGE OF	
170829	
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
00931	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
02061	NOV. 16, 2006

MCHENRY COUNTY (UNINC.)	170732	PANEL NUMBERS LISTED AT THE END OF THE TABLE

MCHENRY, CITY OF	
170483	
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
02051	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02061	NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02071	
NOV.16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02081	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02091	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02171	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02201	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02261	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02301	
NOV. 16, 2006

OAKWOOD HILLS, VILLAGE OF	
170831	
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0220)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02381	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0335)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0351)	
NOV. 16, 2006

PORT BARRINGTON,VILLAGE OF	
170478	
NOV.16,2006	
17111C	
0239)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0352)	NOV. 16, 2006

PRAIRIE GROVE, VILLAGE OF	
170975	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0217)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
02201	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
02361	
NOV. 16, 2006




Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 11: Floodplain and Floodway Maps 	122
DATE OF CURRENT	MCHENRY COUNTY	MCHENRY COUNTY COMMUNITY	EFFECTIVE MAP		FIRM		FIS
 
 	COMM!.!Nln'. NAM!l 	
 
NUMBER
 
(QR MAf ll':UlllX)	fANllL N!.!M!!ER	llEEECTIVE I!AU: NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	0238)	NOV. 16, 2006
 

RICHMOND, VILLAGE OF	170484	NOV. 16,2006	17111C	0079)	NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0080)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0081)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0083)	
NOV. 16, 2006

RINGWOOD, VILLAGE OF	
170060	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0087)	
NOV.16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0089)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0091)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0093)	
NOV.16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0094)	
NOV. 16, 2006

SPRING GROVE, VILLAGE OF	
170485	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0082)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0084)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0091)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0092)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0103)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0111)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0112)	
NOV. 16, 2006

TROUT VALLEY, VILLAGE OF	
170062	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0334)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0353)	
NOV. 16, 2006

UNION, V ILLAGE OF	
170487	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0281)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0300)	
NOV. 16,2006

WONDER LAKE, VILLAGE OF	
170976	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0074)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV.16,2006	
17111C	
0086)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0087)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0088)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0089J	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0200)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0205)	
NOV. 16, 2006

WOODSTOCK, CITY OF	
170488	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0176)	
NOV. 16, 2006




Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of und erlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Ref er to App endix 1for p ermitting flow charts.
 
Appendix 11: Floodplain and Floodway Maps 	123


		DATE OF CURRENT	MCHENRY COUNTY	MCHENRY COUNTY
	COMMUNITY	EFFECTIVE MAP	FIRM	FIS
 QMM!Jt'.:llTY t'.:IAMll	NUMBER	(QR MA Jt'.:IQEX)	PA!".:IEL t'.:l!JMBER	llEEECil:[E QAI!l
		NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	0177)	NOV. 16, 2006

	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16,2006	17111C

17111C	0178)

0179}	NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0181)	
NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0183)	
NOV. 16, 2006
	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0200)	
NOV. 16, 2006

MCHENRY COUNTY (UNINC.)	
170732	
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
00 17)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C

17111C	
0025)

0036}	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0050)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0064)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0065)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0070)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0073)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0074)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0075)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C

17111C

17111C

17111C

17111C	
0079)

0080}

0081)

0082]

0083)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0084)	
NOV. 16,2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0086)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0087)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0088)	
NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C

17111C

17111C	
0089)

0091]

0092)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006
		
NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0093)	
NOV. 16,2006




Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to App endix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 11: Floodplain and Floodway M aps 	124
DATE  OF CURRENT	MCHENRY COUNTY	MCHENRY COU NTY COMMUNITY	EFFECTIVE  MAP		FIRM		FIS
 
 	CQMMUtmx NAME 	
 
NUMBER
 
(QR MAP IND EX)	fANEI. Nl.!M BER	EEFECIIVE    !!ATE
 
MCHENRY COUNTY (UNINC.)	170732	NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	00941	NOV. 16, 2006

NOV.16, 2006	17111C	0103)	NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0111)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01121	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0113)	
NOV.16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0114)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0150)	
NOV.16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0163)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0164)	
NOV.16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0175)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0176)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01771	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01781	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0179)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
01811	
N OV. 16, 2006

N OV. 16, 2006	
17111C.	
0183)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0200)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0205)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0206i	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0207)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02081	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0209)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0215)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02171	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02201	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0226)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02301	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0236)	
NOV . 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0237)	
NOV. 16, 2006




Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 11: Floodplain and Floodway Maps 	125


		
DATE OF CURRENT	MCHENRY  COUNTY	MCHENRY COUNTY
	COMMUNITY	EFFECTIVE MAP	FIRM	F S
CQMMUl'llln'. NAME	NUMBER	(QB MAe I NDEX)	PANEL Nl.!Ml!Ell	llEEECTl QATE
MCHENRY COUNTY (UNINC.)	170732	NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	0238)	NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	02391	NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0275)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02761	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
02771	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0281)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03001	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03031	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03041	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0305)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0308]	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03091	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0310)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0312)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0314)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV.16, 2006	
17111C	
03151	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03161	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03101	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03201	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03261	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03271	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03201	
NOV.16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03291	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03341	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03351	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0336)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03371	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
03401	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0341)	
NOV. 16, 2006




Refer to Appendix 12 for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Append ix 11: Floodplain and Floodway Maps 	126


		DATE OF CURRENT	MCHENRY COUNTY	MCHENRY COUNTY
	COMMUNITY	EFFECTIVE MAP	FIRM	FIS
CQMMI.!NIIY   NAM!l MCHENRY COUNTY (UNINc.)	NUMBER 170732	(OR MAe INUEX) NOV. 16,2006	fANEL NUMBER 17111C   0342)	llFFECTlllll OAIE NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	17111C	0343)	NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16,2006	
17111C	
0351)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0352)	
NOV. 16,2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0353)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0354)	
NOV. 16, 2006

NOV. 16, 2006	
17111C	
0365)	
NOV. 16, 2006

















































Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of und erlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	127


Appendix 12

§15.60.270	Definitions

The following definitions shall be used with this Ordinance.

accessory building: A non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.

actual start of construction: Either the first placem ent of permanent constructi on of a building on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excava tion; or placem ent of a manufactured home on a foundation.

Advanced Id en tification Wetl and Study (ADID): A study conducted in McHenry County by the USACE and the USEPA in 1997 to generate wetland maps.

agricultur al building: An accessory building that is used solely for agricultura l purposes in which the use is exclusively in connection with the produ ction, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock.

applicant: Any person, firm, or governmen tal agency who owns property or its duly appoi nted representative and proposes to develop that property and executes the necessary forms to procure a permit to obtain authorization for such regulated development from the Enforcement Officer.

appropriate use: The only regulated development within the designated floodway that is permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The appropriate uses are determined by IDNR/OWR.

armoring: The placement of materials (concrete, rip-rap, retaining wall, etc.) within a channel or along a shoreline to protect property along streams, lakes or pond s from damage caused by wave action and flowing water.

as-built plans: Record drawings prepared by a licensed land surveyor or licensed profess ional engineer to confirm that a regulated developm ent was constructed in substantial conformance with the approved plans.

base flood :The flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
The base flood is also known as the 100 year flood event.

base flood elevation (BFE): The water surface elevation that can be expected during the base flood.
Determination of the BFE at any location is as described in the Flood Hazard Areas section of this
Ordinance.

basement: Any area of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides.

best management practice (BMP) : Land planning and engineered practices designed to reduce soil
erosion, sediment deposition , and water quality impacts of development.

boardwalk: A walkway constructed of wooden, composite, metallic, or other decking material, primarily serving pedestrian and bicycle traffic.




Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	128


buffer: An area of predominantly vegetated land located adjacent to WOTUS and IWMC for the purpose of, but not'limited to, reducing contaminants in stormwater that flows to su ch areas.

building: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by two or more rigid walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term al o includes recreational vehicles or travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.

Certified Community: A community which has petitioned the MCSC and has been found by the MCSC to be capable of enforcing an ordinance (or ordinances) which contain rules and regulations which are consistent with or at least as stringent as the regulations of this Ordinance.

Certified Erosion.  Sediment and Storm Water Inspector (CESSWI): A certification by EnviroCert Internation al, Inc., which can be earned by demonstrating certain qualifications based on a combination of edu cation and experience, and passing an exam.

Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC): A certification by EnviroCert International, Inc., which can be earned by demonstrating certain qualifications based on a combination of education and experience, and passing an exam.

channel: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, flow path, slough, ditch, gully, ravine, swale, wash, or drainageway with a discernible bed and banks, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.

channel modification: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation of the channel. Channel modification does not include dredging or the clearing of invasive, dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel.

Class V injection wells: Any bored, drilled, or driven shaft, or dug hole that is deeper than its widest surface dimension, or an improved sinkhole, or a sub-surface fluid distribution system. This includes most direct infiltration structures such as drywells and column drains. Class V injection wells are regulated by th e !EPA an d the owner of any proposed injection well is required to submit an inventory information form prior to the infiltration structure becoming operational.

column drain: Any device, including drywells, which facilitates direct infiltration of stormwater runoff below the soil layer (typically greater than five feet).

commun ity: Any municipality (as defined at Ill. Rev. Stat., 1989,Ch. 24, 1-1-2 {1}) or McHenry County when providing services or applying its regulatory authority to the unincorporated portions of the County.

compensatory storage: An excavated volume of storage used to offset the loss of existing flood
storage volume when:

A.	Fill, materials or structures are placed within a flood hazard area; or

B.	A depressional storage area is drained.




Ref er to App endix 12for the d efinition  of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to App endix 1for permitting flow charts.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	129


Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA will revise the BFEs, flood insurance rate zones, flood bound aries or floodway as shown on an effective FIRM, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved .

contiguous property: The lot or parcel of land on which a development is proposed, together with the adjacent lots or parcels of land that were owned in whole, or in part, by the same property owner on the effective date of this Ordinance.

control structure: A structur e designed to control the rate of flow that passes through it, based on a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation.

cosmetic repair: Cleaning, sanitizing, resurfacing (e.g., sanding, repair of joints, re-painting) and similar repairs.

cri tical duration: The duration of a storm event that results in the greatest peak runoff rate or the greatest peak storage volume required. A critical duration analysis shall compare the peak runoff rates or the peak storage volumes from varying storm durations between the 1hour and 240 hour events.

dam: All obstructions, wall embankm ents or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.

deed or plat restriction: Permanent easements, covenants, deed restricted open spaces, outlots, reserved plat areas, and conservation easements dedicated to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, or public road rights-of-way that contain any part of the stormwater management system of a development.

depressional storage area: A non-riverine depression where stormwater collects; only regulated when total storage of an individual depressional storage area exceeds 0.75 acre-feet. Any area within a closed contour and drained by a sewer or culvert with a full-flow capacity greater than
0.10 cubic feet per second per acre (cfs/a c) capacity shall not be considered a depressional storage area.

design storm: A selected storm event, described in terms of the statistical probability of occurring once within a given number of years, for which stormwater or flood control improvements are designed and built.

designated floodway:  The channel, including  on-stream  lakes. and that portion  of the  floodplain adj acent to a stream or watercourse, as depicted on the FEMA FIR M, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100 year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10 percent increase in velocities. The need to preserve storage when determining the designated  floodway will  be waived if all the municipalities and  counties along a hydraulically significant portion of the watershed require hydrauli cally equivalent compensatory storage for all lost floodplain  storage volume.

FIGURE4

Understanding the Floodway

Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	130


(IDNR Floodplain Management in llhnois Quick Guide, 2001)
1
---------- Floodway--- 1----
Flood	Flood
Fringe	Fringe

 


Simuloled
Encroochmenl
 
Stream Channel
 







 
Area of Hoodploin !hot could be
used  for development by raisi ng ground
 

Flood elevation before encroachment
 

line  @-@ -Flood Elevation Before Encroochmen t
line @-@ -Flood Elevation After Encroachment
"Surcharge not to exceed 0.1 foot [Illinois requi rement]	c:JSimulated     Encroachment


detention  facility  (detention  pond /detentio n basin) : A man-mad e structure for the temporary
storage of water with a controlled release rate.

development: Any man-made change to real estate by private property owners or public agen cies including, but not limited to :

A.	Construction, reconstruction, repa ir or remod eling. m aintenance or placement of a building or any addition to a bu ilding, including "ag exempt" buildin gs;

B.	Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured hom e, or installing a recreational vehicle or travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days (if the recreational vehicle or travel trailer is on the site for l ess than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use);

C.	Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects;

D.	Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;

E.	Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts;

F.	Channel modification;

G.	Filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or oth er alterations of the ground surface;

H.	Storage of materials;

I.	Exten sive remova l of vegetation; or


Refer to Append ix 12for the definition of und erlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 12: Defin itions 	131


J.	Any other activity of man that changes the height or velocity of flood or surface water.

developm ent site: The portion  of contiguous property  that is hydro l ogi cally disturb ed by the
developm ent.

drain tile: Sub-surfa ce conduit used for drainage of land, typically for agricultural purposes.   Drain
tile does not include footing drains.

drain til e survey: An inventory of existing farm and storm drain tiles, typically based u pon a field investigation utilizing the slit trench method to locate existing drain tiles.

dredging: The maintenance or restoration of a water body by removing accumu lated silt, sediment,
and other debris from its bed.

dry det enti on facility: A detenti on facility designed to drain completely after temporary storage of
stormwater. A dry detention facility is n ormally dry over the majority of i ts bottom area.

dry floodpro ofing: Building protection measures designed according to curr ent FEMA guidelines to keep water out of the building. Dry floodproofing measures are among the  floodproofing measures described in the following FEMA publi cations: Engineering Princip les and Practices for Retrofitting Flood-Prone Residential Structures (FEMA P-259), H omeowner's Guide to Retrofitting (FEMA P-312), Selecting Appropriate Mitigation Measures for Floodprone Structu res (FEMA 551), Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage (FEMA 348), Reducing Damage from Localized Flooding (FEMA 511), Non-R esidential Floodproofing - Requirements and Certification (FEMA TB 3), and Floodproofing  Non-Residentia l Structures (FEMA 102).

earth change: Development in which the primary activity is a change in ground elevations affected
by the movement of earth materials.

effective date of this Ordinance: January 20, 2004.  Subsequent amendments shall be effective upon
passage of an amending ordinance.

elevation certificate:A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the lowest floor (including the basement) elevation to which a building has been constructed.

emergency overflow: The stru cture in a stormwater management facility designed to protect th e stormwater management system in the event of a malfunction of the control structure or a storm event greater than the design storm. The emerge n cy overflow capacity in itiates at th e design high water level of the stormwater management facility.

Enforcement  Officer :  The  MC SC  Chief  Engineer  or  the  Certified  Community's   development
regu lations officer.
erosion: The process wh ereby soil is detached by precipitation, flowing water, wind or wave action. extensive removal of vegetation : Removal of 1acre or more of vegetation, such as woods or meadow,
for non-agri cultural purposes and replacement with a surface cover having a higher Run off C urve Numb er. The removal of vegetation (in any quantity) consisting primarily of invasive, dead, or dying vegetati on shall not be considered extensive remova l of vegetation.





Refer to Appendix 12for the d efinition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	132


flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface water from any source.

flood damage: A measurable rise in flood heights at a building currently subject to flooding, or
flooding of a building not currently subject to flooding.

flood damage -resistant material s: Any building product (material, component or system) capable of withstanding direct contact with floodwaters for at least 72 hours without sustaining damage requiring  more  than  cosm etic repair.	FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 provides guidance in the classification of flood damage-resistant materials.

flood frequ ency: A frequency, normally expressed as a period of years, that a flood of a stated magnitude can be expected to be equaled or exceeded, based upon a statistical analysis of the percent chance of occurrence in any given year.

flood fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of a designated floodway.  No flood fringe exists
within a floodplain that has a n on-designated floodway.

flood hazard area: The land located in a floodway, floodplain, or flood prone area subject to the base flood.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions
 
133
 


FIGURE 5

 



Floodplain






Flood Fringe






Floodway (Designated}
 
Flood Hazard Areas
 





Floodway (Non­ Designated) or Flood Prone Area



Floodway (Non­ Designated)
 

Flood Fringe

Flood Hazard Area Development:  Regulated development located partially or completely within  a
floodway. floodplain, or a flood prone area.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the floodplain, designated floodways, and flood insurance risk premium zones within McHenry County. The effective dates of the FIRMs in McHenry County are listed in Appendix 11. The effective FIRM s may be amended or revised by a LOMC.

Flood Insurance Study (FIS): A report published by FEMA for McH enry County in conjunction with
the McHenry County's FIRM s. The effective date of the McHenry County FIS is shown in Appendix
11.  The stu dy contains such background data as the base flood discharges and water surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRMs. The effective FIS may be revised by a LOMC.

flood prone area: Any area inundated by the base flood and located outside the limits of the floodplain that:

A	Has a tributary area greater than 100 acres,

B.	Is a depressional storage area, or

C.	Is mapped as a Flood of Record area on the USGS-Hydrologic Investigation Atlas Flood of Record Maps.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	134


flood protection  elevation  (FPE): The BFE plus 2 feet of freeboard, except in the case of attached
garages and small accessory buildings, where the FPE is the BFE plus 0.5 foot of freeboard.

floodplain: Those lands within the jurisdiction of McHenry County and its municipalities that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of McHenry County are identified on the of McHen ry County prepared by FEMA. The effective dates of the FIRMs in McHenry County are listed in Appendix 11. The effective FIRMs may be amended or revised by a LOMC. The floodplain includes areas identified on the FIRMs as Zones A, AO, AH, A.E., A99, AR, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, or
AR/A.

FIGURE 6

Understandine the Riverine Floodplain
(IDNR Floodplain Management in Illinois Quick Guide, 2001)

1

 

Fringe
 
Floodway ----•
 
...f--- -i ..•
Fringe
 



Stream Channel

















floodplain management: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for avoiding or
reducing future flood damage.

floodproofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural measures, changes or adjustments to buildings or property which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, buildings and their contents. (See also dry floodproofing and wet floodproofing.)

floodproofing certificate: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a non-residential
building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed up to the FPE.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	135


floodway: See designated floodway and non-designated floodway.

freeboard: An increment of height added to the BFE or a design high water elevation to provid e a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown local conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.

functional assessment: An assessment of a wetland's flood storage,water quality and other beneficial functions.

General Permit: A stormwater manag ement permit  pertaining to a specific type of regulated development, which may be issued by MCSC or a Certified Community in order to streamline the permit process for a routine project.  Each General Permit specifies the term s and conditions for a specific type ofregulated development to assure compliance with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. Valid General Permits are listed in Article III of this Ordinance.

HEC-1: Hydrograph producing hydrologic computer model created by the USACE in the Hydrologic Engineering Center.

HEC-2:  Hydraulic  step  backwater  computer  model  created  by  the  USACE  in  the  Hydrologic
Engineering Center.

HEC-RAS: Windows™ based hydraulic step backwater computer model created by the USACE in the Hydrologic Engineering Center.

High Functional Value Wetland (HFVW): Any WOTUS or IWMC identified as such on the ADID Maps or any WOTUS or IWMC that, through a functional assessment, meets the criteria defined in that Study for determining high functional value, related specifically to hydrological and water quality functions.

High Quality Aquatic Resour ce (HQAR): WOTUS or IWMC that are determined to be critical due to their uniquen ess, scarcity, function and/or value. The following types of WOTUS or IWMC are considered HQAR.

A.	ADID wetland and aquatic sites.

B.	Bog: A low nutrient peat land, usually in a glacial depression, that is acidic in the surface
stratum and dominated by the genus Sphagnum.

C.	Ephemeral pool: A seasonally inundated depression within forested or open areas, usually located on a moraine, glacial outwash plain, or in an area shallow to bedrock; also known locally as a "vernal pool." These areas may or may not be permanently vegetated.

D.	Fen: An herbaceous or wooded peat land created and maintained by the constant surface
water flow of cold mineralized (calcareous) groundwater flow.

E.	Forested wetland: A wetland, including wooded seeps, shrub swamps, and floodplain forests, dominated by shrubs or trees growing on soils that are inundated or saturated much of the year, but that do dry out at the surface.

F.	Sedge meadow: Saturated, sometimes flooded open wetlands dominated by grasses and sedges, including hummock forming Tussock Sedge (Carex stricta).



Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	136


G.	Seep: A wetland, herbaceous or wooded, with saturated soil or inundation resulting from
the diffuse flow of groundwater to the surface stratum.

H.	Streams: Perennial and intermitt ent streams, provided that the stream is not WOTUS and that the lfilis greater than 35, or that the stream is classified as Class A or Class B in the Biological Stream Characterization System of the !EPA.

I.	Streamside marsh: A wetland that is within a 100 year riverine floodpl ain and dominated
by herbaceous species.
J.	Wet prairie: A wetland dominated by native graminoid species with a diverse indigenous forb component that is seasonally saturated and/or temporarily inundated.

K.	Wetl ands supporting Federal or Illinois endangered or threatened species.

L.	Wetlands with a FQI of 20 or greater or a mean C-value of 3.5 or greater, as determined by the methodology described in Plants of the Chicago Region (Swink, F. and G. Wilhelm, 1994, 4th Edition, Indianapolis: Indiana Academy of Science).

M.	Wetland s that are within a designated Illinois Natural Areas Inventory Site or McHenry County Natural Areas Inventory Site.

High Quality Habitat Sites (HQHS): WOTUS or IWMC that are identifi ed as having high quality wildlife habitat, high floristic quality or high quality aquatic habitat based on the ADID M aps; or meets the criteria defin ed in the ADID Study through a function al assessment.

high est adjacent grade: The highest natural ground elevation in an area of interest, such as next to
the proposed walls of a building.

historic structur e: A structure that is:

A.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individu al listing on the Nation al Register;

B.	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

C.	Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; or

D.	Individu ally listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by th e
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.

HY-8: Culvert hydraulic analysis program created by the Federal Highway Administration.

hydra uli ca lly equivalent compensatory storage: Compensatory  storage that can be shown	by hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to offset the loss of existing flood storage volume. The storage volume displaced below the existing 10 year frequency flood elevation must be replaced below the proposed 10 year frequency flood elevation. The storage volume displaced above the




Ref er to Appendix 12for the defin ition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	137


existing 10 year  frequency  flood  elevation  must be  replaced  above  the proposed  10 year
frequency flood elevation.

hydrologic and hydraulic calculations: An enginee ring analysis  which determines expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics, sub-su rface drainage characteristics, and ra infall events.

hydrologically disturbed : An area where the land surface has been cleared, grubbed, compacted, graded, excavated, filled or otherwise modified in a manner that changes runoff volumes, or rates .

impervious surface. impervious area: Any hard-surfaced, compacted area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including but n ot limited to building roofs, asphalt and concrete surfaces, and graveled areas.

in-kind replacement: A replacement culvert, storm sewer, or drain til e that has an equivalent cross­ sectional area and shape, with the same material or a smoother material. In-kind replacement of a culvert, storm sewer, or drain tile includes minor adju stment of pipe invert elevations to correct an adverse slope.

Index of Biotic Integrity (!BI): Ecologically based water quality score calculated from multiple types of fish data utilized to classify str eam s. An initial !BI may be obtained from the bian nu al IEPA Illinois Water Quality Report, but a site specific IBI assessment may override the initial IBI.

individual permit: Any stormwater m ana gement permit which does not meet the terms and conditions of a General Permit.

infiltrat ion facility (infiltration po nd/infiltr ation ba sin): A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of infiltration. A rain garden shall not be considered an infiltration facility.

initial constru ction: The date the first building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.

inspect: To check or to review a site for compliance with this Ordinance, permitted plans and permit
conditions.

Interm ediate Development: Regulated development that:

A.	Consists of hydrologic disturbance between 20,000 square feet and 1acre; and

B.	Is not a Public Road Developmen t or Mining Development.

intermittent stream: A stream that has flowing water during certain times of the year, when groundwat er provides water for stream flow. During dry peri ods, intermittent streams may not have flowing water. Run off from rainfall is a suppl emental source of water for stream flow. Intermitt ent streams are depicted on the USGS Quadrangle Maps with a dashed blue line.

Isolated Waters of McH enry  County (IWMC): All  waters such as rivers, lakes,  ponds, streams (including intermittent streams), farmed  wetlands,  and  wetlands  that  are  not  un der  USACE juri sdiction.



Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	138


A.	The limits of the IWM C extend to the ordinary high water mark or the delineated wetland
b oundary.

8. IWM C exclude excavations created for such purposes as stormwater conveyance, detention/retention areas constructed as part of a stormwater  management  system, recreatio n, mining, stock watering, irrigation, settling basins or wastewate r treatment systems and roadside ditches, provided that the excavation has been permitted or that no permit was required at the time of the excavation.

C.	Mitigation sites where wetlands or waters were created to meet the requirements of this
Ordinance or Section 404 of the Clean Water Act are n ot excluded.

IWM C impact: IWMC that are disturbed or otherwise adversely affected, whether temporarily or permanently, by developm ent. Tren chless installation of utilities beneath IWMC does not constitute an IWMC impact, provided that no soil is disturbed within the limits of the wetland, the installation does not drain the IWMC, and no drilling fluids are discharged into the IMWC.

IWMC   mitigation:   Compensation   for   impacts   to   IWMC   throu gh   the   restoration,   creation,
enhancem ent of wetlands or waters.

lake: A body of wate r encompassing an area of 2 or more acres which retains a normal water level
througho ut the year.

Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An official determination by FEMA that a specific buildin g or parcel of land is above the BFE and was inadvertently included in a flood plain provided that th e natural ground elevation has not been altered. A LO MA amends the effective floodplain limits on a FIRM. A LOMA does not modify a floodway limit or the BFE.

Letter of M ap Change (LOMC): A LOMA or LOMR.

Letter of M ap Revision  (LOMR): Letter issued by FEMA or IDNR/OWR that revises BFEs. flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM.

licensed land surveyor: A surveyor licensed in the State of Illin ois, under the Illinois Professional Land Surveyor Act of 1989 225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.(1994 State Bar Edition).

licensed professional  engineer: An engineer licensed in the State of Illin ois, under the Professional
Engineering Practice Act of 1989 225 ILCS 325/1, et seq. (1994 State Bar Edition).

low opening elevation: The elevation at which water could enter a building through any non­ watertight opening such as a doorway threshold, a window sill, the top-of-foundation, or a basement window well.

lowest adjacent grade: The lowest finished grade adjacent to a building, not includin g the bottom of
window wells.

lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or wet floodproofed enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the building in violation  of the applicable non-elevation design requirements  of this Ordinance.


Ref er to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	139


maintainabl e outlet: A new storm sewer or overland flow path that discharges to an existing
stormwater management system or chann el.

maintenance of existing buildings: Re-roofing, replacement of windows, re-siding, carpeting, painting, installing a new water heater, installing a new electric service, and maintenance tasks that do n ot requir e a buildin g permit.

mainten an ce of existing roads and trails: Rehabilitative maintenance, such as milling and overlaying, that does not increase the im perv ious area and does not increase the surface elevation. Maintenance of existing roads and trails also includ es increasing the surface elevation with the following limitations:

A.	Resurfacing outside flood haza rd areas;

B.	Resurfacing within flood prone areas;

C.	Resurfacing within the flood fringe, provided the difference between the elevation of the road surface after resurfacing and the elevation of the road surface on the effective date of this Ordinance is not more than two inch es.

maintenan ce plan: A plan for the perpetua l maintenance of the stormwater managemen t system,
including wetlands, waters and buffer areas. A maintenance plan shall include the following:

A.	Planned maintenanc e tasks and the frequen cy of each task such as removal of sediment,
debris, mowing and pruning of vegetati on, and restoration of eroded areas;

B.	Identification of the party responsible for performing each task; and

C.	A description of applicable deed or plat restrictions.

Major  Development:  Regulated  development  that  is  not  classified  as  a  M inor  Development.
Intermediate Development, Public Road Developm ent, or Mining Development.

major stormwater system: The portion of a stormwate r management system needed to store and
convey flows for the base flood event.

manufactured home (or mobile home) : A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or with out a permanent foun dation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured homes also includes park trail ers, travel trailers and oth er similar vehicles placed on site for more th an 180 consecutive days. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle or travel trailer.

manufactured home park (mobile home park. trailer park): A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land on which two or more manufactured hom es are harbored, either free of charge, for rent or for sale.

McHenry County Stormwater M anagement Commission (MCSC): The Commission establish ed and existing under 55 ILCS 5/5 1062 (1994 State Bar Edition) for the purposes of developing, revising and implementing a countywide stormwater management plan  and ordinance.

MCSC Chief Engineer: A licensed professio n al en gineer representing the MCSC as the Enforcement
Officer of this Ordinance.


Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to Appendix 1for permitting flowcharts.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	140


Mining Development: Regulated developm ent that:

A.	Consists of extracting and/or minin g mineral or aggregate resources; and

B.	Is conducted upon a recorded parcel ofland exceeding 2 acres; and

C.	Involves the removal of 10 feet or more of overburd en.

Minor Development: Regulated development that:

A.	Consists of hydrolo gic disturban ce ofless than 20,000 square feet; and

B.	Is not a Public Road Developm ent or a M ining Development.

minor stormwater system : All infrastru cture including curb, gutter, culverts, roadside ditches and swales, storm sewers, dra in tiles, subsurface drainage systems, and other pr actices intend ed to convey or capture stormwater runoff from storm events less than the base floo d event.

mitigation: Measures taken to offset negative impacts from development activities, such as constru ction in wetlands, waters and flood hazard areas. Wetland mitigation typically involves wetland  restoration  or enhancement.	Floodplain and flood prone area mitigation typically involves compensatory storage and created conveyance capacity.

mitigation  plan: A plan to mitigate IWM C impacts.

multi-county municipalities: A municipality containin g corporate area within both McHenry County
and an Illinois county located contiguously adjacent to McHenry County.

mobil e home : See manufactured hom e.

National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): Th e requirements of th e NFIP are codified in Title 44 of th e Code of Federa l Regulations.

N ational Geod etic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29) : Reference surface set by the Nati onal Geodetic Survey deduced from a Continental adj ustment of all existing sea level adju stments in 1929. Mean Sea Level for 1929 (MSL adj. 1929), is an equivalent. Refer to the FIS for conversion between N GVD2 9 and NAVD 88.

n ative vegetati on: Generally, all warm season, deep rooted, grass and forb species believed to have
grown naturally in the pre-settlement landscape of northern Illinois and south ern Wisconsin.

natural grou nd elevation : The elevation of the ground on September 30, 1981, which was the
effective date of the first FIR M in McHenry County.

n atural streams and channels: Streams and chann els formed prior to changes made by man. A modified stream or channel which has regained natural characteristics over time as it meanders and re- establishes vegetation may be considered natural.

n ew con struction: Buildin gs for which th e initial constru ction commence d on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a communi ty and includes any subsequent improvements to such buildings.

new impervi ous area: Impervious surface area created after the effective date of this Ordinan ce.




Ref er to App endix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appe ndix 13for a list of acronyms. Refer to App endix 1for p ermitting flowc harts.
 
Appendix 12: D efinitions 	141


non-d esignated floodway: The chann el, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodpl ain adjacent to a stream or watercour se, not specifically identified as a floodway on the FEMA FIRM, but which has a tribut ary area of 640 acres or more in an urban area or a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a rural area. The urban area or rur al area designation s shall be determined by IDNR/OWR.

non-re sidential  building: A  commercial or industrial building.	An accessory building is n ot considered a non-residential building.

non-riv erine: Ar eas not associated with a stream or river, such as isolated depressional storage areas, pond s and lakes.

North American Vertica l D atum of 1988 (NAVD88): A datum that supersedes the NGVD29.  Refer to
the FIS for conversion between NGVD29 and NAVD88 .

online detention: Any detention facility that receives runoff from an offsite area or from an onsite
area that is not hydrologically disturbed.

ordinary high water mark: The point on the bank or shore at which the presence and movement of surface water are continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark, su ch as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, pr edominan ce of aquatic vegetation, or other such recognized characteristics.

other m aintenan ce activi ty: Rehabilitative maintenance that is not ma intenance of existing buildin gs
or m ai nt enance of existing rqads and trail s. including but not limited to:

A.	Repair or replacement of existing driveways or parking lots within th e same footprint and
outside flood hazard areas;

B.		Repair or replacement of existing driveways or parking lots within the same footprint and within flood prone areas;

C.		Repair or replacement of existing driveways or parking Jots within the same footprint and within the flood fringe, provided the difference b etween the elevation of the paved sur face after repair or repl acement and th e elevation of the paved surfa ce on the effective date of this Ordinan ce is n ot mor e than two inches;

D.	Repair of existing und erground and overhead utilities, provid ed th e repa ir does not result in any IWMC impact;

E.	Repair or in-kind replacement of existing culverts, storm sewers, or drain tiles, provid ed the culverts, storm sewers, or drain tiles are outside the designated floodway and have a cross-sectional area less than 12.6 square feet;

F.	Repair, not including in-kind replacement, of an existing bridge outside the designated floodway;

G.	Mainten ance of drainage ditches (i.e., dredging and the removal of obstructive, invasive, dead, or dying vegetation), outside the designated floodway. provid ed that spoil materi als: are removed from the flo od hazard area and are spread thinly and incorporated into existing cultivated areas; or are hauled away from the development site; and provid ed that


Refer to Appendix 12for the def inition of underlined terms or to Appen dix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	142


appropriate soil erosion  and sediment control practices are utilized.	Maintenance of drainage ditches does not include ditch straightening, ditch widening, flood hazard area fill, soil stockpiles or the constru ction of any new channel or water body;

H.	Dredging of ponds, outside the designated floodway. provided that spoil materials: are removed from the flood hazard area and are spread thinly and incorporated into existing cultivated areas; or are haul ed away from the development site; and provided that appropriate soil erosion and sediment control practices are utilized. Dredging of ponds does not include the construction of any new pond or water body;

I.		Removal of any obstruction from a channel. culvert, or storm sewer to restore its original design or permitted condition. Removal of obstruction does not include channel straightening, channel widening, flood hazard area fill, soil stockpiles, or the construction of any new channel or water body; and
J.		Maintenance to restore an existing stormwater management facility to its original design or permitted condition (the Enforcement Officer may also allow minor modifications to an existing stormwater management facility to reduce the need for future maintenance).

overland flow path: The route that stormwater will travel based on the topography of the land.
Overland flow paths are typically viewed without consideration of infiltration, evaporation or underground  drainage structures.

oversight committee: A decision-making authority designated by a C ertified Community or McH enry County. For a Certified Community, the oversight committee may be comprised of the corporate authoritie s or any committee thereof , plan commission, zoning board of appeals, or other existing body, or the corporate authorities may, according to their own rules and procedures, establish a separate oversight committee. The Natural and Environmental Resources Committee of the McHenry County Board shall act as the oversight committee for McHenry County.

parcel identification number (PIN): Permanent index number used to identify properties.

perennia l stream: A water course which intersects the groundwater table and flows throughout the
year, depicted on the USGS Quadrangle Maps with a solid blue line.

performance guarantee :A bond, surety, letter of credit, or other instrument used to ensure regulated developm ent conforms with the requir ements of this Ordinance and the terms and conditions of the stormwater management permit.

permanent erosion control: Permanent  features of a developm ent site designed to control soil
erosion and sedimentation .

permeab le paveme nt: Porous asphalt, pervious concrete, permeable pavers and similar paving materials designed to promote stormwater infiltration. Permeable pavem ent is not considered an impervious sur face, provided that it is constructed over soil which can be shown by developm ent site specific soil data to be sufficiently permeable to allow infiltration without a system ofunderdrains and provided that the full depth of the pavement cross-section is above the seasonal high groundwater elevation.

pond: A body of water of less than 2 acres which retains a normal water level year round.


Refer to App endix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	143


precipi tation: Any form of water, such as rain, snow, sleet or hail that falls to the earth's surface.

pre-treatment: BMPs used to remove pollutants from stormwater prior to infiltration.

p ublic bodie s of water: All open publi c rivers, streams, and lakes specifically designated by IDNR/OWR . The IDNR/OWR designated public bodies of water are listed in Appendix 8. Generally, public bodies of water are capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, or which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their waters into navigable Jakes or rivers within, or upon, the borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, subm erged lands and Jakes that are open to the main channel or body of water and directly accessible thereto.

public flood con trol project: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce floo d damages to existing buildings and structures, including hydrologic and hydra ulic calculations of th e existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing i n th is definition shall preclude the design, engineering, constru ction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are n ot publi c agencies.

Publi c Road Development: Regulated development that:

A	Takes place in a publi c right-of -way or part thereof; and

B.	Does not include the construction of a building; and

C.	Consists  of  culverts,  bridges,  roadways, sidewalks, bike  paths and  related  constructi on.
Publi c recreational trails and linear railroad developm ents shall be considered Public Road Development with respect to the requirem ents of this Ordinance, even if the public recreational trail or linear railroad developm ent is not located within a public right-of-way .

qualified inspector: A person knowledgeable in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment control measures, such as a licensed professional engin eer, a C ertified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC), a Certified Erosion. Sediment and Storm Water Inspector (CESSWI) or other knowl edgeable person who possesses the skills to assess conditions at the development site that could impact stormwater quality and to assess th e effectiveness of any sediment and erosion control measu res selected to control the quality of stormwat er discharges from the construction activities.

rain gar den: A small, shallow depression planted with flowers, grasses or other vegetat ion that is designed to collect stormwa ter runoff from surroundin g areas. Rai n gardens are typically less than 300 square feet in size with a depth less than 12 inches.

Rationa l Method: An empirical formula that relates stormwater runoff to rainfall intensity, surface area and surface characteristi cs.

recreational vehicle or travel trailer: A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or Jess when measured at th e largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-prop elled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.



Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix  12: Definitions 	144


redevelopm ent: The process of developing land pr eviously developed.

regulated development: Development that meets any of the criteria listed in Article II, Section B of this Ordinance, unless the development is specifically exempted  in Article II, Section C of this Ordinan ce.

repair or r emodeling: Development activities which do not result in any changes in th e outside dimensions of a building, any changes to the dimensions of a structure or increase in impervious area.

repetitive loss: Flood-related damages sustained by a building on two separate occasions during a 5 year period for which the cost ofrepairs at the time of each such flood event,on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the building before the damaged occurred .

retention facility (retention pond/r etention basin) : See infiltration facility.

riverine: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a stream (including creeks and rivers). runoff : See stormwater runoff.
Runoff Curve Number: An empirical parameter developed by the NRCS and used for predictin g direct
runoff or infiltration from excess rainfall.

rural area: The rural area designation within non-designated floodways shall be determin ed by IDNR/OWR. In flood pron e areas, all residenti al, commercial or other non-residential land uses that are not defin ed as or included within an Urban Area, as defined by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau (USCB) or as approved by the Enforcement Officer.

sediment basin: A permanent, wet-bottom basin created to detain sediment-laden stormwater runoff
long enough for sediment or other water-based debris to settle to the bottom .

sediment trap: A temporary stru cture formed by construction of an embankm ent or excavation of a basin in order to detain sediment-laden stormwat er runoff from a disturbed area of 5 acres or less long enough for sediment or other water-based debris to settle to the bottom.

sedimentation: The processes that deposit soils, sedim ent, debris, and other materials.

silt fence: A temporary barri er of entrench ed geotextile fabric (filter fabric) stretched across and attached to supporting posts used to intercept sediment laden runoff from small tribut ary areas of disturbed soil.

sm all accessory building: An accessory buildi ng that:

A.	Is less than 600 squ are feet in size; and

B.	Is less than $22,150 in value; and

C.	Is only used for the storage of vehicles and/or tools; and

D.	Is accessory to a residential building.

soil stockpile: 100 cubic yards or more of soil that remains in place for 7 or more days. start of construction: The date on which a regulat ed development comm enced.


Refer to Appen dix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to App end ix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Defin itions 	145


stormwater management: A set of actions taken to control stormwater runoff with the objectives of
providing controlled surface drainage, flood control and pollutant reduction in runoff.

stormwa ter management facility: A detention facility or infiltration facility.

stormwater management permit: A permit established by this Ordinance which signifies conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. A stormwater management permit may be issued as a General Permit or as an individual permit.

stormwater  management permit application : A form provided  my McHenry County or a Certified
Community that includes the following information:

A.	The name and legal address of the applicant;

8.	The PIN or legal description of each parcel compris ing proposed development;

C.	A written description of the proposed development;

D.	The proposed hydrologically disturbed area;

E.	The existing and proposed impervious area and the impervious area that existed at the
development site prior to the effective date of this Ordinance;

F.	Approximate start and end dates of the proposed development; and

G.	A statement of intent to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, signed by the applicant.

stormwater management system: The major and minor stormwater system for a development.

stormwater runoff: Precipitation that flows off of permeable and imp ermeable surfaces.

stormwater storage: Temporary detention or retention of stormwater with a controlled release rate
or with release by means of infiltration.

stream: A course of running water flowing in a channe l (includes creeks and rivers).

StreamStats: A web-based Geographic Information System developed by the USGS that delineates the watershed boundary and estimates stream flow statistics for a user selected site.

structural dry floodproofing: Building protection measures designed to make the building and its attenda nt utilities watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Structural dry floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity. Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar building protection measures are forms of dry floodproofing which are not structural dry floodproofing.

substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a building in a floodplain whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during a 5 year period equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building before the damage occurred, regardless of actual repair work performed.	The market value of volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination.


Refer to Appendix 12for the definition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	146


substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other activity to a building in a floodplain taking place during a S year period in which the cumulative project cost equ als or exceeds SO percent of the market value of the building before the improvement or repair is started.

Substantial improvement is considered to begin when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Substantial improvement includes:

A.	The cost to repair a building that has incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage. regardless of the actual repair work performed; and

8.	The cost of proposed maintenance of existing buildings; but

Substantial improvement does not includ e:

A.	The cost of any maintenance of existing buildings completed within the previous S year period as a stand-alone project that did not require a building permit; or

8.	The cost of any project to improve a buildin g to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions;  or

C.	The cost of any alteration of a hi storic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.

sub-watershed: A sub-section  of a larger watershed.	For the purpose  of this Ordinance, sub­ watersheds would include the  tributary areas of named streams and lakes within a given watershed (i.e. Rush, Lawrence, and Mokeler Creeks are sub-watershed s within the Piscasaw Watershed).

temporary erosion control: Erosion control measures used to control soil erosion and sedimentation
during the constru ction phase of a development.

temporary IWMC im pact: An IWMC impact that would result in a short-term loss of IWMC function.
Temporary IWMC impacts shall not result in a permanent conversion of wetland to non-wetland. Temporary IWMC impacts shall not include relocation of an IWMC, or conversion of a vegetated commu nity to open water. Additionally, for the IWMC impact to be considered temporary: soil profiles shall be restored to a similar pre-disturbance condition and elevation; vegetative communiti es shall be restored to the same or higher quality and function; and the restoration must be completed within 1year of the disturbance. The Enforcement Officer shall make the determination as to whether an IWMC impact is considered a temporary IWMC impact.

TR-20: Technical Release 20 is a hydrogr aph producing hydrology computer model created by the
NRCS .

TR-SS: Technical Release SS (NRCS, June 1986) is a document that presents simplified procedures for estimating runoff and peak discharges in small watersheds.



Refer to Appendix 12for the d ef inition of underlined terms or to App endix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	147


transition section: Reaches of th e stream where water flows from a narrow cross-sectio n to a wide cross-section and vice-versa.

travel trailer: See recreational vehicle or travel trailer.

tributary area: All of the land surface that contributes runoff to a given point.

urban area: The urban area designation within non-de signated floodways shall be determin ed by IDNR/OWR. In flood pron e areas. any densely developed resid ential, commercial or other non­ residential land uses in which the U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau (USCB) census block or tract contains a population density of at least 2,500 people, at least 1,500 of which reside outside institutional group quarters or as approved by the Enforcement Officer. Urbanized Areas and Urban Clusters, as defined by the USCB, are subsets of urban areas. A m ap of all urban areas of the county can be found on the USCB website: http ://tiger web.geo .census.gov/t igerweb /.

USGS Regression Equations: Equations developed by th e USGS and approved by IDOT for estimating
the peak runoff from a watershed for a given flood frequency.

variance: A grant ofrelief by a community from the requirements of this Ordinance.

violation : The failure of a stru cture or other regulated development to be fully compliant with this Ordinance. A stru cture or other regul ated developm ent without the elevati on certi ficate, other certifications, or other required evidence of compliance is presum ed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

water dependent facilities: Structures or facilities relating or requiring access to the water or shoreline. Examples include shoreline protection , pumping and boating facilities and improvements.

waters: A subset of the definitions of the WOTUS and IWMC. Waters are areas that are n ormally inundated by surface water, such as lakes, ponds, and streams (inclu ding intermittent streams).

Waters of th e Unit ed States (WOTUS): Those areas that are under the regulatory j urisdiction of the USACE.

watershed: A geographic area that collects, concentrates and contributes stormwater  ru noff  to  a given point on a waterway. The major watersheds in McHenry Cou nty, which are shown in App endix 9, are:

A.   Piscasaw Creek,

B.    Nippersink Creek,

c.  Kishwauk ee River,

D.	Upper Fox River,

E.	Lower Fox River, and

F. Coon Creek.
 
Appendix 12: Definitions 	148


watershed benefit: A decrease in flood damages created by installation of the stormwater management system. The benefit must be beyond the benefit provided by meeting the minimum requirement of this Ordinance.

watershed plan: A study and evaluation of the stormwater management and/or floodplain management needs and capabilities of a watershed or sub-watershed.

Watershed Specific Area Development: Regulated development that is partially or completely located in a watershed or sub-watershed, for which additional or more restrictive standards have been adopted by MCSC or a Certified Community, based on the recommendations of a watershed plan.

wet bottom detention facility: A wet detention facility is designed to maintain a permanent pool of
water after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.

wet floodproofing: Protection from flood damage according to current FEMA guidelines by using flood damage-resistant materials below the FPE and elevating other items above the FPE. Wet floodproofing measures are among the floodproofing measures described in the following FEMA publications: WetF/oodproofing Requirements for Structures located in Special Flood Hazard Areas (FEMA TB 7-93), Engineering Principles and Practices for Retrofitting Flood-Prone Residential Structures (FEMA P-259), Homeowner' s Guide to Retrofitting (FEMA P-312), Selecting Appropriate Mitigation M easuresfor Floodprone Structures (FEMA 551), Protecting Building Utilitiesfrom Flood Damage (FEMA 348), Reducing Damag e from Localized Flooding (FEMA 511), Non-Residential Floodproofing - Requirements and Certification (FEMA TB 3), and Floodproofing Non-Residential Structures (FEMA 102).

wetland: A subset of the definitions of the WOTUS and IWMC. Wetland s are land that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, under normal conditions, a preval ence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (known as hydrophyti c vegetation). A wetland is identified ba sed upon the three attributes: 1) hydrology,
2)  soils  and  3)  vegetation  as  mandated  by  the  current  Federal  wetland  determination
m ethodology.

wetland creation: The introdu ction of wetlands to an area where none existed historically.

Wetland and Waters Developm ent: Regulated development located partially or completely within
WOTUS or IWMC.

wetland enhancement: The improvement in wetland functional value of an area currently meeting
the technical definition of a wetland.

wetland  mitigation  banking:  The  process  of  purcha sing  "credits"  from  a  financial  institution
established by a third party to compensate for permitted losses.

wetland restoration: The re-introduction of wetlands to an area where wetlands existed histori cally, but not prior to the mitigation activity.

wetland restor ation activities: Those restoration activities in wetlands or adjacent buffer areas determined to be necessary and beneficial to the preservation, maintenance, or restoration of wetland plant communities, wildlife habitat and ecosystems native to McHenry County.
 
Appendix 12: Defi nitions 	149


wetland specialist: A person complying with A, B, and C as follows:

A.		Provide a signed statement of qualifications to MCSC demonstrating the m1mmum requirements of Band C have been met. The signed statement will be considered evidence of qualification .

B.	Completion of the USACE Wetland Delin eation Certification Program or equivalent course
and meet one of the following.

(1)	Registered  Professional Wetland  Scientist (PWS)  from the  Society of Wetland Scientists; or

(2)	Minimum of a Bachelor's Degree in an Earth Science or Biologic Science and at least one of the following:

a.	Three years (cumulative) full-time experience in the Upper Midwest region on
wetland related projects; or

b.	The completion of 100 wetland delineations in the upper Midwest; or

c.	A  minimum  of  300  hours  spent  in  field  review  of  wetlands  in  the  Upper
Midwe st.

C.	A minimum of 24 work-related professional development h ours shall be obtained every three years. Documentation shall be self-monitoring and shall be provided to MCSC upon request.

Zone A: Areas subject to inundation by the 1percent-annual chance flood event generally determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and Flood Hazard Area Performance Standards apply.

Zone AE: Areas subject to inundation by the 1percent-annual chance flood event determin ed by detailed methods. BFEs are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requiremen ts and Flood Hazard Area Performance Standards apply.

Zone AH: Areas subject to inundation by 1percent-annual -chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and three feet. BFEs derived from detailed hyd raulic analyses are shown in this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirem ents and Flood Hazard Area Performance Standards apply.

Zone AR: Areas that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in th e process of being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and Flo od Hazard Area Performance Standards apply.

Zone AO: Area s subject to inundation by 1percent-annual-chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detail ed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and Flood Hazard Area Perform ance Standards apply.
 
Appendix 13: Acronyms


Appendix 13

§15.60.280	Acronyms

The following acronyms shall be used with this Ordinance. ADID :Advanced Identification Wetland Study
BFE: Base flood elevation

BMP: Best managemen t practice

CESSWI: Certified Eros ion. Sediment and Storm Water Inspector CLOMR: Conditiona l Letter of Map Revision
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sedim ent Control

FEMA: Federal Emerge ncy Management Agency

FIRM: Flood Insurance Rate Map FIS: Fl ood Insurance Study
FPE: Flood protection elevation

HFVW: High Functional Value Wetland HQAR: High Quality Aquatic Resource HQHS : High Quali ty Habitat Sites
IBI: In dex of Biotic Integrity

IDNR: Illinois Department of Natura l Resources


IDNR/OWR:  Jllinois D epartm ent of Natura l Resour ces/Office of Water  Resources

!DOT: Illinois D epartment of Transportation

!DOT/DOH: Illinois Department of Transportation/Divisio n of Highways IEPA: Illinois Environme ntal Protection Agency
IWMC : Isolated Waters of McHenry County

LOMA: Letter of Map Amendment LOMC : Letter of Map Change
 
150
 
·Appendix  13:Acronyms


LOMR: Letter of Map Revision

MCCD: McHenry County Conservation District

MCSC: McHenry County Stormwater Management Commission

NAVD88: North American Vertical Datum of 1988

NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program

NGVD29 : National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929

NRCS: United States Department of Agriculture - Natural Resource Conservation Service PIN: Parcel Identification Number
USACE: United States Army Corps ofEngineers

USEPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency

USFWS: United States Fish and Wildlife Service

USGS: United States Geological Survey

WOTUS: Waters of the United States
 
151
 
 
 
Appendix 1 §15.60.150 Permitting Flowcharts 	97
Regulated Development Flowchart
 

Is the Project Considered Development?
(See Appendix  12)

 


No Permit Required
 

Is the Development an Exempted Development? (See Article 11.C)

 

Is the Development in a Flood Hazard Area?

 

Is the Development in a Wetland or Water?





Does the Development Hydrologically Disturb 5,000 Square Feet or 50% of a Lot or Parcel?




Does the Development Result in 20,000 Square Feet of Impervious Area since January 20, 2004?





Does the Developm ent Result in Impervious Area Exceeding the Design of a Stormwater Management Facility?







No Permit Required
 



No Permit Required








Permit Required - See Development Classification Flowchart





Permit Required - See Development Classification Flowcha rt




Permit Required  - See Development Classification Flowchart




Permit Required - See Development Classification Flowchart





Permit Required - See Development Classification Flowchart
 




Refer to Appendix 12for the dejlnition of underlined terms or to Appendix 13for a list of acronyms.
 
 
 
::i::i
(.l.),
s
;i,.

::s
0..
)(•
......
l'-.J
'a..'>,
s.
Cb
 


Does the Project Meet the General Permit Conditions?
•	(See Article II!.B.1
and 3)
 



See Application Requirements  - Article IIl.B.2
 
0
Cl>
<:
!!..
0
"d
3
Cl>
::l rt n iij'"
Cl'J
­
::n
n
1:1.l
CT.
 
0..
::s
o:
0::s

§

:::!;.·.
a
hj"
3
0"..,'
s
;i,.

::s
0..
)("
......
(;,,)
'a..'>,
c
...,.
..s;_
c·


3
"'
 



Is the Project One of the Routine Projects Listed on this Page?





z
0







Flowchart Continued on the Next Page
 

Does the Project Permit Conditions?
(See Article III.Al
and 3)



z




NO
 





Requirements -
Article III.A.2
 
List of Routine Projects
1.	Undergr ound and Overhead Utilities
2.	Storm Sewer Outfalls, Drain Tile

z	3.Maintenance of Existing Road s and
0	Bridges
4.Sidewalks, Trails, Driveways, and Patios
5.B oardwalks
6.	Seawalls
7.	Other Shoreline and Streambank
Protection
8.	Minor Non -Commerc ial Boat Docks
9.	Signposts, Poles, Fencing, and Guardrails
10.	Minor Modification of Culverts,
Storm Sewers and Drain Tiles
11. Decks
12. Topsoil and Sand Restoration
13. Pools
14.	Replacement Onsite Waste Disposal
Systems (Septic Systems)
15.	Material Storage
16. Dredging
17.Wetland Restoration and
Enhancement
 
0
:l
'Tl
0
:E

1:1.l
,....,..,.
1:1.l
Cl>
0"_"",'
N
'--'
 






'c°o
 
 
 
:>;,
-§,
(1)
.....
8"
:i:,..
"l::l
"l::l
(1)
::i
Q
)<•
N. N 'C....>.
g.
(1)

:g:i:
::i


::i

:s::t·.
(1)


a"....'.
8"
:i:,..
"l::l
"l::l
(1)
::i
Q
)<•
N.
 



Flowchart Continued from the Previous Page








Is the Development a M.in.uL
In  termediate	E.!.!hlk.
Road or Mining
Development?
 
















Is the Development.	YES











Is the  us:;vy1y)JllJVUL.	I	See Application
Requirements -
 















I
a Wetlands and

Development?








See Application Requirements -
 















See Application Requirements  - Article V.B-G
 
t:i
(L)
<:
(L)
0
"d 3 (L)
::l
rt" n OJ'
(/)
(/)

n o.; c.
0
::i
'Tl
0
:E
n
::i­
o.;
'"""!
,.r.t.....
o.;
aq
(!)
N
0......,
N
'--'
 
w
'C....>.
Q

'""'"
s::i
<">
(3

3
Y>
 
Waters
Development?
 
Article V.B-E, G
 
Article V.B-F
 

See Application Requirements  - Article V.B-E




'°
 
 
 


Runoff Control Submittal Flowchart (Page 1of 2)
 
100
 

 
Is the
Impervious Area<
1.5-ac?

 

Stormwater Stora e is Required
 


Y ES
 
Stormwater Storage is Not Requi red
 



 
 
Is the New
Im perv ious Area -"<.------ 20,000 square
feet?
 

Stormwater Storage is Not Requ ired
 





 
Is the N ew  Impervious Area< 1-acre and .::; 10% of the Contiguous    Property?






z
0








Is the New Impervious Area <
5% of the Conti  uous Pro  er
and in a Conservation Easement?






Stormwater Storage is Required
 
Will the Development Result in Flood Damage or Other Drainage Hazard?

 

Stormwater Storage is Not Requ ired







Will the Deve lopment Resu lt in Flood Damage or Other Drainage Hazard?

 

Stormwater Storage is Not Requi red
 
Stormwater Storage is Required
















Stormwater Storage is Required
 
 
 


Runoff Control Subm ittal Flowch art (Page 2 of 2)
 
101
 

 
Is the
Deve l opment  a Minor Development





Is Stormwat er Stora e Required? (Refer to the Oth er Flowchart on this Page)






See Runoff Contro l Submitta l Requirements - Article V.E.2, 3a, 3b, 3f-j, 5
 

See Runoff Contro l Submittal Requ irements - Article V.E.2, 5






See Runoff Control Submittal Requirements - Article V.E.2- 5
 
 
 


Flood Haza rd Area Submi ttal Flowchart (Page 1of 3)



I s the Floodplai n a
ZoneAE?




z
0





Is the Floodplain a
z.o.ne..A?


 

I s the Floodplain a
Zone AH?


 


I s the Floodplain a
Zone AO?
 





Determine the BFE a nd Floodplain  Limits According to Articl e VI.C.3









Determin e the BFE and Floodplain Limits According to Article Vl.C.4-







Determine the BEE. and Floodplain Limits According to Articl e VI.C.S







Determine the BFE and Floodplain Limits According to Article Vl.C.6
 
102
 




 

 
I s the Flood Haza rd Area a
Flood Prone Area?
 
Determine the BFE and Flood Prone Area Limits Acco rding to Article VI.C.2
 
 
 


Flood H azard Area Submittal Flowchart (Page 2 of 3)
 
103
 


 
Has the BFE Been Determined? (Refer to the
Previous Page)









Will the Development Involve a B uilding or Fill in the Flood Hazard Area?







ABFE
Determination is
Not Required
 

Will the BFE
Remain the Same?







NO


Is the fl.Q..QQ_ Hazard Area  a Floodplain?

 

I s the f1Q.Q.d_
Hazard Area a
Fl ood Pron e Area?
 
A New BFE
Determi nation is Not Req u ired









See Flood Hazard Area Submittal  Requirements - Article V.F.2-6







See Flood Ha zard Area Submitta l Requ ireme nts - Articl e V.F.2-5
 
 
 


Fl ood Hazard Area Submittal Flowchart (Page 3 of 3)

Is the Development Exempt from the Compensatory Stora e Req uirements? (See Article VI.C.13(a))



z
0
 





Compensa tory Stora ge is Not Required
 
104
 

 

 
Compensatory Storage is Not Requir ed
 
See Flood H azard Area Submitta l  Requirements - Article V.F.2, 5
 







 

 

A Substanti al Improvement Calculation is is Not Required
 







See Flood H azard Area Submittal Requir ements - Article V.F.2, 3, 7, 8
 
 
 


Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submi ttal Flowchart
 
105
 

 
Are the 'wetlands and Waters und er 1lSACE_
jurisd iction?

 

Will IWMC be Impacted  by the Development?






See Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal Requirements - Article V.G.2- 6, 10
 
See Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal Requirements - Article V.G .2- 4, 10






Is the Developm ent Exempt from the JWMC Mitigation Requirements? (Refer to Article Vl.E.5.a)





See Wetlands, Waters and Buffer Area Submittal
Requirements -Article V.G.2-
11
 











See Wetlands, Waters and
Buffer Area Submittal Requ irements - Article V.G.2 -
6, 10
 
 
 
CHAPTER30 GROUNDWATER  PROTECTION

30.1	Title
30.2	Purpose and Intent
30.3	Authority and Applicability
30.4	Extent and Designations
30.5	Definitions
30.6	Permits
30.7	Regulations Which Apply Within the Minimum Setback Zone (Zone 1) of the GPPA
30.8	Regulations Which Apply Within the Maximum Setback Zone (Zone 2) of the GPPA
30.9	Regulations Which Apply Within the Five-Year Capture Zone (Zone 3) of the GPPA
30.10	Unauthorized  Releases
30.11	PenaJties
30.12	Enforcement
30.13	Notice of Violation
30.14	Appeals
30.15	Severability
30.16	Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed
30.17	Saving Clause

 
Exhibit A Exhibit B Exhibit C
 
Best Management Practices for the Construction Industry
Chemical Substance Management Plan
Wellhead Protection Planning Map for Marengo (110650)
 

30.1	TITLE

This Chapter 30 ("Chapter") shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Groundwater Protection Ordinance for the City.

30.2	PURPOSE AND INTENT


A.	In the interest of securing and promoting the public health, safety and welfare to preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water supply for the present and future generations, and to protect and preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those aquifers having a potential for future use as a public water supply, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all properties located within the Groundwater Protection Planning Area (GPPA). This Chapter establishes regulations for activities within the GPPAs for: inspection and monitoring standards for new and existing chemical substance facilities; uniform standards for release reporting; emergency respon se; substance management planning; permit procedures; and enforcement.

B.	It is the intent of this Chapter to provide a method:
 
1.	To protect the groundwater resources of the City and the surrounding area.

2.	To  provide  a  means  of  regulating  management  activities within  the
groundwater protection areas.

3.	To protect the City's drinking water supply within the GPPA from potential impacts by facilities that store, handle, treat, use or produce substances that pose a hazard to groundwater quality.

4.	To manage activities that store, handle or produce chemical substances for the protection of present and future groundwater sources within the GPPA.

30.3	AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY Amended. 05-3-2

A.	This Chapter is passed pursuant to authority conferred upon municipalities by the following sections in the Illinois Municipal Code (Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes): 5/11-12-4 et seq., 5/11-13-1 et seq., 5/11-60-2 et seq; and, 50 ILCS 805/ 1 et seq., Chapter 451,415 ILCS 511 through 5n.5 and 415 ILCS 30/1 et seq.

B.	The Groundwater Protection Committee ("Committee") is designated as the Groundwater Protection Technical Advisory Committee ("GPTAC"). Committee members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. (The words Committee and GPTAC are interchangeable in this Chapter.) Committee members shall serve until their successor is appointed. The Mayor may consider appointing committee members from the Water and Sewer Department and Building Department of the City, the Administrator , the Marengo Fire Protection District and other consultants. The purposes and duties of the GPTAC are to:

1.	Administer and implement the provisions of this  Chapter  and  other appropriate sections of this Code.

2.	Provide technical support and recommendations to the Water and Sewer Department concerning the technical definition and criteria of any groundwater protection area as described in Section 30.04 herein.

3.	Advise  the  Building  Department  when  the  GPTAC  determin es  that
performan ce standards should be amended.

4.	Provide technical support and recommendations to  the  City  Council concerning any application made to it.

5.	Advise the Building Department when the GPTAC determined that this Chapter 30 or any regulation or rule promulgated pursuant to the chapter should be amended.
 
6.	Hold public meetings on appeals.

C.	It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to make a determination of the applicability of this Chapter as it pertains to property within the City.

D.	All facilities within a groundwater protection area must comply with this Chapter prior to the issuance of any underlying permit s. Existing facilities which are not applying for an underlying permit should have come into compliance by May 21, 1999,which was one year from the effective date the ordinance establishing these provisions was passed.

E.	The following are exempt from the permit requirements of this Chapter:

1.	De Minimus Usage of Chemical Substances. Facilities that use, store or handle chemica l substances in 250-pound aggregate quantities or less, or if in liquid form, 30 gallons or less aggregate quantities during any calendar year.

2.	Single family residences provided that no home business is operated on the premises.

F.	The following are exempt from this Chapter:

1.	Department of Transportation  licensed  fuel  tanks  and  fluid  reservoirs attached to a private or commercial motor vehicle and used directly in the operation of that vehicle.

2.	The activities of construction,  repairing or maintaining any facility or improvement on lands within Zones 1, 2 or 3, provided that all contractors, subcontractor, laborers, material men and their employees when using, handling , storing or producing chemical substances in Zones 1, 2 or 3 use those applicable Best Management Practices set forth in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated herein.

3.	Activities specifically regulated under 35 Ill.Adm . Code 601.615, 616 and 617 (regulations for existing and new activities within setback zones and regulated  recharge areas); 8 Ill.Adm. Code 255 and 256 (regulations for secondary containment for agricultural pesticide and fertilizer facilities);and 8 Ill.Adm. Code  257 (cooperative groundwater protection program for agricultural chemical facilities within appropriate setback zones).

4.	If the owner of a new potential primary source, new  potential secondary source or new potential route is granted an exception by the City Council (other than land filling or land treating) pursuant to the Act, such owner shall not be  subject to this Chapter to the same extent that such owner is not subject to the Act.
 
5.	If the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source or new potential route is issued a Certificate of Minimal Hazard by the Agency pursuant to the Act, such owner shall not be subject to this ordinance to the same extent that such owner is not subject to the Act.

G.       Any action by the Agency or City Council referred to in this Chapter 30.03 shall not be final and binding on the City under this ordinance until the City has received notice of such proposed action and has had reasonable opportunity to present evidence concerning its interest.

30.4	EXTENT AND DESIGNATIONS Amended, 08-2-I

A The provisions of this Chapter shall  apply to  all properties located within the Minimum Setback Zone (Zone 1) established under Section 14.2 of the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/14.2), City of Marengo Ordinances number 90-5-1 and 96-2-5 and this Chapter, the Maximum Setback Zone (Zone 2) established under Section 14.3 of the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/14.3), City of Marengo Ordinances number 90-5-1 and 96-2-5 and this Chapter, the 5-year recharge zone (Zone 3) which is hereby established as all real property parcels located wholly or partially within the limits of the recharge area drawn on the official map entitled Wellhead Protection Planning Map for Marengo (110650) (Exhibit C) which was compiled pursuant to Section 17.1 of the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/17.1) and is hereby adopted by reference as part of this Chapter as if the maps were fully described herein, and such other areas as the City may hereafter establish as Minimum and Maximum Setback Zones and/or Wellhead Protection Areas pursuant to these authorities.

B.	In determining the location of properties within the zones depicted on the map(s), the following rules shall apply:

1.	Properties located wholly within one zone reflected on the applicable map(s), shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that Zone.

2.	Properties having parts lying within more than one zone reflected on the applicable map(s) shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the zone in which each part of the property is located.

3.	Where a travel-time contour which delineates the boundary between two zones passes through a building, the entire building shall be considered to be in that zone which is most restrictive as of the adoption date of this Chapter.

30.5	DEFINITIONS

Except as stated in this Chapter, and unless a different meaning of a word or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this Chapter shall be the same as those used in the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and the Illinois Groundwater Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/14 et
 
seq.), as amended from time to time . In addition to the definitions found inAppendix A, terms used in this Chapter, whether capitalized or not, have the following meaning:

Act: the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/ 1 et seq.).

Agency:  the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.

Aquifer: saturated (with groundwater) soils and geologic materials which are sufficiently permeable to readily yield economically useful quantities of water to readily yield economically useful quantities of water to wells, springs or streams under ordinary hydraulic gradients.

Board: The Illinois Pollution Control Board.

Containment Device: A device that is designed to contain an unauthorized release, retain it for
cleanup, and prevent released materials from penetrating into the ground.

Chemical Substance: Any "Extremely Hazardous Substance" listed in Appendix A of 40 C.F.R. Part 355, "Any Hazardous Substance" listed in 40 C.F.R. Section 302.4,and any petroleum including crude oil or any fraction thereof.

Chemical Substance Source of Groundwater Contamination: A unit at a facility or site that stores or accumulates more than 250 pounds aggregate quantities or less, or if in liquid form 30 gallons or less aggregate quantities during any calendar year.

Facility: The building and all real property contiguous thereto , and the equipment at a single location used for the conduct of business (430 ILCS 45/3).

Groundwater: Underground water which occurs within the saturated zone and geologic materials
where the fluid pressure in the pore space is equal to or greater than atomospheric pressure.

Groundwater Protection Planning Area: (GPPA) The portion of an aquifer within the five-year
capture zone of a well or well field.

Groundwater Protection Permit: An authorization by the City for a person to store, handle, use or produce a chemical substance sources within a GPPA. A Groundwater Protection Permit can include either a Development, Operating or Closure Permit pursuant to this Chapter.

Groundwater Protection Technical Advisory Committee: (GPTAC) A committee appointed by the Mayor which review s materials to determine compliance with this Chapter. Committee members may include representatives from the Water Department , Wastewater Department, Building and Zoning Department, Marengo Fire Protection District , City Council members , City Administrator and/or other professionals as deemed necessary.

Groundwater Protection Overlay Zones: Zones of the GPPA designated to provide differential
 
levels of protection. Each GPPA is subdivided into three Groundwater Protection Overlay Zones as
described below and as illustrated in the attached exhibits.


1.	Zone 1: Minimum Setback Zone, the geographic area located between a well or a well field providing potable water supply and a radial area of 400 feet (as shown in Exhibit C) or within 200 feet of a non-community or private potable water supply well.

2.	Zone 2: Maximum Setback Zone , the geographic area located between a well or a well field providing potable water to a community water supply and a regular or irregularly shaped area not to exceed 1,000 feet from the wellhead,but excluding the minimum setback zone.

3.	Zone 3: Five-Year Capture Zone, the geographic area located between a well or a well field providing potable water to a community water supply and the delineated five-year zone of capture, but excluding Zones 1 and 2.

New Chemical Substance Source of Groundwater Contamination: Means:

1.	A Chemical Substance Source which is not in existence or for which construction has not
commenced at its location as of the effective date of this regulation.

2.	A Chemical Substance Source which expands laterally beyond the currently permitted boundary or, if the chemical substance source is not permitted, the boundary in existence as of the effective date of this Chapter (February 22, 200 1).

3.	A Chemical Substance Source which is part of a facility that undergoes major reconstruction.
Such reconstruction shall be deemed to have taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components, constructed within a two- year period , exceed 50 percent of the fixed capital cost of a comparable entirely new facility.

New Potential Primary Source: Means:

1.		A potential primary source which is not in existence or for which construction has not commenced at its location , on the effective ·date of passage of this Chapter (February 22, 2001); or

2.	A potential primary source which expands laterally beyond the currently permitted boundary , or if the primary source is not permitted , the boundary, or if the primary source is not permitted , the boundary in existence; or

3.	A potential primary source which is part of a facility that undergoes major reconstruction.
Such reconstruction shall be deemed to have taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed within a two-ye ar period exceed percent of the fixed capital cost of a comparable entirely new facility . Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state and local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has
 
been initiated and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion. New  Potential  Route: Means:
1.	A potential which is not in existence or for which construction has not commenced at its
location ; or

2.	A potential route which expands laterally beyond the currently permitted boundary or, if the potential route is not permitted , the boundary in existence. Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state, and local proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.

New Potential Secondary Source: Means:

1.	A potential secondary source which is not in existence or for which construction has not commenced at its location; or

2.	A potential secondary source which expands laterally beyond the currently permitted boundary of, if the secondary source is not permitted , the boundary in existence, other than an expansion for handling of livestock waste or for treating domestic waste waters; or

3.	A potential secondary source which is a part of a facility that undergoes major reconstruction. Such reconstruction shall be deemed to have taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed within a two-year period exceed 50 percent of the fixed capital cost of a comparable entirely new facility. Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state, and local approval have been obtained, and work at the site has been initiated and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.

Operator: Any person who in control of, or having responsibility for daily operation of a facility.

Owner: Any person who owns a site, facility or unit , or part of a site, facility or unit, or who owns
the land on which the site, facility or unit is located.


Person: Any person, individual, public or private corporation, firm, association ,joint venture, trust, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer , owner, lessee, tenant or any other entity whatsoever or any combination of such, jointly or severally.

Potable Water: Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes meeting currently accepted water supply practices and principals.

Potential Primary Source: Any unit at a facility or site not currently subject to a removal or remedial action which:
 
l.       Is utilized for the treatment, storage or disposal of any hazardous or special waste not
generated at the site; or

2.	Is utilized for the disposal of municipal waste not generated at the site, other than landscape
waste and construction and demolition debris; or

3.	Is utilized for the land filling, land treating, surface impounding or piling of any hazardous or special waste that is generated on the site or at other sites owned, controlled or operated by the same person ; or

4.	Stores or accumulates at any time more than 75,000 pounds above ground, or more than
7,500 pounds below ground of any hazardous substances.

Potential Route: Aband oned and improperly plugged wells of all kinds, drainage wells, all injection wells, including closed loop heat pump wells, and any excavation for the discovery, development or production  of stone, sand or gravel.

Potential Secondary Source: Any unit at a facility or a site not currently subject to a removal or remedial action, other than a potential primary source which :

1.	Is utilized for the land filling, land treating or surface impounding of waste that is generated on the site or at other sites owned, controlled or operated by the same person, other than livestock and landscape waste, and construction and demolition debris; or

2.	Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 pounds but not more than 75,000 pounds above ground or more than 2,500 pounds but not more than 7,500 pounds below ground of any hazardous substances; or

3.	Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 gallons above ground, or more than 500 gallons below ground of petroleum including crude oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise specifically listed or designated as a hazardous substance; or

4.	Stores or accumulates pesticides , fertilizers or road oils for purposes of commercial application, or for distribution to retail sales outlets; or

5.	Stores or accumulates at any one time more than 50,000 pounds of any deicing agent; or

6.	Is utilized for handling livestock waste or for treating domestic waste waters other than private sewage disposal systems as defined in the Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act. (225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.)

Recharge Area: The area through which precipitation and surface water can enter an aquifer.

Saturated Zone :The zone in which the voids in the rock or soil are filled with water at a pressure
 
greater than atmospheric pressure.

Setback Zone: A geographic area designated pursuant to the Act and this Chapter containing a potable water supply well or a potential source or potential route having a continuous boundary, and within which certain prohibitions or regulations are applicable in order to protect groundwater.

Site: Any location, place, tract of land or facilities,  including but not  limited to buildings and improvements used for purposes subject to regulations or control by the Act or regulation s thereunder.

Unauthorized Release : Any spilling leaking, emitting, discharging, escaping, leaching or disposing of a chemical substance sources in a quantity greater than one gallon from a facility into a containment device into the air, into groundwater, surface water, surface soils or subsurface soils. Unauthoriz ed release does not include intentional withdrawals of chemical substances for the purposes of legitimate sale, use or disposal and discharges permitted under federal, state or local law.

Under lying Permit: This includes the building permits, septic permits, erosion, sediment and storm water control permits, entry access permit and well permits required by the City.

Unit: Any device, mechanism,  equipment or area (exclusive ofland utilized only for agricultural
production).

Well: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, driven, dug, fitted or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is for the location, diversion, artificial recharge or acquisition of groundwater.

Well Field: An area which contains one or more wells for obtaining a potable water supply.


30.6	PERMITS Amended. 05-3-2

A.	GENERAL  CONDITIONS

1.	No person, persons, corporation or other legal entities shall install or operate a facility in a GPPA without first obtaining a Groundwater Protection Permit from the Building Conunissioner. Prior to issuance , the Committee shall approve the application.

2.	The review for all permits shall be on the types of substances that will be stored, handled, treated, used or produced and the potential for these substances to degrade groundwater quality.

3.	For new facilities, all permits required pursuant to this Chapter must be issued prior to or concurrent with the issuance of permits for construction
 
activities or underlying permits.

4.	Existing facilities shall submit an application for a permit within one year of the passage of this Chapter or within one year of the facility's being included ina OPPA. The application must include a proposed schedule of compliance.

5.	A permit shall not be issued for a facility unless adequate  plans, specifications, test data, and/or other appropriate information has been submitted by the owner and/or operator showing that the proposed design and construction of the facility does not impact the long term, short term or cumulative quality of the aquifer.

6.	The facility owner shall apply to the City for permit renewal at least 90 days
prior to the expiration of the permit.

7.	If an inspection of the facility reveals noncompliance, then the City must verify by a follow-up inspection that all required corrections have been implemented before renewing the permit.

8.	For new activities located inZone 1, Zone 2, or Zone 3 and regulated by the above requirem ents, the applicant for a Site Plan Review has the burden of proof that the proposed activity will not adversely affect groundwater. All application s shall be prepared and considered pursuant to the City's existing Site Plan Review Ordinance and shall include written information and plan (map) information. In addition, certain management activities may require Site Plan Reviews with additional info1mation as required by this Chapter, the OPTAC, and/or the City Council.

B.	DEVELOPMENT  PERMITS

1.	The application for Development Permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be
made on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a fee of
$500. The extension application fee shall be $100.

2.	Applications for Development Permits shall be submitted at least 90 days
before the expected start of construction.
3.	Development Permits expire one year from the date of issuance unless construction has started, the owner/operator of the facility or their authorized agent shall request an extension of Development Permit. Ifthe construction period is expected to exceed one year, a request for extension shall be filed with the City at least 90 days prior to the permit expiration date.

4.	The Development Permit application shall include in addition to the other
requirements set forth in the Zoning Regulation s and Subdivision and Other
 
Land Use Regulations , the following information:

a.	Name(s), addresses, and phone number(s) of all owner(s) and/or operators of the property and/or facility. If occupant is not owner, copies of all leases pertaining to the facility must be provided.

b.	Property address, legal description and permanent identification (PIN) number for the facility.

c.	Description of proposed use, type of use or activity, commercial (trades and services), industrial (manufacturing and processing) , product produced and Standard Industrial Code (S.I.C.) ifapplicable.

d.	A description of the containment devices designed to comply with the requirements of this Chapter and the procedures for inspection and maintenance of containment devices.

e.	A copy of engineering plans prepared by an Illinois registered professional engineer showing the following:

I.	Location of all public water supply well s within 1,000 feet of
the development.

II.	Location of all private drinking water supply wells, streams and other watercourses tributary to any Class A stream within 1,000 feet of the development.

lll.	The location of the facility and its property boundaries and the location(s), size(s), and length(s) of all existing structures including buildings, above and underground utilities.

JV.		A map, at scale no greater than  1 inch = 200 feet indicating geographic North and th e location of the  property  and all proposed	improvements    thereon    and   their  geographic relationship  by  the  depiction  of  the   City's   corporate boundaries and the Groundwater Protection Planning Areas.

V.	A site plan and building floor plan showing hazardous materials loading, storage, handling and process areas, floor drains, process vents, sewage disposal, and waste storage or disposal areas; including the location where substances regulated by this Chapter are stored, handled, treated, used , or produced , and the locations of each containment device.
 
VI.	Floodplain/stormwater  delineation.

C.	OPERATING PERMITS

1.	The Operation Permit application shall be filed with the City when construction is complete. An Operating Permit is required for all project s which require a Development Permit. The approved Operating Permit shall be obtained before the project is placed in service or any chemical substances are permitted to be delivered to, or generated on the site.

2.	The application for Operating Pennits pursuant to this Chapter shall be made on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by such other documents, certifications and other materials as the Building and Zoning Department shall require, and a fee of $100. An Operating Permit issued by the City shall be effective for one year. The City shall not issue a permit to operate a facility until the City has determined that the facility complies with the provisions of these regulations.

3.	The application for Operating Permits shall be submitted at least 15 days before putting the facility in operation.

4.	The Operating Permit application shall include:

a.	A report certified by an Illinois register profession engineer which will demonstrate that the Development Pennit requirements and conditions have been met in all respects.

b.	The owner and/or operator certification that a Chemical Substance Management Plan  is available upon inspection.  (Contents of  a Chemical Substance Management Plan may be found in Exhibit B of this Chapter).

5.	Operating Permits may be transferred to a new facility owner/operator if the new facility owner/operator does not change any conditions of the permit, if the transfer is registered with the City within 30 days of the change in ownership, and any necessary modifications are made to the information in the initial permit application due to the change in ownership.

6.	Within 30 days of receiving an inspection report with permit deficiencies for the City, the Operating Permit holder shall file with the City a plan to implement any required modifications to the facility or to the monitoring plan needed to achieve compliance with the intent of this Chapter of the permit conditions. This plan shall also implement all of the recommendations set out by the City. The City shall determine the time period for implementing the
 
City's recommendations correcting any deficiencies.

D.	CLOSURE PERMITS

I.	No person shall close or cause to be closed a facility regulated pursuant to this Chapter without first obtaining a Closure Permit from the City. The City shall not issue a permit to temporarily or permanently close a facility unless adequate plan s and specifications and other appropriate information have been submitted by the applicant showing that the proposed closure meets the intent and provisions of this Chapter.

2.	The application for a Closure Permit shall be submitted at least 90 days before closure.

3.	The application for a Closure Permit pur suant to this Chapter shall be made
on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a fee of $200.

4.	Closure Permits shall be required for all facilities that cease to store, handle, treat, use, or produce chemical substances for a period of more than 365 days or when the owner has no intent within the next year to store, handle, treat, use , or produce chemical substances. During the period of time between cessation of chemical substance storage, handling, treatment, use, or production, and actual completion of facility closure, the applicable containment and monitoring requirements of this Chapter shall continue to apply.

5.	Prior to closure, the facility owner shall submit to the City a plan describing how the owner intends to comply with closure requirements. Owners proposing to close a facility shall comply with the following requirements:

Chemical substances shall be removed from the facility, including residential liquids, solids, or slud ges to levels specified in the approved closure plan. Any residues generated from the closure activities shall be disposed of in complian ce with the Act.

6.	The owner of a facility being closed shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of City that closure has been completed in accordance with the approved plan submitted pursuant to Section 30.06-D4 herein.

7.	Facility closure will be  accepted as complete by the City upon implementation of the Closure Permit conditions and compliance with all provisions of this Chapter.

E.	SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL PERMITS
 
1.	Right oflnspection: The pennitee shall allow any agent duly authorized by the City upon presentation of credentials, and in accordance with the constitutional limitations to:

a.	Enter at reasonable times, the pennitee's premises where the permitted facility is located or where any activity is to be conducted pursuant to a pennit.

b.	Have access to and copy at reasonable times any records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of pennit.

c.	Inspect at reasonable times including during any hours of operation:

I.	Equipment constructed or operated under the permit.

II.	Equipment or monitoring methodology.

III.	Equipment required to be kept, used, operated, calibrated and maintained under the permit

2.	Permit Limitations: All pennits issued under this Chapter shall not be valid until applications for all other permits required at this facility have been made and received.

3.	Revisions and Alterations: Any propos ed deviation from plans and specifications previous approved by the City shall require approval by the City before such changes are made. Examples of changes are those which affect the location, capacity, hydraulic conditions, operating units or functioning of containment or monitoring devices.

F.	PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND REVIEW PROCESS

1.	Filing of application s and final action by the City.

a.	The filing date is the date when the City receives the application.

b.	The City shall take final action by granting or denying development, closure, or renewal permits within 90 days of the filing of the application. The City shall take final action by granting or denying operating permits within 30 days of filing the application. Applicants may waive the time limitations by advising the City in writing.

2.	Permit Application Review.
 
a.	When a permit application is submitted to the Committee, the Committee shall reject the application or issue a permit within 30 days after submitaL In the event the application is rejected, the reasons shall be put in writing.

b.	Permit applications shall not be considered accepted until all required documentation has been filed with the Committee. The City shall have available to the public,  in written form, what documentation shall accompany an application.

30.7	REGULATIONS  WHICH  APPLY WITHIN  THE MINIMUM  SETBACK  ZONE (ZONE 1) OF THE GPPA

A.	PROHIBITED USES AND ACTIVITIES

1.	Except as provided in Section 30.06, no person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source or new potential route within the minimum setback zone(s) of any existing or permitted community water supply well in the City.

2.	Except as provided in Section 30.06, no person shall alter or change an existing potential primary source, potential secondary source or potential route where the alteration or change would result in a potential source or route that would be prohibited under this Chapter if it were a new potential source or route within the minimum setback zones.

B.	REVIEW AND APPROVAL  OF PROPOSED ACTIVITIES

1.	All proposals for new chemical substance sources within the minimum setback zone (Zone 1)must be reviewed by the City for compliance with this Chapter, including the issuance of a Groundwater Protection Permit pursuant to this Chapter prior to issuance of any underlying permit.

2.	No Groundwater Protection Permit shall be issued unless a finding is made by the  City that the proposal will not impact the long term, short term or cumulative quality of aquifer. The find shall be based on the present or past land use  activities  conducted at the chemical substance source, chemical substances stored, handled, treated, used or produced and the potential for the activities or chemical substances to degrade groundwater quality.

30.8	REGULATIONS WHICH APPLY WITHIN THE MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE (ZONE 2) OF THE GPPA
 
A.	PROHIBITED USES AND ACTIVITIES

I . Except as provided in Section 30.06, no person shall place a new potential primary source within the maximum setback zone(s) of any existing or permitted community water supply well in the City.

2.	Except as provided in Section 30.06, no person shall alter or change an existing potential primary source where the alteration or change would result ina potential source or route that would be prohibited under this Chapter if it were a new potential source or route within the maxinmm setback zones.

B.	REVIEW AND APPROVAL  OF PROPOSED ACTIVITIES

1.	All proposals for new chemical substance sources which use, store, handle, treat or produce a chemical substance within the maximum setback zone (Zone 2) must be reviewed by the City for compliance with this Chapter, including obtaining a Groundwater Protection Permit pursuant to this Chapter prior to issuance of any underlying permit.

2.	No Groundwater Protection Permit shall be issued unless a finding is made by the City that the proposal will not impact the long term, short term or cumulative quality of the aquifer. The finding shall be based on the present or past land use activities conducted at the facility, chemical substances stored, handled, treated, used or produced, and the potential for the activities or chemical substances to degrade groundwater quality.

30.9	REGULATION  WHICH APPLY WITHIN THE FIVE-YEAR  CAPTURE ZONE (ZONE 3) OF THE GPPA

A.	All proposals for new chemical substance sources within the 5-year capture zone (Zone 3) must be reviewed by the City for compliance with this Chapter, including obtaining a Groundwater Protection Permit pur suant to this Chapter prior to issuance of any underlying permit.

B.	No Groundwater Protection Permit shall be issued unless a finding is made by the City that the proposal will not impact the long term, short term or cumulative quality of the aquifer. The finding shall be based on the present or past land use activities conducted at the chemical substance source, chemical substances stored , handled , treated,used or produced , and the potential for the activities or chemical substances to degrade groundwater quality .

30.10	UNAUTHORIZED RELEASES

A.	GENERAL PROVISIONS. Any unplanned release is unauthori zed and must be either reported to the Marengo Fire Protection District or recorded in the owner's inspection and maintenance log according to the provisions of this Section 30. IO. An unauthorized release is an
 
"unauthorized release requiring recording" if the release is completely captured by the containment device. Ifthe containment device fails to contain the entire release, the release is an "unauthorized release requiring reporting." Reporting a release to the Marengo Fire Protection District does not exempt or preempt any other reporting requirements under federal, state or local laws.

B.	UNAUTHORIZED RELEASES REQUIRING RECORDING. Unauthorized releases
requiring recording shall be reported in the facility's operating report.

C.	UNAUTHORIZED  RELEASES REQUIRING REPORTING

1.	Unauthorized releases requiring reporting shall be verbally reported to the Marengo Fire Protection District immediately.

2.	A written report shall be submitted promptly  thereafter containing the
following information that is known at the time of filing the report:

a.	List of type, quantity and concentration of chemical substance(s)
released.


b.	The results of all investigations completed at that time to determine the extent of soil or groundwater or surface water contamination because of the release.

c.	Method of cleanup implemented to date, proposed cleanup actions and approximate cost of actions taken to date.

d.	Method and location of disposal of the released chemical substance  sources and any contaminated soils, groundwater or surface water.

e.	Proposed method of repair or replacement of the containment device.

f.	Chemical substance source owner's name and telephone numbers .

3.	Until cleanup is complete, the owner shall submit reports containing the reporting required by Section 30.10-C herein to the City, every month or at a more frequent interval specified by the inspector.

4.	The City shall either find that the containment standards of this Chapter can continue to be achieved or shall recommend the revocation of the permit until appropriate modifications are made to allow compliance with the standards.

5.	The chemical substance source owner and/or operator jointly and severally shall be responsible for any costs incurred by the City or its authorized agents in the conduct  of such remedial  actions, including but not  limited  to all
 
consultant, engineering and attorney fees.

30.11	PENALTIES

A.	A violation of any of the provision s of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and a nuisance. It shall be a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted.

B.	Any owner or operator who violates any provisions of this Chapter shall be subject,
upon conviction in court, to a fine not to exceed $500 per day, per chemical substance source.

C.	In addition to any fines and penalties set forth above, the owner or operator shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs incurred as a result of responding to, containing,cleaning up or monitoring the cleaning up and disposal of any spilled or leaked chemical substance sources including but not limited to consultant, engineering and legal fees.

30.12	ENFORCEMENT Amended, 05-3-2

A.	The Committee shall be the administering agency and shall have the power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The City shall have the right to conduct inspections of chemical substance sources at reasonable times to determine compliance with this Chapter.

B.	The City may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter after notice to the permitee and after affording the permitee an opportunity to meet either in person or by telephone if it finds that the permit holder:

1.	Has failed or refused to comply with any provision of this Chapter.

2.	Has submitted false or inaccurate information in a permit application.

3.	Has refused lawful inspection.

4.	Has an unauthorized release and the Groundwater Protection Technical Advisory Committee finds that the containment standards of this Chapter cannot continue to be achieved.

30.13	NOTICE OF VIOLATION

Whenever it is determined that there is a violation of this Chapter, the notice of violation issued shall:

1.	Be in writing and delivered to the owner or operator by certified/registered mail.
 
2.	Be dated and signed by the authorized City agent making the inspection.

3.	Specify the violation or violations.

4.	Specify the length of time to correct the violation after receiving the notice of violation.

30.14	APPEALS Amended, 05-3-2

Any decision made by the GTPAC or Building Department pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed to the City Council. Appeals to the City Council take place by filing an appeal in writing with the City within 15 days after receipt of a decision in writing by the GTPAC. A hearing with the Marengo City Council will be held within 60 days of submission of the appeal or petition.

30.15	SEVERABILITY

Ifany section, subsection, subdivision ,paragraph , sentence , clause or phrase in this Chapter, or any part thereof , or application thereof to any person is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction . Such a decision shall not affect the validity of effectiveness of the of the remaining portion s of this Chapter or any part thereof. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the City Council that this Chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof not then been included.

30.16	INCONSISTENT  ORDINANCES  REPEALED

All other ordinances, or parts of ordinances, in conflict herewith are repealed.

30.17	SAVING  CLAUSE

Nothing in this Chapter hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred , or any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in this Chapter.
 
EXHIBIT A
BEST MANAGEMENT  PRACTICES FOR THE CONSTRUCTION  INDUSTRY

1.	The general contractor, or if none the property owner, shall be responsible for assuring that each contractor or subcontractor evaluates each site before construction is initiated to determine if any site conditions may pose particular problems for the handling of any chemical substances. For instance, handling chemical substance(s) in the proximity of a Groundwater Protection Overlay Zone or water bodies may be improper.

2.	If any chemical substances are stored on the construction site during the construction process, they shall be stored in a location and manner which will minimize any possible risk of release to the environment. Any storage of 55 gallons (208 liters), or 440 pounds (200 kilograms), or more containing chemical substances shall have constructed below it an imperviou s containment system constructed of material s of sufficient thickness, density and composition that will prevent the discharge to the land, groundwater or surface water of any pollutant which may emanate from said storage container or containers. Each containment system shall be able to contain 110percent of the contents of all storage containers above the containment  system.

3.	Each contractor shall familiarize him/herself with the manufacturer's safety data sheet supplied with each material containing a chemical substance sources and shall be familiar vvith procedure s required to contain and clean up any releases of the chemical substance. Any tool s or equipment necessary to accomplish same shall be available in case of a release.

4.	Upon completion of construction, all unused and waste chemical substances and containment systems shall be removed from the construction site by the respon sible contractor, and shall be disposed of in a proper manner as prescribed by law.
 
EXHIBITB
CHEMICAL SUBSTANCE MANAGEMENT PLAN

A Chemical Substance Management Plan shall be required as a condition of each Operating Permit. If a Spill Prevention Control Plan (SPCC), Best Practices Management Plan or similar contingency plan has been prepared in accordance with Illinois or United States Enviromnental Protection Agency requirements; a Chemical Substance Management Plan (CSMP) is not required as long as all of the chemical substances and requirements of a CSMP are included in the spill prevention control plan. The Chemical Substance Management Plan shall include:

I.	The names and volumes of all chemical substances which are to be stored, handled, treated , used or produced at the facility being permitted quantities greater than the minimum amounts specified by this Chapter 30.

2.	Location of adjacent (within 400 feet of the property line) public or private drinking water supply wells.

3.	A brief description of the manner in which the on site chemical substances are stored and
used.

4.	A potential release assessment and the response procedures to be followed at the chemical
substance source for notifying the local emergency response agencies.

5.	Any management measures that are employed to reduce the potential for releases.
 
EXHIBITC
WELLHEAD PROTECTION PLANNING MAP FOR MARENGO (110650)










-----.Wellhead  Protection Planning
Map/or
Marengo  (110650)


Legend

_.N'Roads
/\J.Rails
/\/Streams
•	CWS Wells  glYlinimum   Setback  Zone flB Maximum Setback Zone
:·; t?5 5-Year Recharge Arca
e.
.	.

lUiuois EPA
Division of Public Water Supplies Groundwater Section
2007

Source lufonnatio1l Coverages obtained from Illiuois JJNR
5-YcarReclJargcAr	t..leli11c;1let.l by the llliuois E11viro11me11!al Protectio11 Agency.
 
CHAPTER31
LICENSES AND PERMITS

31.1	Garage Sales
31.2	Raffles
31.3	Bed and Breakfast Licensing Requirements



31.1	GARAGE SALES Amend ed, 13-6-2

A.	PERMITS AND FEES:

I . For the purposes of the Section, the term "garage sale" shall mean and in­ clude all sales of tangible personal property conducted on premises in the City that are zoned for residential use, regardless of the name by which such sale may be called.

2.	Permits for garage sales shall be limited to the sale of household goods and furnishings .No person, firm or corporation shall, at any garage sale, sell any goods acquired in wholesale lots.

B.	LICENSING: Such license shall be issued to any one address only twice withfo a 12- month period and no such license shall be issued for more than six days total for the 12 month peri­ od. The license shall allow for the sale to be conducted between the hours of 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. on the permitted days. Each license issued under this Section 31.01 must be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.

Each license issued under this Section 31 .01 must be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.

C.	SIGNS: Signs advertising or indicating the existence, location and time of a sale shall be limited to three in number and shall be displayed only during the dates the sale is in progress. A sign must have its own support or post to be affixed in the ground. Under no circumstances shall a sign be attached to a telephone pole, tree or a federal, state or local sign or signal. No sign shall pro­ ject higher than three feet above the ground level. All signs must be removed by the party holding the sale within 24 hours of the last day of the sale.

D.	INFORMATION TO BE FILED: The information to be filed with the license appli- cation shall be as follows:

1.	Name of person , firm, group, corporation, association or organization con­
ducting said sale.


2.	Name of owner of the property on which said sale is to be conducted if appli-
 
cant is other than the owner.


3.	Location at which sale is to be conducted .


4.	Dates of sale.


5.	Date, nature of any past sale.


6.	Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation conducting any past sale and the date or dates of such sale.

7.	Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by any local, state or federal agency.

8.	The location of any signs applicant intends to place.


9.	Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.

E.	PERSONS AND SALES EXCEPTED: The provisions of this Section 31.02 shall not
apply to or affect the following persons or sales:


1.	Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction .

2.	Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.


3.	Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal prop­ erty which are specifically name or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.

4.	Not-for-profit organizations provided they file with the Administrator a re­ quest for exception containing the information specified in Section 31.01-D herein , together with the name of the organization, proof of its not-for-profit status and a description of the purpose of the sale.

F. PENALTY: Any person, association or corporation con ducting any such sale without being properly licensed therefore or who shall violate any of the other terms and regulations of this Section 31.01 shall, upon conviction , be fined not Jess than $25 nor more than $500 for each viola­ tion.

31.2	RAFFLES
 
A.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, the terms used in this Section 31.02 are defined as follows:

Business organization: A voluntary organization composed ofindividuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial , financial , industrial and civic interests of the City.

Charitable organization: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indef­ inite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefits upon the public.

Educational organization : An organization or institution organized and operated to provide sys­ tematic instruction in useful branches ofleaming by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported  schools.

Fraternal organization: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare ofits members and to provide assistance to the general pub­ lic in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by the government.

Labor organization: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of better­ ment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.

Net proceeds: The gross receipts from the conduct ofraffles, less sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.

Non-profit organization: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of such operation.

On-going raffle: A raffle in which there is one sale of chances before an initial drawing date; there­
after, the chances shall be valid at subsequent drawings in the same raffle.

Raffle : A form oflottery, as defined in Section 5/28-2(b) of the "Criminal Code of 1961"(720 ILCS 5/28-2) conducted by an organization licensed under this Section 31.01 in which:

1.	The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance represented and differenti­ ated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other means, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance;

2.	The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or con­ nected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the out­ come of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
 

Religious organization: Any church, congregation , society or organization founded for the purpose
of religious worship.

Veterans organization : An organization or association comprised of members of which substantial­ ly all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary pur­ pose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general pub­ lic in such a way as to confer a public benefit.

B.	LICENSE REQUIRED: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a raffle or to sell, offer for sale, convey, issue or otherwise transfer for value a chance on a raffle, un­ less conducted pursuant to a license duly issued by the City and in accordance with the provisions of this Section 31.02.

C.	LICENSE APPLICATION:

1.	Contents of Application : Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an application therefor with the Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall contain the following information:

(a)	The name, address and type of organization ;

(b)	The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the date and state of incorporation;

(c)	The name, address, telephone number , social security number and date of birth of the organization's presiding officer, secretary, raffles manager and any other members responsible for the conduct and op­ eration of the raffle;

(d)	The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle;

(e)	The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in the raffle;

(f)	The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold;

(g)	The maximum number ofraffle chances to be issued;

(h)	The area or areas in which the raffle chances will be sold or issued ;

(i)	The time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold;

(j)	The date, time and location at which winning chances will be deter­
mined;
 

(k)	A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the ap­ plicant organization, signed by the presiding officer and secretary of that organization; and

(I)	A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant organiza­ tion attesting to the fact that the information contained in the applica­ tion is true and correct.

2.	Fees: A fee shall be charged by the City and paid to the Clerk at the time of application for a raffle license. Not-for-profit organizations shall be exempt from paying said license fee. The fee, based on the aggregate retail value of prizes, shall be:

Aggregate Retail Value of Prize

Less than $500	$5
$500 to $999	15
$1,000 to $9,999	25
$10,000 to $99,999	35
More than $100,000	50

D.	LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS: Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide charitable, educational , fraternal, labor, religious and veterans organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years or more immediately preceding the making of application for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to a non­ profit fund raising organization that the City detennines is organized for the sole purpose of provid­ ing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.

The following are ineligible for any license under this Section 31.02:


1.	Any person who has been convicted of a felony;


2.	Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or a gambling promot­ er;

3.	Any person who is not of good moral character;


4.	Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in 31.02-D-1, 2 or 3 has a proprietary , equitable or credit interest,or in which such a person is active or employed ;
 
5.	Any organization in which a person defined in 31.02-D-1 , 2 or 3 is an officer,
director or employee, whether compensated or not; and

6.	Any organization in which a person defined in 31.02-D-1, 2 or 3 is to partici­
pate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined herein.

E.	ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:


1.	The Administrator or his designee shall review all raffle license applications and shall, within 30 days from the date of application , accept or reject a raffle license application. Ifan application is accepted a license shall be issued and shall be valid for a period of 30 days from and after its issuance unless the Administrator specifically authorizes a license for a longer period , but in no case for more than 60 days, except for on-going raffles as defined herein.

2.	A raffle license shall show the following:

(a)	The area or areas in which raffle chances may be sold or issued;

(b)	The period of time during which the raffle chances may be sold or is­ sued;

(c)	The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance is­ sued or sold; and

(d)	The date, time and location on or at which winning chances will be
determined .

3.	Said license shall be prominently displayed at the time and location of the de­ termination of the winning chances.

4.	A license shall be valid for one raffle only; however, multiple licenses may be issued for multiple raffles to a licensee.

F.	CONDUCT OF RAFFLES: The operation and conduct of raffles are subject to the
following  restrictions:


I.	The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the law­
ful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct that game;

2.	No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle;

3.	No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating  in the
 
management or operation of the raffle;

4.	A licensee may rent a premises on which to deter mine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this Section 31.02;

5.	Raffle chances may be sold, offered for sale, conveyed , issued or otherwise transferred for value only within the area specified on the license, and win­ ning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the li­ cense;

6.	Each raffle chance shall have printed thereon the following:

(a)	The cost of said chance;

(b)	The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in said raffle;

(c)	The maximum number of raffle chances to be issued; and

(d)	The date(s), time(s) and location(s) on or at which winning chances will be detennined.

However , when raffle chances are sold, conveyed, issued or otherwise trans­ ferred only at the time and location at which winning chances will be deter­ mined and only to persons then in attendance, the face of the raffle chance need not contain such information.

7.	No cash prize in excess of $500,000 may be awarded.

8.	No real property , including land and any buildings thereon, may be the prize in a raffle unless the organization holding the raffle license owns fee simple title as to the entire subject real property.

9.	No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting ofraf­ fles of chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian.

10.	No chance shal1 be sold, offered for sale, conveyed , issued or otherwise transferred for value to or by any person under the age of 18 years without the permission of his parent or guardian .

Not withstanding the foregoing, any person may make a gift of a chance to any person of any age.
 
G.	RAFFLES MANAGER, BONDS: All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization .

The raffles manager shall give a fidelity bond , equal in amount to the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded, in favor of the licensee, conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation.

H.	RECORDS:

1.	.          Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net pro­ ceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are to be determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single fathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be item­ ized as to payee , purpose , amount and date of payment.

2.	Gross receipts from the operation ofraffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the licensee, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Illinois Department of Revenue, and placed in a sepa­ rate account. Each licensee shall have separate records ofits raffles. The per­ son who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the op­ eration of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other reve­ nues of the organization.

3.	Each licensee shall report within 30 days after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and to the Clerk: its gross receipts, expenses and net pro­ ceeds for raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required herein.

4.	Records required herein shall be preserved for three years, and licensees shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspec­ tion at reasonable times and places.

I.     PENALTIES: Violation of this Section 31.02 or any of its requirements or provisions shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Each member of the sponsoring organization shall be jointly and severally liable with the organization and with each other for any violation.

The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the City from instituting ap­ propriate action to prevent unlawful raffles or to restrain, enjoin, correct or abate a violation of this Section 31.02 or of the condition s of the raffle license issued pursuant hereto.
 

31.3	BED AND BREAKFAST LICENSING REQUIREMENTS Ord. 09-9-3

A.	PURPOSE: The purpose of this Section is to set forth licensing requirements , stand-
ards and procedures for bed and breakfast establishments in the City.

B.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to those terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, the following definitions shall be applicable to this Section:

Bed and breakfast establishment ("establishment") : An operator-occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than 5 guest rooms for rent, in operation for more than 10 nights in a 12-month period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfa st establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses or food service establish­ ments.

Bed and breakfast guest ("guest"): Any person or persons staying in a guest room overnight on a transient basis, but for not more than 15 consecutive days, and having a permanent residence at an address other than that of the establishment.

Guest room: A sleeping room intended to serve no more than 2 transient guests per night.

Operator: The owner of an establishment , or the owner's agent, who is required by the Bed and Breakfast Act (50 ILCS 820/1 et seq.) ("Act") to reside in the establishment , or on contiguou s prop­ erty.

C.	LICENSING AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:

1.	An establishment shall not be operated or maintained in the City without first obtaining a valid operating license as required by this Section and a special use permit pursuant to the Marengo Zoning Ordinance.

2.	Bed and breakfast operating license applications are available from City Hall.
Completed applications shall be submitted to the City Administrator.

3.	A bed and breakfast operating license shall not be issued or renewed until the facilities have been inspected and approved by the City, McHenry County Health Department and the Marengo Fire Protection District. Proof of such inspection s shall be submitted with the initial application or renewal applica­ tion.

4.	Each license issued shall expire on December 31 after the first calendar year or portion thereof and following two consecutive calendar years of operation. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date.
 

5.	A bed and breakfast operating license shall be conspicuously displayed with­ in the establishment and cannot be transferred to another person , location or establishment.

6.	The fee for an operating or renewal license shall be $25 and shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued and for the following two consecutive calendar years.

D.	MINIMUM STANDARDS: An establishment shall be subject to the requirements of the Act and the following minimum standards:

1.	Each establishment shall maintain a guest register and available for inspec­ tion by the City at any time.

2.	Guests shall not be permitted to stay overnight in any portion of the estab­
lishment that is not designated as a guest room.


3.	One off-street parking space shall be provided for each authorized guest room , plus an additional two spaces for the principle residential dwelling. These requirements may be reduced by the City if the operator can demon­ strate the ability of and permission to use alternative off-site parking accom­ modations.

4.	Exterior signage for the establishment in a residential zoning district shall consist of no more that one sign having an area of no more than three square feet and kept in good repair.

5.	Means of egress from an establishment shall not be blocked or obstructed.


6.	Whenever guests are present the owner or the owner's agent shall be present.


7.	The owner of the establishment shall have liability insurance coverage for guests in the amount of at least $500,000. A copy of such insurance coverage shall be submitted with the license application or license renewal.

E.	PENALTY: Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating, disobeying or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Section, the Act and/or special use permit shall be fined not less than $200 or more than $750 for each offense. In addition to this penalty, a licensee violating any provision of this Section, the Act, special use permit or other applicable and relevant regulations of the City may be subject to having their license revoked , suspended or not renewed.
 
CHAPTER 32
BUSINESS REGULATIONS & AMUSEMENT LICENSE

32.1	Definition
32.2	Amusement License Intent
32.3	Amusement License Required
32.4	Amusement License Application and Fee
32.5	Amusement License Conditions
32.6	Inspection and Seizure of Amusement Devices
32.7	Amusement Device Confiscation, Forfeiture, Hearing and Sale
32.8	Amusement Device Violations and Penalties
32.9	Amusement Device Judicial Review
32.10	Business Licenses Exhibit A   License Fee Schedule

32.1	DEFINITION

For purposes of this Chapter, a coin operated or automatic amusement device is defined as: each and any machine, apparatus or device which, upon insertion of a coin, token or dollar bill(s), may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement of any kind or description, whereby the player initiates, employs or directs any force or energy by the machine.

32.2	AMUSEMENT LICENSE INTENT

Any person, partnership, firm, club, association or corporation engaged in the business of leasing, renting or contracting for the use or display of a coin operated device to be used or operated by the public within the City for entertainment or recreation purposes shall, before entering any lease, retail agreement or contract agreement with the owner or lessee of any premises, obtain a license from the City for the purpose of engaging in the business of leasing, renting or contracting for the use of any such devices. Or, any person, partnership, firm club, association or corporation owning any coin operated device and also engaging in any business whereby these internally owned de- vices are to be used or operated by the public within the jurisdiction of the City for entertainment, amusement or recreation purposes, shall obtain a license for the purpose of so displaying such devices for use or operation by the public.

32.3	AMUSEMENT LICENSE REQUIRED

No person, partnership, firm, club, association or corporation shall operate or maintain any au- tomatic amusement device without first having obtained a license as provided in this Chapter 32.

32.4	AMUSEMENT LICENSE APPLICATION AND FEE

A.	APPLICATION FOR AMUSEMENT LICENSE: Any person, partnership, firm, club, association or corporation desiring a City amusement license shall make application for that purpose to the City, which application shall set forth the following information:
 
1.	The full name of the applicant.

2.	The address, location and character of the building or place wherein the automatic amusement devices are to be located, maintained and operated.

3.	The number of such devices to be located, maintained and operated in such building or place.

4.	The type of machine to be located, maintained and operated and the charge to be made to the customer for operating such device.

B.	AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE FEE: See Exhibit A of this Chapter

32.5	AMUSEMENT LICENSE CONDITIONS Amended, 12-10-3, 12-5-3

A.	PLACEMENT OF AMUSEMENT DEVICES: All licensed automatic amusement devices shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such devices are kept or used. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to authorize, regulate, permit or license any gambling device or authorize any gambling which shall only be permitted as provided in Section 33.38 of this Code.

B.	DISPLAY OF AMUSEMENT LICENSE: Each automatic amusement device shall have a City issued license affixed to the device in plain view as to allow for an inspection of the device.

C.	REVOCATION OF LICENSE: In addition to any penalty imposed, the City may revoke such license for good cause, including a violation of this Chapter or any other ordinance or law of the State pertaining to automatic amusement devices or conduct of the business in which the automatic amusement device is kept or used.

D.	TERMS OF AMUSEMENT LICENSE: Each license shall be for a one year period which shall be from May 1st through April 30th of each following year. Any license issued after May 1st shall require the $50.00 fee per device and will expire April 30th regardless of the date issued. Licenses are not to be transferred amongst machines and will be replaced if lost, damaged or stolen for a fee of $2.00. All automatic amusement devices must be in compliance within 30 days of the adoption of this amendment (February 9, 2006)

32.6	INSPECTION AND SEIZURE OF AMUSEMENT DEVICES

Any automatic amusement device operated within the City is subject to inspection by the City. Any authorized City employee may, without a search warrant, seize any automatic amusement device which is being displayed in his or her presence in a manner that violates any provision of this Chapter. Such amusement device so seized shall be subject to confiscation and forfeiture as hereinafter provided.
 
32.7	AMUSEMENT  DEVICE  CONFISCATION,  FORFEITURE,  HEARING  AND SALE

After seizing any automatic amusement device as provided in Section 32.06, the City’s General Administration Committee (“Committee” for purposes of this Chapter) shall hold a hearing and determine whether such amusement device was properly licensed and/or being used in a manner which violates any provision of this Chapter.

Notification of this hearing will be posted at City Hall, 132 East Prairie Street, sent via certified mail to the owner of the automatic amusement device as reflected on the license application and if such person is not the owner of the seized device, sent via certified mail to the person who was in possession of the automatic amusement device at the time such device was confiscated at the ad- dress where such device was confiscated.

In the case neither the owner nor the person in possession of the amusement device is known, the Committee shall cause publication of the time and place of such hearing to be made at least once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
If, as a result of such hearing, the Committee determines that the seized amusement device was, at the time of seizure, being displayed in a manner which violates this Chapter, the Committee shall enter an order declaring the amusement device confiscated and forfeited to the City and to be sold by the City in the manner provided herein. The Committee shall give notice of such order to the owner of the device if he or she is known and also to the person in whose possession the amuse- ment device so taken was found. In the case neither the owner nor the person in possession of the device is known, the Committee shall cause publication of such order to be made at least once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.

The person from whom the amusement device has been seized (or the owner, if that is a different person) may redeem and reclaim the device within 30 days after the Committee’s order of con- fiscation and forfeiture becomes final by payment of an amount equal to twice the annual fee ap- plicable to the amusement device, plus any cost of seizure, transportation, storage of the device and public hearing, as well as any fines imposed.

If no complaint for review, as provided in Section 32.09, has been filed within the time required by the Administrative Review Law and if such amusement device is not redeemed and reclaimed within the time and in the manner provided for in this Section, the Committee shall proceed to sell said property for the best price obtainable and shall forthwith pay over the proceeds of such sale to the City; provided, however, that if the value of the property to be sold at any one time shall be
$500.00 or more, such property shall be sold only to the highest and best bidder on such terms and conditions and on open competitive bidding after public advertisement.

32.8	AMUSEMENT DEVICES VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

A.	Any licensee, person, partnership, firm, club, association or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter on any two occasions which are separated by a period of not less than 30 days, shall have its license revoked if, upon a bearing before the Com- mittee, there is a finding that said violations did occur. In such event the license shall be revoked
 
forthwith and in addition, the licensee or any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity, shall be ineligible to be licensed in the following year.

Thereafter, any licensee, person partnership, firm, club, association or corporation con- victed of a third violation of the provision of this Chapter occurring at any time if, upon a hearing before the Committee, there is a finding that said violations did occur, then no such licensee, person, partnership, firm or corporation required to be licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall be granted a license under the provision of this Chapter and any license issued to such licensee shall be revoked.

B.	Any person, partnership, firm club, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day that the violation exists shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.

C.	Any person, partnership, firm, club, association or corporation who shall know- ingly file a false application or provide false information on the application required by this Chapter shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.

32.9	AMUSEMENT DEVICE JUDICIAL REVIEW

All final administrative decisions of the City and/or the Committee under any Section of this Chapter shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law and any amendment and/or modifications thereof and the rules adopted relative thereto.

32.10	BUSINESS LICENSES

The annual license fee for certain specified businesses and events is found in Exhibit A of this Chapter.

EXHIBIT A
Business/Event	Fee
Automatic amusement device, for each device	$50
Carnival, per day (65 ILCS 11-54.102)	$150
Cigarette vending machine	$75
Circus, per day (65 ILCS 5/11-42-5)	$150
Dance hall, entertainment provided (65 ILCS 5/11-42-5)	$150
Food dispensing vehicle	
For one vehicle	$50
For each additional vehicle	$25
Handbills, samples and advertisements, distribution (Distribution of free political, civic
or religious items and advertising for City businesses are exempt.)	$50
Junk peddler, for each vehicle (65 ILCS 5/11-42-5)	$100
Solicitation, Chapter 35, per person for a three-day license	$10
Sound trucks, operators per vehicle per day	$25
Taxicab, maximum fee for each taxicab business (65 ILCS 5/11-42-6)	$75
 
CHAPTER 33
LIQUOR CONTROL AND LIQUOR LICENSING

33.1	Definitions
33.2	License Required
33.3	Application
33.4	Disposition of Fees
33.5	Application Requirements
33.6	Term, Prorating Fee
33.7	License Classification and fees; approval authority; limitation on number of licenses
33.8	Records
33.9	Death or Bankruptcy of Licensee
33.10	Change of Location
33.11	Change of Ownership
33.12	Abandonment
33.13	Renewal of License
33.14	Mandatory Meeting, List of Owners, Managers and Employees
33.15	Displaying License
33.16	Restrictions Upon Sound Amplification
33.17	Sanitary Conditions
33.18	Employee Restrictions
33.19	Location Restrictions, Notification
33.20	Premises
33.21	Books and Records of Licensee
33.22	Stores Selling School Supplies, Lunches, etc.
33.23	Closing Hours
33.24	Consumption on Premises, Drinking on Public Streets
33.25	Peddling
33.26	Purchase or Acceptance or Gift of Liquor by Persons Under the Age of 21; Identifi- cation Cards; Punishment; Exceptions
33.27	Sale to Persons Under 21 Years of Age
33.28	Sale or Use of False Evidence of Age and Identity
33.29	Sales to Intoxicated Persons, Habitual Drunkards, Spendthrifts and Mental Incompe- tents
33.30	Inspections and Enforcement
33.31	Gatherings Where One or More Persons are Under the Age of 21 Years
33.32	License Revocation Authorized
33.33	Revocation, Suspension or Fine
33.34	Prohibited Acts and Conditions
33.35	Compliance Check Procedures Concerning Alcohol/Tobacco Retailers
33.36	BASSET Program
33.37	Penalty
33.38	Video Gaming Terminals
 
33.1	DEFINITIONS

Terms used in this Chapter 33 are defined in Appendix A of this Code. In addition, any reference to Liquor Commission shall mean the Local Liquor Control Commission and any reference to Com- missioner shall mean the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.

33.2	LICENSE REQUIRED

It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the City any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer’s license, or in violation of the terms of such license.

33.3	APPLICATION

Applications for such license shall be made to the Commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a group or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall be addressed to the Mayor and City Council, and shall further contain a statement and information as found in Exhibit A of this Chapter 33.

33.4	DISPOSITION OF FEES Amended, 08-5-4

All license fees shall be paid to the Commissioner at the time the application is made, and shall be forthwith turned over to the Treasurer.

If the license applied for is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, the fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as designated by the City Council. License fees are separate and apart from the application fee required pursuant to Section 33.05-F herein.

33.05              APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS: Amended, 16-9-2, 16-5-3, 12-5-5, 10-6-3, 08-5-4, 07-
2-1, 06-1-3

A.	CONTENTS OF APPLICATION: Application for a liquor license shall be filed with the Commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club, corporation or other legally recognized entity, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain full and complete responses to the requested statements and information which shall be immediately updated if any of said statements or information changes during the term of any license. In the event the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company, general partnership or limited partnership, said application shall be signed by any member, officer, manager, director, part- ner (silent and limited) or stockholder owning more than five percent interest in the corporation, limited liability company, general partnership or limited partnership, as the case may be. Each ap- plicant must submit acceptable proof of ownership when the applicant is the property owner of the premises, or a copy of a fully-executed lease of premises when the applicant is not the property owner of the premises for which he or she is seeking a license. Such lease must have coverage period equal to, or longer than, the duration of the applicant’s liquor license. Said lease must name the applicant as lessee. Applications shall contain the following information and statements:

1.	The name, birth date, social security number and address of the applicant in
 
the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the name, birth date and social security number of each partner owning more than five percent interest and a copy of the partnership agreement; and, in the case of a corporation or other legally recognized entity, the articles of organization, the names, birth date, social security number and address of the officers, directors and/or members owning five percent or more interest in the corporation.

2.	The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.

3.	The character of business of the applicant.

4.	The length of time said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued.

5.	The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.

6.	The location and legal description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. Each application shall contain a diagram of the premises which depicts the location of any service bars and the location of one designated dancing area.

7.	A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposi- tion of such application.

8.	A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this Section 33.05, laws of this State or the ordinances, rules or resolutions of the City.

9.	Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the fed- eral government has been revoked, and the reasons thereof.

10.	A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state, or of the United States, or any ordinance, rule or resolution of the City in the conduct of his or her place of business.

B.	INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT: No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant shall have been investigated by the Liquor Commission and a report filed in the records of said Commission approving the issuance of such license. As a part of this investigation, the Liq- uor Commission shall have the right to require fingerprints of all new and renewal applicants. For purposes of obtaining fingerprints under this Section 33.05, the Liquor Commission shall collect a fee in the amount specified on the application and forward the fee to the Police Department. A copy of fingerprints shall be held on record by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. In addition, the
 
applicant shall sign a release authorizing the Police Department to conduct a criminal background check.

C.	AMENDMENTS: Any and all licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter 33 shall be subject to any and all changes or amendments which may be hereafter made, and any and all rules adopted by the Commissioner or Liquor Commission. Any and all licenses shall be subject to any restrictions or conditions deemed desirable by the Liquor Commission or the Commissioner.

D.	INSURANCE: No license shall be issued to any person or entity that cannot produce a policy of insurance by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in the state insuring said person or entity against liability for any injury or death which said parties may incur while operating under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act as follows:

1.	$500,000 per person and $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury liabil- ity; $100,000 for loss of means of support; $100,000 for property damage liability; or

2.	A $1,000,000 single limit dram shop policy.

3.	No license shall be issued to any person or entity that cannot produce a policy of insurance by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in the State insuring said person or entity against general liability in the amount of $500,000.

4.	The City shall be named on the licensee’s liquor liability insurance as an ad- ditional insured. Said policy cannot be cancelled without first giving the City 30 days’ prior written notice of said cancellation.

E.	LIQUOR LIABILITY INSURANCE: Each applicant shall show by evidence satis- factory to the Liquor Commissioner, the issuance of a policy of the appropriate liquor liability in- surance. In the event of cancellation, the Liquor Commissioner shall be notified immediately of such cancellation.

F.	APPLICATION FEE: A non-refundable application fee in the amount of $5,000 shall be payable upon the initial application for liquor license classifications A, B, and C. No initial application fee shall be required from liquor classification D. The renewal of liquor licenses as provided in Section 33.13 herein shall not be subject to this application fee.

G.	STATE LIQUOR LICENSE: At the time a license is approved the City will provide a copy of the license to the licensee. The original City license will be issued when the licensee provides a copy of the license issued by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission.

H.	OUTSTANDING DEBTS: An applicant or holder of a liquor licenses shall not be indebted to the City. Any indebtedness in excess of 30 days shall constitute the basis for the denial and/or revocation of a liquor license.
 
33.6	TERM, PRORATING FEES Amended, 11-11-1

A license is purely a personal privilege and, except for daily permits, shall expire one year from the date of issuance. The one-year period shall be from the 1st day of May of each year to the 30th day of April of each following year, unless sooner revoked or suspended. The fee for licenses issued after the 1st day of May of any year will be prorated.

The fee for licenses issued after the 1st of May but before September 1st of any year shall pay the full amount, licenses issued after September 1st but before January 1st of any year shall pay two- thirds (2/3) of the full amount, and licenses issued after January 1st but before May 1st of any year shall pay one-third (1/3) of the full amount.

All licenses, regardless of the date of issuance, shall terminate on the 30th day of April of each year following the date of issuance.

33.7	LICENSE CLASSIFICATION AND FEES; APPROVAL AUTHORITY; LIM- ITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES Amended 19-6-1, 19-3-1, 19-3-3

Licenses required by this Chapter shall be divided into the following classes. The approval and authority to issue liquor licenses is the responsibility of the Liquor Control Commissioner with the approval of the City Council. The Liquor Control Commissioner or appointed designee may issue Class D “Special Event licenses without prior Council approval when the license does not involve the use of additional City services or public property.

Upon approval by the City Council of an increase in liquor licenses, the City Clerk is hereby directed to amend this Section of the City Code to increase the number of liquor licenses accordingly. Any time a license is revoked or voluntarily surrendered, the maximum number of authorized licenses of that class will reduce by one, and the City Clerk is hereby directed to amend this Section of the Code to reflect that reduction.

(a)	Class A (“Full Bar”) license. Issuance of a Class A license shall authorize the sale of Al- coholic liquor for consumption on premises and the retail sale of packaged liquor, where alcohol is the primary sale, and accounts for more than 51% of sales. For the purpose of this subsection (a), the term sales shall not include revenue from gaming activity. The annual fee for such licenses shall be $1,750.

(b)	Class B (“Table Service”) license. Issuance of a Class B license shall authorize the sale of Alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises only, as an incidental part of food service. Food sales must account for more than 51% of sales. The annual fee for a Class B license shall be $1,500. A Class B licensee shall be eligible to apply for a Catering Endorsement for an additional fee of $500, which shall permit the service of Alcoholic liquor for off-site consumption as an incidental part of food service, sold at a package price, as agreed upon under contract.

(c)	Class C (“Packaged Retail”) license. Issuance of a Class C license shall authorize the Re- tail sale of packaged Alcoholic liquor only.  No consumption of Alcoholic liquor shall be
 
permitted on the premises. The annual fee for a Class C license shall be $1,500.

(d)	Class D (“Special Event”) license. Issuance of a Class D license shall only authorize the Retail sale of Alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises during a designated special event to any not-for-profit organization or club, such as a church, order or lodge, veteran’s organization or other civic organization, business or local liquor license holders in good standing. No such license shall be issued for a license period in excess of four days nor shall any private premises be eligible for more than four such licenses during any calendar year. Commissioner reserves the right to limit the sale of liquor to particular times during the day of the permit. The fee for such license shall be $50 per day for current license holders and
$300 per day for non-license holders.

1.	The following information shall be submitted regarding the event:

i.	Date, time and location of the event;

ii.	Type of alcohol to be served, which cannot exceed the type of alcohol a li- censee already sells pursuant to its license;

iii.	Description of the security measures to be utilized for both liquor service and the event;

iv.	Description of the area in which alcoholic liquor will be available for service and consumption; and

v.	Sales and delivery of alcohol liquor shall be conducted pursuant to the re- quirements of this Chapter, the Illinois Liquor Control Act and the Illinois Liquor Control Commission Rules and Regulations.

2.	Unless specifically provided otherwise, all requirements of this Chapter shall ap- ply to permits granted under this Section including insurance requirements in Sections 33.05-D and E. To the extent that any such event may take place on public property and outside of the licensed premises, the applicant shall name the City as an additional insured and provide the City with the appropriate insurance endorsement.

3.	Application for a daily permit must be submitted a minimum of 30 days in ad- vance of the event.
1.  NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED: There shall be issued in the City not more than: Class A:	7 Licenses
Class B:	8 Licenses
Class C:	6 Licenses
 

33.8	RECORDS

The Commissioner shall keep a complete record of all licenses issued, and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of Police each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license, or the suspension or revocation of any old license, the Commissioner shall give written notice of such action to each of these officers.

33.9	DEATH, TRANSFER OR BANKRUPTCY OF LICENSEE

A license shall be a purely personal privilege, not to exceed one year after issuance unless revoked sooner, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or exe- cution nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being en- cumbered or hypothecated.

Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that the executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bank- ruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.

A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under the license in accordance with the provisions of this Section 33.09.

33.10	CHANGE OF LOCATION

A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the appli- cation and license. Such location may be changed only upon the receipt of written permission from the Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with provisions and regulations of this Chapter 33.

33.11	CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP

A liquor license shall be purely a personal privilege and shall be valid for the time specified therein, unless sooner revoked or suspended and shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to at- tachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involun- tarily or subject to be encumbered or hypothecated.

33.12	ABANDONMENT

If the licensee to which a license has been issued discontinues operations at the premises described in the application and license for 90 consecutive days, or whenever there is evidence of a clear intent of the licensee to abandon the premises, said license shall be subject to revocation.
 

33.13	RENEWAL OF LICENSE

Any licensee may renew his liquor license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the reduction of the number of licenses to be issued within the City.



33.14	MANDATORY MEETING, LIST OF OWNERS, MANAGERS AND EM- PLOYEES 06-1-3; Amended, 09-5-4

A.	MANDATORY LICENSEE MEETING: All liquor license holders or their repre- sentatives shall be required to attend a mandatory meeting hosted by the Commissioner in March of each year to discuss changes in this Chapter 33, identify/address issues and concerns and provide for open communication between the licensees and Commissioner. The City will provide notice of the date, time and location for this meeting no less than 14 days in advance. Failure to attend the mandatory meeting could result in the revocation of the renewal privileges upon the expiration of the liquor license.

B.	LISTING OF OWNERS, MANAGERS AND EMPLOYEES: All licensees shall by May 1 of each year submit to the Marengo Police Department a listing of all owners and managers of the licensed premises, as well as a list of any and all employees who prepare, dispense, sell or serve alcoholic beverages at the licensed premises. The listing shall include the names, home ad- dresses, date of birth and indicate whether they have received BASSET training. The licensee shall have 10 days in which to update this listing with new managers or employees once they have been hired.

33.15	DISPLAYING LICENSE

Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspic- uous place on the licensed premises.

33.16	RESTRICTIONS UPON SOUND AMPLIFICATION

It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any noise or sound to be amplified outside the bounds of a structure on the premises if a residence is within 500 feet of the premises.

33.17	SANITARY CONDITIONS

All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the laws and ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.

33.18	EMPLOYEE RESTRICTIONS Amended, 19-11-1, 09-5-4
 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any person under the age of 21 years to dispense, draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor, or in any way tend bar. This shall not prevent persons 18 years of age and over, as employees, from delivering alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. Em- ployees selling, delivering, checking out or receiving payment for packaged alcoholic liquors must be 21 years of age or older.

It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparing or distributing of such liquor.

33.19	LOCATION RESTRICTIONS, NOTIFICATION Amended, 18-9-1, 09-9-1, 08-5-4

Except as provided herein, no liquor license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, undertaking establishment or mortuary, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station. This prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on at the place of business. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the City local liquor control commission may, in his discretion, based on the cir- cumstances, gran an exemption to the prohibition in this paragraph.

33.20	PREMISES

Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prohibit any connection between such premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his family and personal guests.

33.21	BOOKS AND RECORDS OF LICENSEE

It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission or any Commissioner having jurisdiction over the licensee. Such books and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained in the State of Illinois. However, all original in- voices covering purchases of alcoholic liquor must be retained on the licensed premises for a period of 90 days after such purchase.

33.22	STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES, ETC.

No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are persons under the age of 21 or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks
 
for such persons.

33.23	CLOSING HOURS Amended, 08-5-4, 04-8-4

A.	It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, or to give away, in or upon any licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor:

Between the hours of 1:01 a.m. and 6 a.m. Monday through Friday; and Between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. Saturday; and
Between the hours of 2 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. on Sunday.

B.	SUNDAY HOURS: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, or to give away, in or upon any licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor between the hours of 2 a.m. and 8:30
a.m. on Sunday.

C.	HOLIDAYS: On the eve of New Year’s Day, Memorial Day (observed), Independ- ence Day (4th of July), Labor Day and Thanksgiving Day it shall be lawful to sell alcoholic liquor in the City until 2 a.m. in licensed premises.

D.	The hours stated herein shall be Central Standard Time when Daylight Savings Time is in effect and then said hours shall be Central Daylight Savings Time.

E.	It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, to admit the public to, to permit the public to remain within, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor in, or upon, any premises in, or on, which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided, that in the case of restaurants and clubs, such establishments may be kept open, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public during the hours prohibited.

33.24	CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES, DRINKING ON PUBLIC STREETS

A.	CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES: It shall be unlawful for anyone having a Class B, BB or G license to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold, or to permit the same to be consumed on the premises where sold.

B.	DRINKING ON PUBLIC STREETS: No person shall openly drink or furnish to others any alcoholic liquor to be drunk upon any street, public place or vacant lot within the City and no person shall connive at or assist in or procure others to violate any provision of this Chapter 33.

33.25	PEDDLING

It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the City.

33.26	PURCHASE OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OF LIQUOR BY PERSONS UN- DER THE AGE OF 21; IDENTIFICATION CARDS, PUNISHMENT; EX- CEPTIONS
 

A.	PURCHASE OR ACCEPTANCE: It shall be a violation of this Section 33.26 for any person under the age of 21 to purchase, obtain, accept deliver of, accept a gift of, consume, or have in his or her possession alcoholic liquor.

B.	WARNING PLACARD: In every place in the City where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times, in a prominent place, a printed card, which shall be supplied by the Clerk, and which shall read substantially as follows:

Warning to Persons Under 21 Years of Age

You are subject to a fine up to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) under the Liquor Control Ordinance of the City of Marengo if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or mis- represent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.

C.	EXEMPTIONS: The possession and dispensing or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under 21 years of age in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under 21 years of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent of such minor in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this Chapter 33.

D.	PENALTY: Whoever violates any provision of this Section 33.26 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.

33.27	SALE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE

A.	SALE BY LICENSEE: It shall be a violation of this Section 33.27 for the licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years.

B.	SALE BY OTHER PERSONS: It shall be a violation of this Section 33.27 for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such alco- holic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.

C.	PROOF OF IDENTITY AND AGE: To prevent the violation of this Section 33.27, any licensee, or his officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21 years. Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to member of the Armed Forces.

D.	PENALTY: Whoever violates any provision of this Section 33.27 shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $500. In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Commissioner may suspend or revoke the retail liquor dealer’s license for any violation of this Section 33.27.
 

33.28	SALE OR USE OF FALSE EVIDENCE OF AGE AND IDENTITY

A.	It shall be a violation of this Chapter 33 for any person to sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of the age and/or identity of such person or to sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and/or identification of any other person.

B.	It shall be a violation of this Chapter 33 for any person under the age of 21 to present or offer to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and/or identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or who has in his or her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and/of identity.

C.	PENALTY: Whoever violates any provision of this Section 33.28 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.

33.29	SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS, HABITUAL DRUNKARDS, SPEND- THRIFTS AND MENTAL INCOMPETENCE

No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative or agent or employee of the licensee, shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her to be an habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, feeble minded or distracted, mentally ill, men- tally deficient or in need of mental treatment.

No licensee, or agent or employee of the licensee, shall harbor or permit any intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises described in the license or permit any conduct which shall tend to disturb the peace or quiet or the neighborhood or the premises.

33.30	INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT

Any law enforcing officer of the City may enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this Chapter 33 or whether any of the rules or regula- tions adopted by the Mayor and City Council or by the State of Illinois have been or are being violated and at such time may examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith.

Any law enforcing officer of the City may receive complaint from any citizen within the jurisdiction of the City that any of the provisions of this Chapter 33 or any rules or regulations adopted by the Mayor and City Council or by the State of Illinois have been or are being violated, and may act upon such complaints in the manner provided.

The Commissioner shall have the authority to make and establish rules and regulations of procedure concerning notice of hearings and all such other matters as may from time to time be necessary, and to appoint deputy Commissioners to the Liquor Commission.
 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter 33 to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which a license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of any police officer or any other legally authorized person.






33.31	GATHERINGS WHERE ONE OR MORE PERSONS ARE UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS

A.	It shall be a violation of this Section 33.31for any person to knowingly permit a gath- ering at a residence which she/he occupies of two or more persons where any one or more of the persons is under 21 years of age and the following factors also apply:

1.	The person occupying the residence knows that the person or persons under the age of 21 is in possession of or is consuming an alcoholic beverage; and

2.	The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under 21 is not otherwise permitted by this Chapter 33; and

3.	The person occupying the residence knows that the person under the age of 21 leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition.

B.	For the purposes of this Section 33.31 where the residence has an owner and a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is occupied only by the tenant or lessee.

33.32	LICENSE REVOCATION AUTHORIZED Amended, 12-5-3

A.	No person holding a City license shall, in the conduct of the licenses business or upon the licensed premises, either directly or through the agents or employees of the licensee:

1.	Violate or permit a violation of any federal law or state statute related to the control of liquor.

2.	Violate or permit a violation of any City ordinance or resolution regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor or relating to the eligibility of the licensee to hold a liquor license.

3.	Violate or permit a violation of any rule or regulation of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission as amended from time to time.

4.	Permit the sale and/or consumption of any alcoholic beverages outdoors ab- sent a specific permit issued by the City.

5.	Allow fighting, disorderly conduct or excessive noise constituting a nuisance to take place on the licensed premises or on, about and/or adjacent to the
 
property where the licensed premises are located.

6.	Allow patrons to serve or distribute alcoholic beverages to minors on the li- censed premises or allow minors to drink alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.

7.	Fail to call the City Police Department upon the violation of any City ordi- nance or state law relating to fighting, disorderly conduct or excessive noise constituting a nuisance on the licensed premises.

8.	Submit to the City a liquor license application containing a false or mislead- ing statement.

9.	Violate or permit a violation of any federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance related to video gaming.

B.	Proof before the Commissioner of the facts which establish a violation of any federal law, state statute, City ordinance or resolution or rule of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission or the Illinois Gaming Board shall be sufficient cause for revocation, suspension and fine of any liquor licensee, irrespective of whether or not a conviction has been obtained in any court. In addition, the licensee shall be obligated to reimburse the City for all attorney=s fees incurred as a result of the prosecution of the offending licensee.

C.	Pursuant to Resolution 00-8-C passed by the City Council and pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/7-9, all appeals from the decision of the Commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record of proceedings.

33.33	REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR FINE

A.	REVOCATION: Licenses granted hereunder may be revoked by the Commissioner for the violation of any part or portion of this Chapter 33, or of the Liquor Control Act, or of any valid resolution or ordinance enacted by the City, or of any applicable rule or regulation established by the Commissioner or any violation of the Criminal Code, which occurs on the licensed premises or any violation of the Criminal Code which occurs off the licensed premises where said violation involves or relates to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. Li- censes granted hereunder may be revoked upon the conviction of licensee under the Criminal Code. Should any applicant for license make a false or fraudulent statement in such application, the same shall be cause for revocation by the Commissioner of such license.

B.	SUSPENSION: Licenses granted hereunder may be suspended by the Commissioner for a period of not exceeding 30 days for the violation of any part or portion of this Chapter 33, or of the Liquor Control Act, or of any valid resolution or ordinance enacted by the City, or of any applicable rule or regulation established by the Commissioner or by the State Liquor Control Com- mission or any violation of the Criminal Code which occurs on the licensed premises or any viola- tion of the Criminal Code which occurs off the licensed premises where said violation involves or relates to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. During such
 
period of suspension, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold on said licensed premises.

C.	FINE: In addition to revocation or suspension of the liquor license by the Commis- sioner, the Commissioner may fine any licensee up to $1,000, plus the City=s cost of prosecution including reasonable attorney fees, for each violation of any part or portion of this Chapter 33, or of the Liquor Control Act, or of any valid resolution or ordinance enacted by the City, or of any appli- cable rule or regulation established by the Commissioner or by the State Liquor Control Commission or any violation of the Criminal Code which occurs on the licensed premises or any violation of the Criminal Code which occurs off the licensed premises where said violation involves or relates to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.

33.34	PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS 02-8-5; Amended, 08-5-4

A.	ADULT BUSINESS PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the City at which alcoholic bever- ages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to permit or allow the following activity to be conducted on the premises of such a commercial establishment, all of which activity is defined in Chapter 44 of this Code: Adult Business; Adult Entertainment Center; Adults-Only Activity, Bookstore, Motion Picture Theater, Nightclub, Sauna; Nudity; Obscene Activity; Rap Parlor; Sad- omasochistic Activity; or Sexual Conduct Activity.

B.	BEER, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful for any establishment defined as an Adult Business pursuant to the Marengo Zoning Code to sell, distribute or permit beer or alcoholic beverages on the premises.

33.35	COMPLIANCE  CHECK PROCEDURES  CONCERNING  ALCOHOL/TO- BACCO RETAILERS 02-9-1

The following guidelines are to be followed when members of the Marengo Police Department conducts investigations into suspected abuses of alcohol and/or tobacco being sold to Minors, com- monly referred to as a “Compliance Check.” These investigations are conducted on retail establish- ments or businesses operating within the City limits which sell or distribute alcohol or tobacco prod- ucts.

Compliance checks are defined as a controlled buy type operation, wherein a minor will attempt to purchase either alcohol or tobacco from the respective retailer.

1.	ALCOHOL/TOBACCO PROCEDURES: Effective immediately, the following procedures shall be followed by members of the Marengo Police Department, when conducting said compliance checks:

a.	A compliance check operation will involve investigating those retail establishments and businesses that sell either tobacco or alcohol. The operations shall be specific in nature, in that they will target either tobacco or alcohol, and not be conducted simul- taneously.
 
b.	Tobacco and alcohol enforcement operations will be conducted at a minimum of one time per year, or more as deemed necessary, or as manpower and resources are avail- able.

c.	Alcohol related compliance checks, when possible, will involve targeting every es- tablishment within the City that holds a liquor license, to the extent, that a member of the general public has ready access to purchase alcoholic beverages at the location of business for the liquor license holder.

d.	Tobacco operations will target every retailer or business that sells tobacco within the City, with the exemption of those tobacco retailers or businesses which are adult in nature, i.e. bars.

e.	Subjects used for the tobacco operations will be between 16-17 years of age and have their parent or guardians consent to participate in the operation. A parental consent form will be completed prior to the operation.

f.	Subjects used for the alcohol operations will be between 17-20 years of age. Subjects 18-20 years of age will sign a consent form, and those subjects 17 years of age will have their parent or guardian sign a consent form.

g.	Minors enlisted to aid in the operation will be approved by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

h.	The minors will be of good character and have no record of tobacco or alcohol related violations.

i.	Prior to the operation, the minor will provide the operations supervisor with proof of age, such as birth certificate or valid, State of Illinois photo driver=s license or State of Illinois photo identification card, for proof of birth verification and age.

j.	Minors involved in the operation will dress appropriately and make no attempt to alter their appearance, for the purpose of age enhancement.

k.	Minors involved in the operation, if asked by the merchant or employee of the mer- chant, shall provide an accurate Illinois driver=s license to the requesting merchant or employee of the merchant.

2.	OPERATION AND TRANSACTION GUIDELINES

a.	On the date of the operation, the minor will arrive at the department or other desig- nated location for a briefing. At that time, the minor will be photographed and in- structed in what they are to do and not do. They will also be instructed to remove all personal effects from their pockets, with the exception of their photo driver=s li- cense.
 

	b.	The minor will be issued the money for the transaction prior to entry into the estab- lishment.
	
c.	
The officers enlisted to aid in the operation will make an attempt to view the sale of the item, when and where possible.
	
d.	
If there is a successful transaction, the minor or the observing officer will notify the operations supervisor or their designee and advise of the sale.
	
e.	
Every effort will be made to preserve all evidence of the transaction.
	
f.	
The operations supervisor or their designee will then immediately enter the estab- lishment and make contact with the employee who conducted the transaction, unless authorization from the Chief of Police has been approved for multiple transactional purchases. In the instance of alcohol transactions, the employee will be issued a “No- tice to Appear” for the violation. For tobacco violations, the employee will be issued either a “Written Warning” for the first violation or “Notice to Appear” for any sec- ond or subsequent violation. If warranted, enforcement actions may be sought and/or taken against the liquor license holder.
	
g.	
All evidence related to the operation will be taken into custody, if practical and pro- cessed and secured as evidence.
	
h.	
At no time during the operation, will the minor ingest alcoholic beverages or tobacco products.
	
i.	
Initial and possible subsequent reports will be generated for the operation itself. Sub- sequent reports will be generated when a violation occurs, specific to the establish- ment in violation.
	
j.	
Upon completion of the operation, the Chief of Police or their designee will be noti- fied of those establishments that were in violation.

33.36		
BASSET PROGRAM 09-5-3
	
A.	
For purposes of this Section, BASSET is defined as the state certified Beverage Al-
cohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor
Control Commission, as required by 235 ILCS 5/3-12 (11.1) and 6-27 and Title 77 of Illinois Ad- ministrative Code, Chapter XVI, Section 3500.

B.	All original or renewal applications for a liquor license shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a State certified BASSET program for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working on the premises and anyone whose job description entails checking identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages pursuant to that license.

C.	All licensed BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and
 
certificates to prove current qualifications and provide a certificate of course completion and a card (a picture type identification is optional), to participants as proof of completion.

D.	At least one person who has completed the BASSET program shall be required to be on the licensed premises during hours when alcoholic beverages may be purchased.

E.	Any new owner, manager, employee or agent requiring completion of the BASSET program shall, until completion of the BASSET program, work under the supervision of a person who has successfully completed the BASSET program.

F.	LIQUOR VIOLATIONS: In the event a licensed premises is found to be in violation of any provision of this Chapter or the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), the Commissioner, within his sole discretion, may require all persons who sell or serve alcoholic liquor and/or all management personnel working in a licensed premises and/or anyone whose job descrip- tion entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license to re-apply, attend and successfully complete a BASSET program.

33.37	PENALTY Amended, 08-5-4

Any person, firm, corporation or other legally recognized entity who violates any provision of this Chapter 33, for which a specific penalty is not stated, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750 per offense, and be responsible for the City=s cost of prose- cution including reasonable attorney fees, for each offense or the revocation of his or her liquor license, or to both such fine and revocation of such license. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

33.38	VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS 12-5-3

A.	No gambling of any sort shall be permitted in the City except as authorized by this Section.

B.	Video gaming terminals shall be permitted in and upon the premises used or occupied as a place where alcoholic liquor is sold or given away if each of the following conditions is first met:

1.	The use and placement thereof is in compliance with the provisions of the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.), as amended; and

2.	The use and placement thereof is in compliance with the provisions of all rules promulgated by the Illinois Gaming Board pursuant to the Illinois Ad- ministrative Procedures Act; and

3.	The licensee or agent of the licensee:

(a)	Files with the City Clerk a copy of the licensee’s written use agree- ment with the terminal operator for placement of the video gaming
 
terminals and a copy of the license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board; and

(b)	Pays to the City an annual fee of $25 for each video gaming terminal upon the premises.

C.	No video gaming terminal that is permitted under the provisions of Section may be played except during the legal hours of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic bever- ages on the licensed premises.

D.	If a licensee violates any provision of the Video Gaming Act, or rules and regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board or any provision related to video gaming terminals contained in this Section, such violation shall be deemed a violation of the licensee’s liquor license.
 
CHAPTER 34 OCCUPATION AND OTHER TAXES

34.1	Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax
34.2	Municipal Service Occupation Tax
34.3	Municipal Use Tax
34.4	Police Protection Tax
34.5	Hotel Tax
34.6	Taxation of Occupations or Privileges
34.7	Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax



34.1	MUNICIPAL RETAILERS OCCUPATION TAX

A.	REQUIRED TAX: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this munici- pality in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this City at the rate of one per- cent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this Section
34.01 is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3, as amended.

B.	REPORT TO STATE: Every such person engaged in such business in the City shall file on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, the report to the Illinois Department of Reve- nue as required by 35 ILCS 120/3, “An Act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property.”

C.	PAYMENT TO STATE: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the Il- linois Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the proceeding month, together with any penalties then due, if any, and such other information as may be required by 35 ILCS 120/3.

34.2	MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX

A.	REQUIRED TAX: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this City in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent of the cost price of all tangible per- sonal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-1-1.4, as amended.

B.	REPORT TO STATE: Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Munici- pal Service Occupation Tax for the benefit of this City shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the Illinois Department of Revenue as required by 35 ILCS 115/9, “An Act to impose a tax upon persons engaged in the business of making sales of service.”

C.	PAYMENT TO STATE: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the Il- linois Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed together with any penalties then due and such other information as my be required.
 

34.3	MUNICIPAL USE TAX

A.	REQUIRED TAX: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using, in the City, any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with any agency of this state’s government, at a rate of 1 percent of the selling price of such tangible personal property; “selling price” is defined in 35 ILCS 105/2, the Use Tax Act.

B.	REPORT TO STATE: Such tax shall be collected from persons whose Illinois ad- dress for titling or registration purposes is given as being in the City. Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue.

34.4	POLICE PROTECTION TAX

A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of police protection in this City at the rate of .05 percent of the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue of all the taxable property therein for the first year in which the tax is levied, and at the rate of .075 percent of the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for all taxable property therein, in all succeeding years, all in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-1-3.

34.5	HOTEL/MOTEL TAX

A.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, terms, whether capitalized or not, used in this Section 34.05 shall have the following meanings:

Bed and Breakfast: An operator-occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than six guest rooms for rent, in operation for more than 10 nights in a 12- month period in which breakfast may be provided to the guests, but not the general public.

Hotel: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses with more than five guest units for rent.

Operator: Any person operating a hotel.

Occupancy: The use or possession, or a right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.

Room or Rooms: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.

Permanent Resident: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room or rooms, re- gardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days.
 
Person: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability company or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.

Rent or Rental: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or na- ture.

B.	TAX: A tax is imposed upon persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel at the rate of five percent of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leas- ing or letting, excluding, however, from gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that hotel.

C.	PAYMENT AND COLLECTION:

1.	The tax levied herein shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes. It shall be the duty of the operator of every hotel to collect said tax from the guest or lodger, and to pay over to the City said tax on a quarterly basis as provided herein.

2.	Every person required to collect the tax levied by this Section 34.05 shall re- ceive said tax from the guest or lodger at the time the room charge is paid. A receipt, invoice or other statement or memorandum showing the itemized rental and all taxes shall be issued to the user, lessee or tenant.

D.	ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:

1.	Inspections: The Administrator or his or her designee may enter the premises of any hotel for inspection and examination of books and records for the proper administration of this Section 32.05 and enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Administrator or his or her designee in enforcing this Sec- tion 32.05.

2.	Records Required: It shall be the duty of every person operating a hotel in the City to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the Adminis- trator shall, at all times, have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:

a.	The number of hotel rooms rented during the 24-hour period, includ- ing multiple rentals of the same hotel when such occurs; and

b.	The actual hotel room tax receipts collected for the date in question.

3.	Quarterly Tax Returns: Every person operating a hotel shall file tax returns
 
showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel during each three month period ending on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year, within 30 days after the end of the respective date, upon forms prescribed by rules and regulations of the Administrator. At the time of filing said tax returns, the operator shall pay to the City all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the City of all taxes due and owing for the quarter covered by the return.

E.	FAILURE TO PAY TAX:

1.	Interest and Penalty: In the event any hotel owner, manager or operator fails to collect and pay to the City the tax required hereunder within 30 days after the same is due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the rate of one percent per month commencing as of the first day of the month follow- ing the month for which the tax was to have been collected. In addition, a penalty of 10 percent of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collect- ed against any hotel owner, manager or operator.

2.	Suit for Collection: Whenever any person fails to pay any tax required herein, the City Attorney shall, upon the request of the Administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any legal fees incurred by the City in the cost of collection shall be paid by the operator.

3.	Revocation of City Licenses: If the Mayor, after conducting a hearing, finds that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed herein, he may suspend or revoke all City licenses held by the hotel. The operator shall have an opportunity to be heard at a hearing held not less than five days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, with said notice addressed to the operator at the last known place of business, has been delivered to the opera- tor.

F.	PENALTY: Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Section 34.05 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense and be re- sponsible for the City=s cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a vio- lation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

34.6	TAXATION OF OCCUPATIONS OR PRIVILEGES Amended, 10-4-1, 10-3-1

A.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to the terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, terms, whether capitalized or not, used in this Section 34.06 are defined pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2(d).

B.	In addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the City, state or any other political subdivision of the state, a tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
 

1.	Persons in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City and not for resale, at the rate of five percent of the gross receipts therefrom.

2.	The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at re- tail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the City at rates not to exceed the following maximum rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:

1.	For the first 2,000 Kilowatt-hours (“Kwh”) used or consumed in a month, .550 cents per Kwh;

2.	For the next 48,000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .361 cents per Kwh;

3.	For the next 50,000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .325 cents per Kwh;

4.	For the next 400,000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .316 cents per Kwh;

5.	For the next 500,000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .307 cents per Kwh;

6.	For the next 2,000,0000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .289 cents per Kwh;

7.	For the next 2,000,000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .284 cents per Kwh;

8.	For the next 5,000,000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .280 cents per Kwh;

9.	For the next 10,000,000 Kwh used or consumed in a month, .275 cents per Kwh; and

10.	For all electricity consumed or used in excess of 20,000,000 Kwh in a month, .271 cents per Kwh.

C.	EXEMPTIONS: No tax is imposed by this Section 34.06 with respect to any transac- tion in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any politi- cal subdivision thereof; nor shall any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, fur- nishing or selling gas or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to
 
taxation under the provisions of this Section 34.06 for those transactions that may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Section 34.01 herein.

D.	APPLICATION: Such tax shall be in addition to the payment or money, or value of products or services furnished to this City by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or there under of poles, wire, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers’ business.

E.	COLLECTION: The tax imposed by Section 34.06-B2 shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the electricity to the purchaser. The tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the elec- tricity to the purchaser. If the tax is unpaid it is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Section 34.06 and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity shall be al- lowed credit for such tax related deliveries of electricity, the charges for which are written off as un- collectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax to the City. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons de- livering electricity shall be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent of the tax assessed pursuant to this Section 34.06 to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting tax and supplying data to the City. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the pur- chaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the City in the manner pre- scribed herein. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this Section 34.06 shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the City the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this Section 34.06.

F.	BOOKS AND RECORDS:

1.	Every person delivering electricity who is required to collect a tax pursuant to Section 34.06-B2 shall keep accurate books and records of all transactions which may affect the tax provided for herein including, but not limited to, records of the number of Kilowatt-hours (Kwh) used by each consumer with- in the City for each month, the charge imposed upon each consumer for the sale of the electricity and any related services, the amount of tax imposed by Section 34.06-B2 billed to each consumer of electricity and the amount of tax actually collected, the amount of the charge imposed and collected by the electric distributor as compensation for collecting the tax provided for in Sec- tion 34.07-D, and the total gross receipts received by the electricity deliverer for each month, not including the tax imposed by Section 34.06-B2.

2.	Every person delivering electricity is required to collect a tax as set forth herein shall provide to the City, within seven days of written request, copies of all records, or any part thereof, which the City requests, which the elec-
 
tricity deliverer is required to keep pursuant to this Section.

G.	TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:

1.	Every person collecting a tax pursuant to Section 34.06-B2 shall, on a month- ly basis, file a return with the City in a form prescribed by the City along with the total revenues collected. The return and accompanying remittance shall be delivered to the City on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under Section 34.07-D-5.

2.	Each person who is required to pay a tax pursuant to Section 34.06-B-2 and who has not paid said tax to the electricity deliverer as provided for herein, shall file a return with the City, as provided in this Section, and pay directly to the City the tax on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity was used or consumed.

H.	REPORTS TO THE CITY: On or before the last day of each month each taxpayer subject to Section 34.06-B2 shall make a return to the Treasurer for the proceeding month stating:

1.	Name;
2.	Principal place of business;
3.	Gross receipts and/or Kilowatt-hours during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4.	Amount of tax; and
5.	Such other reasonable and related information as the City may require.

On or before the last day of every third month, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Treasurer for a corresponding three-month period.

The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report any pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previous- ly billed), with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any difference between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.

I.	ERRORS: If it appears that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section 34.06, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section 34.06 from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than one year prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.

J.	RECOVERY DEADLINE: No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced more than one year after the due date of such amount.
 

K.	PENALTY: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent re- turn, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Section 34.06 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200 and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.

34.7	MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX

A.	REQUIRED TAX:  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this mu- nicipality in the business of selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compas- sionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in this City at the rate of three per- cent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this Section
34.07 is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-22, as amended.

B.	PAYMENT AND COLLECTION: The tax levied herein shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes. The tax imposed shall be remitted by such retailer to the Illinois De- partment of Revenue. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Sec- tion 34.07 and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. A retailer may reimburse itself for its seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating that tax as an addition- al charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any State tax that seller is required to collect.

C.	ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:  The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Section 34.07.
 

CHAPTER35 SOLICITORS

 
35.01
35.02
35.03
35.04
35.05
35.06
35.07
35.08
 
Definitions Purpose
License Required Application for License
Issuance, Denial and Revocation of Licenses City Policy on Soliciting
Notice Regulating Soliciting Duty of Solicitors
 

35.10
 
Time Limit on Soliciting	r
 
35.09
 
Uninvited  Soliciting
 
35.11
35.12
35.13
 
•
License Fee
Law Enforcement  Solicitation Penalty
 


35.1	DEFINITIONS

Tenns used in this Chapter 35 are defined in Appendix A and the Illinois Compiled Statutes.

35.2	PURPOSE

Numerous complaints have been received  by members of the governing body of this City from occupants of residences and dwelling units about persons who have gained or sought to gain admittance to their residences for the purpose of soliciting; or on the pretext of soliciting, have by their conduct made nuisances of themselves by disturbing and annoying the occupants; or by their acts and conduct have violated the right of the occupants to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment and security of their homes.

The City of Marengo declares that the regulations established by this Chapter 35 are necessary for the safety, health, comfort, good order, protection and welfare ofresidents of this City who desire the protection of the regulations established by this Chapter 35.

35.3	LICENSE REQUIRED

It shall be unlawful for any person to call upon any residence in the  City for the purpose of soliciting, without first securing a license from the Chief of Police, or without  being exempt therefrom pursuant to Section 35.04 herein. Any person required by this Chapter 35 to have a solicitor's license must have the license in his possession while engaging in solicitation.






Chapter 35, Page I	312018
 

35.4	APPLICATION  FOR LICENSE

Application for a solicitor's license shall be made upon a form provided by the Chief of Police and filed with the Chief of Police. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to-wit:

1.	Name,  address  of present  place  of residence,  phone  number  and  date  of birth  of the applicant and person who will be soliciting for the applicant.

2.	Provide a valid photo identification (driver's license or state identification) of the applicant and person who will be soliciting for the applicant.

3.	Physical description of the applicant.

4.	Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is soliciting for and the length of time applicant has been soliciting for the entity.

5.	Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will engage in.

6.	Period of time for which the license is applied for, shall not exceed 30 days.

7.	Whether a license issued to the applicant under this Chapter 35 was ever revoked.

8.	Whether the applicant was ever convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter 35, or the ordinance of any other Illinois municipality regulating soliciting.

9.	Whether the applicant was ever convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States.

10.	All statements made by the applicant upon application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.

35.5	ISSUANCE, DENIAL AND REVOCATION  OF LICENSES

A. The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and  all  information obtained relative thereto, shall issue a license to those  applicants found fully qualified and the license shall be issued forthwith. The license shall state the expiration date thereof.

B.	The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and all infonnation obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application for the reasons here listed. Endorsement shall then be made by the Chief of Police upon application of the denial of the application No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United  States, within five years of


Chapter 35, Page 2	312018
 
the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 35 or of an ordinance of any municipality regulating this Chapter 35 or of an ordinance of any municipality regulating solicitation; nor to any person who has supplied false infonnation on the application or has been previously revoked after a license was issued.

C.	Any license that has been issued shall be revoked by the Chief of Police ifthe holder of the license is convicted ofa violation of this Chapter 35, or has made a false statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of Police to the holder of the license,
in person or by certified United States mail addressed to the residence set forth in the application.
Immediately on giving such notice, the license shall be null and void.	I
35.6	CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING
I
It is the policy of the City Council that the occupant or occupants of the residences in this City
shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their residence. If no determination is made as is provided in Section 35.07 herein, then soliciting is permitted.

35.7	NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING

Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this Chapter 35 shall comply with the following directions, to-wit:

Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or giving invitation only to for-profit solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to any solicitors, to any residence shall be given in the manner following:

1.	A card shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the detennination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:

"NO SOLICITORS INVITED"

Such card so exhibited shall constitute notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained thereon.

2.	A card shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:

"NO FOR PROFIT SOLICITORS INVITED"

Such card so exhibited shall constitute notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained thereon.




Chapter 35, Page 3	3/2018
 
3.	The absence of a "solicitors card" upon or near the main entrance door to the residence shall be deemed notice that solicitation is invited within the provisions of this Chapter 35.

35.8	DUTY OF SOLICITORS

A.	It shall be the duty of eve1y solicitor upon going onto any premises in the City, upon which a residence as herein defined is located, to first examine the notice provided for in Section
35.07 herein, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If the
notice is present then the solicitor, whether licensed or not, shall intmediately and peacefully depart the premises.

B. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether or not invited, shall immediately and peacefully depatt from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.

C. A solicitor may not go upon any portion of the yard (other than a walkway or pathway leading to the front door of the residence) or ring the doorbell upon or near any back door of any residence, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engage in soliciting in such areas after dark.

35.9	UNINVITED SOLICITING

It is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this Chapter 35 for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of Section 35.07 herein.

35.10	TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING

It is unlawful and shall be a violation of this Chapter 35 for any person, whether licensed or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, prior to 10 a.m. or after 6 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Soliciting shall not be permitted on Sunday.

35.11	LICENSE FEE   Amended  13-8-I

All solicitors or applicants for a solicitor's license shall pay a fee of$300.00 per person for a three­ day solicitor's license.

35.12	LAW ENFORCEMENT SOLICITATION




Chapter 35, Page 4	3/2018
 
A.	A person may not solicit property from the general public when the property or any part of that propetiy in any way tangibly benefits, is intended to tangibly benefit or is represented to be for the tangible benefit of any law enforcement officer, law enforcement agency or law enforcement association.

B.	For pmposes of this Section 35.12, a solicitation tangibly benefits a law enforcement agency, officer or association ifthe proceeds of that solicitation are used, represented to be used or intended to be used to support a law enforcement program or purpose which a law enforcement agency or association otherwise would have to fund through its own budgeting mechanism.

C.	EXCEPTIONS:	This Section 35.12 shall not apply to solicitations:

	1.	By or on behalf  of law enforcement officers campaigning for election to public office; or
	
2.	
Solicitations for charitable pmposes unrelated to law enforcement activities;
		or
	
3.	
Solicitations   for   programs   that   benefit   the   general   welfare   of  the community, and are sanctioned by the Chief of Police, and 100 percent of
		the proceeds collected are devoted to that beneficial program.

35.13		
PENALTY	Amended  18-3-1

Every violation of this Chapter 35 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 for each violation.


























Chapter 35, Page 5	3/2018
 
CHAPTER 36 TAXICABS

 
36.01
36.02
36.03
36.04
36.05
36.06
36.07
36.08
36.09
36.10


36.01
 
License Required Character of Applicant Number of Licensees
License Fees; Taxicab Standards
Vehicles Insurance Taxicab Drivers Traffic Rules Unlawful Use Passengers


LICENSE  REQUIRED
 

It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the City without first having secured a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the City, and shall include the name of the applicant, the intended place of business and the number of taxicabs to be operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its president and secretary shall be given.

36.2	CHARACTER  OF APPLICANT

No taxicab license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character or who has been convicted of a felony; nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation of any officer thereof would be ineligible for a license under the foregoing conditions.

36.3	NUMBER OF LICENSEES

There shall be no more than two taxicab licenses in the City. No person or corporation shall be issued more than one license, nor shall a license be issued unless the licensee has taxicabs in service .

36.4	LICENSE FEES; TAXICAB STANDARDS

A.	The annual fee payable in advance for a taxicab license shall be $1 0 for the first taxicab and
$5 for each additional taxicab operated up to a maximum fee of $75. All fees shall be paid to the City at the time application is made. In the event the license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is issued, the fee shall be deposited in the City's general corporate fund or such other fund designated by the City Council. Whenever the number of taxicabs operated is increased during the license year , the licensee shall notify the City of the change and shall pay the additional fee to the City. Such fee shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by ordinance , and the City shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of taxicabs covered by each license . Such tag or sticker shall be displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab while it is in use. If a taxicab is withdrawn from service and another taxicab replaces the one withdrawn, the licensee shall notify the City, who shall issue a tag or sticker for such replacement taxicab upon the payment of a $1 transfer fee. The licensee shall notify the City of the motor number and the license number of each taxicab operated and of the corresponding City tag or sticker number.

B.	The annual license fee shall include the right to use one or more of the designated parking places for  taxicabs  in each of the various  locations throughout  the City, known as cab stands.  Cab

Chapter 36, Page 1
 
stands shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and no other licensee shall use that parking place or places. Each cab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected under the supervision of the Chief of Police. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other than a taxicab in any cab stand .

36.5	VEHICLES

A.	No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license, and no taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror and windshield wipers in good condition. All taxicabs shall be subject to a semi-annual safety test at an official State Police testing station. A certificate of safety, with a number on the face indicating the date of the next inspection period the vehicle is subject to inspection, shall be displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab. If the test shows the taxicab is not in a safe mechanical co ndition, it shall not be operated on the streets of the City until it has been issued a certificate of safety issued . It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to inspect every taxicab as necessary to insure compliance with this Section 36.05.

B.	Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side, in letters readable from a distance of 20 feet, the name of the licensee operating it. If more than one taxicab is operated by a licensee, each taxicab shall be designated by a different number, and such number also shall so appear on each side of such taxicab.

36.6	INSURANCE

No taxicab shall be operated  unless it is covered by a  bond or public liability policy as requir ed by statute.

36.7	TAXICAB DRIVERS

A.	No person shall drive a taxicab unless licensed by the State of Illinois. Proof of such license shall be submitted to the Chief of Police, who will issue a certificate that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this Chapter 35.

B.	It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver , while on duty, to drink any intoxicating liquor, or to use any profane or obscene language, or to shout or call to prospective passengers, or to disturb the peace in any way .

C.	The taxicab licensee shall submit a list of drivers to the City semi-a nnually .

36.8	TRAFFIC RULES

It shall  be the  duty  of  every  driver  of  a taxicab  to obey  all traffic  rules  established  by statute  or ordinance.

36.9	UNLAWFUL  USE

It shall be  unlawful to  knowingly  permit  any  taxicab  to  be  used  in  the  preparation  of  a  crime  or
misdemeanor .

36.10	PASSENGERS

A . It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenge r any person who seeks to use the tax icab, provided such person is not intoxicated and conducts himself in an order ly manner.
 
B.	No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger.

C.	The driver of a taxicab shall not carry a passenger in the front seat of the taxicab.

D.	The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the taxicab.
 
CHAPTER 37
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX

37.1	Definitions
37.2	Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Imposed
37.3	Collection of Tax by Retailers
37.4	Returns to Department
37.5	Resellers



37.1	DEFINITIONS Amended, 10-7-3

Terms used in this Chapter, whether capitalized or not, mean as follows:

Act: The Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.).

Amount paid: The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in such the City regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.

Department: The Illinois Department of Revenue.

Gross charge: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the City and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. Gross charges for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination point within the City that has imposed a tax under this Chapter and charges for the portion of the inter-office channels provided within the City. Charges for that portion of the inter-office channel connecting 2 or more channel termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the City, shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the City and the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected by the inter- office channel. Prior to January 1, 2004, any method consistent with this Chapter or other method that reasonably apportions the total charges for inter-office channels among municipalities in which channel termination points are located shall be accepted as a reasonable method to determine the taxable portion of an inter-office channel provided within a municipality for that period. However, gross charge shall not include any of the following:

1.	Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made pursuant to: (i) the tax imposed by this Chapter, (ii) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.), (iii) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, (iv) 911 surcharges, or (v) charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the
 
provisions of 220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 5/9-222 (the Public Utilities Act), as amended, or any similar charges added to customers’ bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act;

2.	Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the City;

3.	Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;

4.	Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;

5.	Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-222.1) to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity..

6.	Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under the Act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;

7.	Bad debts (bad debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);

8.	Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices; or

9.	Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Act.

10.	Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if (i) those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are taxable, (ii) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice, and (iii) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed	on   a   combined   basis   shall   be   attributed   to   the   taxable   services   or
 
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.

Interstate telecommunications: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.

Intrastate telecommunications: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.

Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county or other political subdivision of this state.

Purchase at retail: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.

Retailer: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this Chapter. The Department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion.

Retailer maintaining a place of business in this state (or any like term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.

Sale at retail: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.

Service address: The location of telecommunications equipment from  which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer’s place of primary
 
use as defined in 35 ILCS 638/1 et seq. (the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act). For air-to-ground systems and the like, service address shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.

Taxpayer: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the City and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this Chapter.

Telecommunications: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. As used in this Chapter, private line means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of telecommunications shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. Telecommunications shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered telecommunications subject to the tax imposed under the Act. For purposes of this Chapter, prepaid telephone calling arrangements means that term as defined in 35 ILCS 120/2-27 (the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act).

37.2	SIMPLIFED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED Amended,
10-7-3

A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:

1.	The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the City intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6 percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
 
2.	The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the City interstate telecommunications by a person at the rate of 6 percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this State on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in a municipality in this State which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this State..

3.	The tax imposed by this Chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the City.

37.3	COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS

A.	The tax authorized by this Chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Chapter and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this Chapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the manner provided by the Department.

B.	Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications.

37.4	RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT

The tax imposed under this Chapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the Department pursuant to the 636/5-50 of the Act and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the Act.

37.5	RESELLERS

A.	If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this Chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the Department may reasonably require.
 

B.	Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the persons having discontinued the making of resales.

C.	Except as provided in this Chapter, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
 
Chapter 38

CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY1

38.1	Purpose and Scope
38.2	Definitions
38.3	Annual Registration Required
38.4	Permit Required; Applications and Fees	18-7-2
38.5	Action on Permit Applications
38.6	Effect of Permit
38.7	Revised Permit Drawings
38.8	Insurance
38.9	Indemnification
38.10	Security
38.11	Permit Suspension and Revocation
38.12	Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status
38.13	General Construction Standards
38.14	Traffic Control
38.15	Location of Facilities
38.16	Construction Methods and Materials
38.17	Small Cell Ordinance
38.18	Vegetation Control
38.19	Removal, Relocation or Modification of Utility Facilities
38.20	Clean-Up and Restoration
38.21	Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance
38.22	Variances
38.23	Penalties
38.24	Enforcement

38.1	PURPOSE AND SCOPE

A.	Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the City’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the City rights of way and the City as a whole.

B.	Intent: In enacting this Chapter, the City intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the City and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:

1.	Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;

2.	Prevent  the  creation  of  visual  and  physical  obstructions  and  other


1 Established by Ordinance 07-11-1
 
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;

3.	Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the City’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;

4.	Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;

5.	Protect  against  increased  stormwater  run-off  due  to  structures  and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;

6.	Preserve  the  character  of  the  neighborhoods  in  which  facilities  are installed;

7.	Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the City’s residential neighborhoods;

8.	Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and

9.	Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.

C.	Facilities Subject to this Chapter: This Chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.

D.	Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements: The City, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the City rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the City enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the City may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this Chapter.

E.	Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements:

1.	Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the City, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.

2.	Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the City and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
 
similar  agreement  shall  govern  and  control  during  the  term  of  such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.

F.	Conflicts with Other Chapters: This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.

G.	Conflicts with State and Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.

H.	Sound Engineering Judgment: The City shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this Chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this Chapter when the City so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the City to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

38.2	DEFINITIONS

As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 1.02 of this Code or 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.

ANSI: American National Standards Institute.

Applicant: A person applying for a permit under this Chapter.

ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.

Backfill: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.

Bore or boring: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.

Cable operator: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). Cable service: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). Cable system: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
Carrier pipe: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.

Casing: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.

Clear Zone: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for
 
safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non- recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.

Coating: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.

Conductor: Wire carrying electrical current.

Conduit: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.

Construction or Construct: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.

Cover: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.

Crossing facility: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.

Disrupt the right of way: For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.

Emergency: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.

Encasement: Provision of a protective casing.

Equipment: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.

Excavation: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.

Extra heavy pipe: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.

Facility: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights of way under this Chapter. For purposes of this Chapter, the term “facility” shall not include any facility owned or operated by the City.

Freestanding facility: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
 
Frontage road: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.

Hazardous materials: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the Engineer or Public Works Coordinator to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.

Highway Code: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.

Highway: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. Highway includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.

Holder: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21- 401.

IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.

ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.

Jacking: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.

Jetting: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.

Joint use: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities.

JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program, operated pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/1 et seq.

Major intersection: The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.

Occupancy: The presence of facilities on, over or under the right of way.

Parallel facility: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.

Parkway: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.

Pavement cut: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction
 
of a facility.

Permittee: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 38.04 and 38.05 of this Chapter.

Practicable: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.

Pressure: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).

Petroleum products pipelines: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.

Prompt: That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.

Public entity: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.

Public Works Coordinator: The duly appointed Coordinator of Public Works or his or her designee.

Restoration: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.

Right of way or rights of way: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the City has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the City. Right of way or rights of way shall not include any real or personal City property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include City buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.

Roadway: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.

Sale of telecommunications at retail: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.

Security fund: That amount of security required pursuant to Section 38.10.

Shoulder: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
 
Sound engineering judgment: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.

Telecommunications: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. Private line means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.

Telecommunications shall not include:

1.	Value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.

2.	Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.

3.	The provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.

Telecommunications provider: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.

Telecommunications retailer: Every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
Trench: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. Utility: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Chapter. Vent:  A  pipe  to  allow  the  dissipation  into  the  atmosphere  of  gases  or  vapors  from  an
underground casing.

Video service: That term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).

Water lines: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
 
Wet boring: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.

38.3	ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED

Every utility that occupies right of way within the City shall register by January 1 of each year with the Public Works Coordinator, providing the utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right of way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section 38.08, in the form of a certificate of insurance.

38.4	PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES  Amended 18-7-2

A.	Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person shall construct any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any City right of way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right of way, or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right of way, without first filing an application with the Public Works Coordinator and obtaining a permit from the City. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.

B.	Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.

C.	Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

1.	The utility’s name and address, telephone and telecopy numbers and an e- mail address contact.

2.	The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in the work.

3.	The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application.

4.	A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed.
 
5.	Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the City:

i.	A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and

ii.	An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this Section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are needed.

6.	Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the	certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations.

7.	Evidence of insurance as required in Section 38.08.

8.	Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 38.10.

9.	Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this Chapter (see Section 38.21).

10.	Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the City.

D.	Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of Section 38.04-C, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:

1.	In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority.

2.	In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures.

3.	In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied.
 
4.	In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, and City have been satisfied.

5.	In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design standard to be followed.

6.	With regard to installation of Small Cell Antennas or Towers to be attached to new or existing utility poles or structures, the provisions of Section 38.04 of the City Code shall so apply and, in the event of any conflict with the provisions of this section 38.04, the provisions in Section
38.17 shall control.

E.	Applicant’s Duty to Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the City within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.

F.	Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee that shall be determined by City Council. (ordinance 06-06-4)

38.5	ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS

A.	City Review of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Public Works Coordinator within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Public Works Coordinator shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons. If the Public Works Coordinator is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Public Works Coordinator shall issue a permit as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Public Works Coordinator, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.

B.	Additional City Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers:

1.	Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to commence work governed by this Chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the City not less than 10 days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Public Works Coordinator shall specify the portion of the right of way upon
 
which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.

2.	In the event the Public Works Coordinator fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either
(i)	10 days after service of notice to the City by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or (ii) 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this Chapter, although in all other appropriate respects, the telecommunications retailer shall be bound by the provisions of this Chapter.

3.	Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit is required for work pursuant to Section 38.04 the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of Section 38.05-A.

C.	Additional City Review of Applications of Holders of State Authorization Under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007: Applications by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City, provided the holder has complied with applicable City codes, ordinances and regulations.

38.6	EFFECT OF PERMIT

A.	Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created: A permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Chapter on City rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.

B.	Duration: No permit issued under this Chapter shall be valid for a period longer than 6 months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.

C.	Pre-Construction Meeting Required: At the election of the City, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this Chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the City with such City representatives in attendance as the City deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
 
D.	Compliance with All Laws Required: The issuance of a City permit does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the City and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.

38.7	REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS

In the event the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated as a request for a variance in accordance with Section 38.21. If the City denies the request, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.

38.8	INSURANCE

A.	Required Coverages and Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed below:

1.	Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as “X,” “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:

a.	Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;

b.	Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and

c.	Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability;

2.	Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property damage for each accident;

3.	Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and

4.	Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.

If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this Section.
 
B.	Excess or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this Section may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.

C.	Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the required policies to the City within 10 days following receipt of a written request from the City.

D.	Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this Section shall contain the following endorsement:

“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”

Within 10 days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later than 10 days prior to cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.

E.	Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by Subsection a) of this Section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under Section 38.08-A, or the requirements of Sections 38.08-B, C and D. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under Section 38.08-A, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self insurer” under the Workers Compensation Act.

F.	Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility’s Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.

G.	Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this Section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. [All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or better and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.]

38.9	INDEMNIFICATION

By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
 
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise, license or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Chapter by the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.

38.10	SECURITY

A.	Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount set forth in this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:

1.	The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Chapter;

2.	Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the City occasioned by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this Chapter; and

3.	The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or non- performance by permittee in violation of this Chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this Chapter to perform that the City must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to this Chapter or any other applicable law.

B.	Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this Section shall, at a minimum:

1.	Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the City and the permittee;

2.	Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the City of any amounts covered by it; and

3.	Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State at which it can be drawn.

C.	Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for
 
the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Public Works Coordinator, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the City estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Public Works Coordinator may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this Section for any single phase.

D.	Withdrawals: The City, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Section, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:

1.	Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;

2.	Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;

3.	Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or

4.	Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the City determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.

E.	Replenishment: Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in this Section.

F.	Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on  the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the City, upon written request for said withdrawal to the City, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required in this Section.

G.	Closing and Return of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this Chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
 
H.	Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the City with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.

38.11	PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION

A.	City Right to Revoke Permit: The City may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for one or more of the following reasons:

1.	Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;

2.	Non-compliance with this Chapter;

3.	Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities  on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights of way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare; or

4.	Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.

B.	Notice of Revocation or Suspension: The City shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section.

C.	Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the City, the permittee shall have the following options:

1.	Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;

2.	Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the City within 5 working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or

3.	Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the satisfaction of the City providing written proof of such removal to the City within 10 days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.

The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this Section.
 
D.	Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within this Section.

E.	Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of this Section, the City or its designee may, at the option of the City: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the City. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the City for all costs of removal.

38.12	CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS

A.	Notification of Change: A utility shall notify the City no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this Chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of way.

B.	Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City’s right of way.

C.	Insurance and Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.

38.13	GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS

A.	Standards and Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:

1.	Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;

2.	Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;

3.	Highway Design Manual;

4.	Highway Standards Manual;

5.	Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;

6.	Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545);
 
7.	Flagger’s Handbook; and

8.	Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.

B.	Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this Chapter, the Public Works Coordinator shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Public Works Coordinator shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or operation of a facility in the future.

38.14	TRAFFIC CONTROL

A.	Minimum Requirements: The City’s minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.

B.	Warning Signs, Protective Devices and Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when performing any work on the rights of way.

C.	Interference with Traffic: All work shall be phased so there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

D.	Notice When Access is Blocked: At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to Section 38.20, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.

E.	Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility’s attention by the City.

38.15	LOCATION OF FACILITIES

A.	General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this Section.

1.	No Interference with City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Public Works Coordinator determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the City’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the City’s utility facilities.

2.	Minimum Interference and Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with
 
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of way.

3.	No Interference with Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.

4.	No Limitations on Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.

5.	Size of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.

B.	Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:

1.	Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:

a.	Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;

b.	Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of 2 feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available;

c.	Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge  as practicable with minimum distance of  4  feet  (1.2  m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;

d.	No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and

e.	Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.

2.	Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:

a.	The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than 8 feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;

b.	A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with  sound  engineering  judgment  (e.g.,  a  new  cable  may  be
 
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and

c.	In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than 5 feet (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within 1 foot (0.3
m) of the right of way line or as near as practicable.

C.	Facilities Crossing Highways:

1.	No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways  may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.

2.	Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.

3.	90 Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.

4.	Overhead Power or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:

a.	It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s rules entitled Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);

b.	Poles are located within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and

c.	Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.

5.	Underground Power or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:

a.	The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and

b.	Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.

6.	Markers: The City may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R.
 
§192.707 (1989)).

D.	Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights of way: The City may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.

E.	Freestanding Facilities:

1.	The City may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.

2.	The City may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view in a manner appropriate for the surrounding environment, and the City may require the facility’s owner to maintain such screening.

F.	Facilities Installed Above Ground: Above ground facilities may be installed only if:

1.	No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;

2.	New underground installation is not technically feasible; and

3.	The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design  and  materials,  to  provide  the  greatest  protection  of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety.  Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the   installation   of   additional   utility   poles   is   strongly discouraged.

G.	Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures:

1.	Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.

2.	A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
 
based upon the following considerations:

a.	The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;

b.	The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;

c.	The	alternative	routings	available	to	the	utility   and   their comparative practicability;

d.	The proposed method of attachment;

e.	The  ability  of  the  structure  to  bear  the  increased  load  of  the proposed facility;

f.	The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;

g.	The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and

h.	The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.

H.	Appearance Standards:

1.	The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.

2.	A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.

38.16	CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS

A.	Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods:

1.	Boring or Jacking:

a.	Pits and Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Public Works Coordinator from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring   shall   be   designed,   erected,   supported,   braced,   and
 
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.

b.	Wet Boring or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.

c.	Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches: Borings over 6 inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than 1 inch (25 mm).

d.	Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less: Borings of 6 inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.

e.	Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system.

2.	Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.

a.	Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless  special  permission  is  obtained  from  the  Public  Works Coordinator.

b.	Open Trench and Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.

c.	Drip Line of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved.

3.	Backfilling:

a.	Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
 
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.

b.	For a period of 3 years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Public Works Coordinator, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Public Works Coordinator.

4.	Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph is permitted under Section 38.21, the following requirements shall apply:

a.	Any  excavation  under  pavements  shall  be   backfilled   and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or	CA-10   gradation,   as   designated   by   the   Public   Works Coordinator.

b.	Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.

c.	All saw cuts shall be full depth.

d.	For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last 7 years, or resurfaced in the last 3 years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.

5.	Encasement:

a.	Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the City.
 
b.	The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within 1 foot
(0.3 m) of the right of way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.

c.	In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City- approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.

d.	In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.

e.	In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only   if: (1)  extra  heavy  pipe  is  used  that  precludes  future maintenance  or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;

f.	If encasement  is  eliminated  for  a  gas  or  petroleum  products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as  to  provide  that construction does not disrupt the right of way.

6.	Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:

TYPE OF FACILITY	MINIMUM COVER
Electric lines	30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines	18-24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by the
City)
Gas or petroleum products	30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line	Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage line	Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection

B.	Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities:

1.	Electric Power or Communication Lines:

a.	Code Compliance: Electric power or communications  facilities within  City rights of way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly  General Order 160 of the ICC) entitled Rules for Construction of  Electric Power and Communications Lines,
 
and the National Electrical Safety Code.

b.	Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single-pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.

c.	Underground Facilities:

(1)	Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that  special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize  damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.

(2)	If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of  “moles,” “whip augers” or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or  (b)  the  installation  is  by  the  open trench method which is  only permitted prior to roadway construction or (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.

d.	Burial of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the City. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within 10 business days after placement.

2.	Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by:

a.	The use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;

b.	Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;

c.	Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or

d.	Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
 
3.	Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a City-approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 – Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR §192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications  for Road and Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.

4.	Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).

5.	Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the	current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.

6.	Ground-Mounted   Appurtenances:	Ground-mounted  appurtenances  to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending 1 foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or  similar material approved by the Public Works Coordinator. With  the   approval of the Public Works Coordinator, shrubbery surrounding the  appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for  ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.

C.	Materials:

1.	General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the ICC or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.

2.	Material Storage on Right of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the Public  Works Coordinator. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior
 
approval must be obtained from the City.

3.	Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the City shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.

D.	Operational Restrictions:

1.	Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic  or the public health, safety and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.

2.	These restrictions may be waived by the Public Works Coordinator when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.

3.	Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction are those set forth in Section 43.08 of this Code.

E.	Location of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the City shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the City or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)

38.17	SMALL CELL ORDINANCE  Added 18-7-2

A.	Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (P.A. 100-0585).

B.	Conflicts with Other Ordinances: This Section supersedes all Sections or parts thereof adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.

C.	Conflicts with State and Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this Section, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this Section to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations.

D.	Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
 
Act: The Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (P.A. 100-0585), as may be subsequently amended.

Antenna: communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.

Applicable Codes: uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.

Applicant: any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.

Application: a request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.

Collocate or Collocation: to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.

Communications Service: cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.

Communications Service Provider: a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.

FCC: the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.

Fee: a one-time charge.

Historic District or Historic Landmark: a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility  for  the  National  Register,  in  accordance  with Section  VI.D.1.a.i  through  Section
VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.

Law: a federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.

Micro Wireless Facility: a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches
 
in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.

Municipal Utility Pole: a utility pole owned or operated by the City in public rights-of-way.

Permit: a written authorization required by the City to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.

Person: an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.

Public Safety Agency: the functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.

Rate: a recurring charge.

Right-of-way: the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include City- owned aerial lines.

Small Wireless Facility: a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.

Utility Pole: a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.

Wireless Facility: equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is  between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.

Wireless Infrastructure Provider: any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services
 
provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the City.

Wireless Provider: a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.

Wireless Services: any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.

Wireless Services Provider: a person who provides wireless services.

Wireless Support Structure: a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.

E.	Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities.

1.	Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or
(ii)	outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.

2.	Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:

i.	Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the City, together with the City’s Small Cell Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:

(a)	Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make- ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;

(b)	The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;

(c)	Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of  1989,  for  each  proposed  small  wireless  facility  covered  by  the
 
application as it is proposed to be installed;

(d)	The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;

(e)	A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and

(f)	Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.

(g)	In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.

ii.	Application Process. The City shall process applications as follows:

(a)	The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.

(b)	An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a completed application.

However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application.

The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this Section.

(c)	An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed application.
 
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application.

The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this Section.

(d)	The  City  shall  deny  an  application  which  does  not  meet  the requirements of this Section.

If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the Collocation Requirements and Conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested  collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.

The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an application.

The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the City’s review period.

The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.

Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.

iii.	Pole Attachment Agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the  applicant  shall  enter  into  a  Master  Pole  Attachment  Agreement,
 
provided by the City for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.

iv.	Completeness of Application. Within 30  days  after  receiving  an application, the City shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City must specifically identify the missing information. An application  shall  be deemed complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the City’s permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the City.

Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.

v.	Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:

(a)	An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City; or

(b)	A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.

vi.	Consolidated Applications. An applicant seeking to collocate  small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at the applicant’s discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.

If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.

vii.	Duration of Permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than 5 years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this Section.

If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable City code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
 
viii.	Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the City by personal delivery at the City’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.

F.	Collocation Requirements and Conditions.

1.	Public Safety Space Reservation. The City may reserve space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.

2.	Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this Section. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained	and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.

3.	No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.

A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment.

Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.

If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.

The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.

4.	The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on City
 
utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the  electric supply zone of the pole.

However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.

For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms “communications space”, “communication worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.

5.	The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.

6.	The wireless provider shall comply with the following design standards and any variations from these design standards may only be granted pursuant to the variance provisions of this Chapter 38 (at Section 38.22):

a.	Screening. Whenever any equipment or appurtenances are to be installed at  grade, screening must be installed to minimize the visibility of the facility and shall not be permitted to obstruct sight lines or to create other traffic or safety problems.

b.	Color and Stealth. All wireless facilities subject to this Section, including all related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the pole, structure tower or infrastructure on which it is mounted. The color must be comprised of nonreflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. The Applicant shall use good faith efforts to employ reasonable stealth techniques to conceal the appearance of the wireless facilities. Any pole extensions shall not be metallic or wood and shall blend with the color of the pole upon which they are mounted.

c.	Wiring and Cabling. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code and National Electrical Safety Code adopted by the City and in force at the time of the installation of the facility. Any wiring must be covered with an appropriate cover. No wiring and cabling serving the facility will be allowed to interfere with any existing uses.

7.	Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this Collocation Requirements and Conditions Section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a
 
small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.

If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.

8.	Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.

New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:

a.	10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the  same right-of-way within  the  jurisdictional  boundary  of  the  City, provided the City may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or

b.	45 feet above ground level.

9.	Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in the manner provided in this Chapter (at Section 38.22).

10.	Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.

11.	Ground-mounted Equipment Spacing. Subject to the variance provisions of this Chapter 38 (at Section 38.22) and state law, the wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements of this Chapter 38 concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.

12.	Undergrounding Regulations. Subject to the variance provisions of this Chapter  38  (at  Section  38.22)  and  state  law,  the  wireless  provider  shall
 
comply with the provisions of this Chapter 38 concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval.

13.	Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.

G.	Application Fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:

1.	Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.

2.	Applicant shall pay an application  fee  of  $1,000  for  each  small  wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.

3.	Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.

4.	The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:

a.	routine maintenance;

b.	the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the City at least 10 days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment type and model numbers for any of the replacement equipment; or

c.	the installation, placement, maintenance,  operation  or  replacement  of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that  are  strung  between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.

5.	Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work within rights-
 
of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.

H.	Exceptions  to  Applicability.  Nothing  in  this  Section  authorizes  a  person  to collocate small wireless facilities on:

1.	Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the City or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;

2.	Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or

3.	Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Section do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility’s wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.

For the purposes of this subsection, “public utility” has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this Section.

I.	Pre-Existing Agreements. Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this Section.

A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the City makes available under this Section for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms.
 
The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.

J.	Annual Recurring Rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on the City utility pole.

If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.

K.	Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.

The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.

A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.

L.	Dispute Resolution. The Circuit Court of McHenry County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the City shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.

M.	Indemnification. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City improvements or right-of- way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this Section and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
 
N.	Insurance. The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost and expense such insurance as is required by this Chapter at Section 38.08.

The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.

A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this Section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the  City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the City.

38.18	VEGETATION CONTROL

A.	Electric Utilities – Compliance with State Laws and Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the City as permitted by law.

B.	Other Utilities – Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this Chapter.

1.	Application for Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.

2.	Damage to Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The City will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.

C.	Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance: The City may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
 
D.	Chemical Use:

1.	Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the City for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.

2.	Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public Works Coordinator that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.

38.19	REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES

A.	Notice: Within 90 days following written notice from the City, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City-initiated or mandated improvement in or upon, or the operations of the City in or upon, the rights of way.

B.	Removal of Unauthorized Facilities: Within 30 days following written notice from the City, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

1.	Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;

2.	If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;

3.	If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this Chapter; or

4.	If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.

C.	Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities: The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the City shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.

D.	Abandonment of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the City, the utility shall notify the City within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the City may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Public Works
 
Coordinator determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event the City does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the City, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.

38.20	CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION

The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within 10 days after any portion of the rights of way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the City. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Public Works Coordinator. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this Section may be extended by the Public Works Coordinator for good cause shown.

38.21	MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE

A.	General: Facilities and any associated screening or landscaping on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the utility’s expense.

B.	Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:

1.	If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.

2.	In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Public Works Coordinator, or his or her duly authorized agent, of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Police Department shall be notified immediately.

3.	In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
 
C.	Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the City a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.

D.	Gas Pipes: Any person or company maintaining any gas pipes in the City shall keep such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done thereby to any person or property.

38.22	VARIANCES

A.	Request for Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this Chapter must do so in writing to the Public Works Coordinator as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.

B.	Authority to Grant Variances: The Public Works Coordinator shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.

C.	Conditions for Granting of Variance: The Public Works Coordinator may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:

1.	One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and

2.	All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are not practical in relation to the requested approach.

D.	Additional Conditions for Granting a Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Public Works Coordinator may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Chapter but which carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

E.	Right to Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Public Works Coordinator under the provisions of this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council, or such other Council or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Council’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least 7 days after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide the appeal.

38.23	PENALTIES

Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code, not to exceed $750.00 per violation per day. There may be times when the City will
 
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the City’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit-related cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.

38.24	ENFORCEMENT

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
 
CHAPTER 40
OFFENSES BY ORGANIZED GROUPS

40.1	Disorderly conduct
40.2	Curfew
40.3	Damaging Property
40.4	Parental Responsibility
40.5	Street Gang Activity
40.6	Alcoholic Beverages
40.7	Weapons
40.8	Drug Paraphernalia; Definitions
40.9	Persons Responsible for Unlawful Activities on their Premises
40.10	Unlawful Possession of Cannabis 09-4-5
40.11	Penalty (Alternative)



40.1	DISORDERLY CONDUCT

No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the City. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:

1.	Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace;

2.	Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any municipality or fire protection district a false alarm or fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists;

3.	Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place.

4.	Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed.

5.	Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose and deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it.

6.	With the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, he commits any of the following acts in a public place:
 
a.	Commits an act in a violent manner toward another whereby that other person is placed in danger of his life or health;

b.	Commits an act in a violent manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;

c.	Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, health or property of another;

d.	Interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence;

e.	Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public way and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other lawful authority;

f.	Incites, attempts to incite or is involved in attempting to incite a riot or unlawful disturbance;

g.	Uses abusive language or threats to any peace officer or any other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited;

h.	Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance in a public place or affecting a public place or another person’s premises to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed;

i.	Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a peace officer where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is threatened;

j.	Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture in public;

k.	Assembles with three or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace;

l.	Assembles with three or more persons for the purpose of violating any provision of this Code; and

m.	Appears in any public place and is under the influence of alcohol or controlled substance, to the degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or property, or alarm or disturb other persons in his vicinity.
 

7.	Permits any assembly of two or more persons for the purpose of committing any unlawful act or breach of the peace, or any riotous, offense or disorderly conduct, in or upon any premises owned or occupied by him or under his control.

8.	Interrupts or disturbs any lawful assembly of people by making any loud or unusual noise, or by rude or indecent behavior, or by profane, obscene or improper discourse or conduct.

9.	Engages in Mob Action: Mob action consists of any of the following:

a.	The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two or more persons acting together and without authority of law;

b.	The assembly of two or more persons to commit an unlawful act; or

c.	The assembly of two or more persons, without authority of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.

10.	Disturbs, tends to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control.

11.	Uses paint or other medium in any way to deface, damage or destroy property.

12.	PENALTY: Any person violating this Section 40.01 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for reimbursing the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.

40.2	CURFEW

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person less than 17 years of age to be present or upon any public road, street, alley or park, or other lands used for public purposes or in any public place of business or amusement in the City at the following times unless such person is accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least 18 years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the statutes of the state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform:

1.	Between 12:01 a.m. and 6 a.m. Friday;
 
2.	Between 12:01 a.m. and 6 a.m. Saturday; and

3.	Between 11 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6 a.m. on the following day.

B.	It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly allow or permit a person in his custody or legal control to violate this Section 40.02.

C.	PENALTY: Any person violating this Section 40.02 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.

40.3	DAMAGING PROPERTY

A.	GRAFFITI DEFINED: Graffiti is any permanent display of any name, identification, letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline, character, spectacle, delineation, illustration, symbol or any combination thereof, which without authorization is marked, written, drawn, painted, scratched, inscribed or affixed, and which is a different color from the color of the exterior of those objects of structures described above and to which is affixed.

B.	PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful, and is hereby declared a nuisance to place graffiti, or permit graffiti to remain upon any public or private curb stone, flagstone, brick, sidewalk or any portion of any part of any sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, lamp post, telephone pole, utility box, utility pole, stanchion, postal mail receptacle, sign, hydrant, fence, door, wall, window, garage or enclosure, vehicle, bridge, pier or upon any other public or private structure or building.

C.	No person shall damage, befoul, disturb, destroy or deface any City property or any public or private property without permission of the owner.

D.	PENALTY: Whoever violates any provision of this Section 40.03 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to the owner of any property damaged or destroyed. Nothing herein shall preclude such additional civil remedies available to the person whose property has been damaged or destroyed. Each day any violation or any provision of this Section
40.03 shall continue shall constitute a separate violation.

40.4	PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY

A.	It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian to knowingly allow or permit said minor to commit any violation of a City ordinance or state statute concerning vandalism, battery, fireworks, obscene conduct,
 
trespass, possession of weapons or alcoholic liquor, curfew, disorderly street gang conduct, suspicious activity, or any other offense or willful or malicious acts to persons or property.

B.	The parent or guardian responsible for the willful or malicious acts of the minor child pursuant to this Section 40.04 shall make full restitution to the injured or damaged party or parties within 10 days after notification by mail. Parents and guardians shall be responsible individually and jointly.

C.	PENALTY: Whoever violates any provision of this Section 40.04 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to the owner of any property damaged or destroyed. Nothing herein shall preclude such additional civil remedies available to the person whose property has been damaged or destroyed. Each day any violation or any provision of this Section
40.05 shall continue shall constitute a separate violation.

40.5	STREET GANG ACTIVITY

A.	CITY COUNCIL FINDINGS:

1.	The City Council hereby finds and declares that it is the right of every person, regardless of race, color, creed, religious, national origin, sex, gender, sexual orientation, age or disability to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation and physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. It is not the intent of this Chapter 40 to interfere with the exercise of the constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The City Council hereby recognizes the constitutional right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to lawfully associate with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate in the electoral process.

2.	The City Council finds, however, that urban, suburban and rural communities, neighborhoods and schools throughout the State are being terrorized and plundered by street gangs. The City Council finds there are now several hundred street gangs operating in Illinois, and that while their terrorism is most widespread in urban areas, street gangs are spreading into suburban and rural areas of Illinois, including McHenry County.

3.	The City Council further finds that street gangs are often controlled by criminally sophisticated adults who take advantage of our youth by intimidating and coercing them into membership by employing them as drug couriers and runners, and by using them to commit brutal crimes against
 
persons and property to further the financial benefit to and dominance of the street gang.

4.	Street gang activity presents a clear and present danger to public order and safety and is not constitutionally protected. No society is or should be required to endure such activities without redress. Accordingly, it is the intent of the City Council, by enacting this Chapter 40, to prohibit street gang related activity.

B.	For the purpose of this Section 40.05, “street gang” or “gang” is defined as any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of three or more persons, whether formally or informally organized, or any sub-group or affiliated group thereof, having as one of its activities the commission of criminal or illegal acts, including by way of example only and not in anyway limiting or specifying, illegal drug distribution, and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal or illegal acts, and which group frequently, though not necessarily, claim one or more particular geographic territory or “turf” exclusively as its realm of influence and operations.

C.	It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to knowingly use, display or wear colors, emblems or insignia on or about their person in public for the purpose of promoting any street gang activity.

D.	It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to knowingly do or make any act, utterance, gesture or display for the purpose of communicating membership of, affiliation with, association with, support of, identification with, sympathy toward or affront or insult toward any street gang, or with actual knowledge that the subject act, utterance, gesture or display is used and recognized as communicative of street gang membership, affiliation, association, support, identification, sympathy or affront.

E.	PENALTY: Any person violating this Section 40.05 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

40.6	ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

A.	INTOXICATING LIQUORS: Any police officer having probable cause that intoxicating liquors are being kept in violation of law in any place, shall search such suspected place, and if the police officer finds upon the premises intoxicating liquors, he shall seize the same, together with the vessels in which they are contained, with the intent of violating this Chapter 40, and shall arrest any person or persons in charge of such place, or aiding in any manner in carrying on the business conducted in such place.
 
B.	PUBLIC PROPERTY: Consumption or possession of any alcoholic liquors without a permit issued by the City pursuant to Chapter 33 of this Code, including beer and wine, at anytime in any public park, street, alley or public place owned, controlled or operated by the City is prohibited.

C.	PENALTY: Any person violating this Section 40.06 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

40.07  WEAPONS Amended, 18-4-4, 13-6-4, 13-5-4

A.	WEAPONS: Unless authorized by law, no person shall wear under his clothing, or conceal about his person, or display in a threatening like manner, any dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not limited to any pistol, revolver, sling shot, knuckles, any bowie or similar knife, or any knife with a switch-blade or device whereby the blade or blades can be opened by a button, pressure on the handle or other mechanical contrivance.

B.	DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS: Except as provided in Section 40.07-C, no person shall discharge any firearms in the City. In addition to those firearms defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, for purposes of this Section, firearms shall include pump air rifles, potato guns, CO2 pellet guns and any other device capable of discharging a projectile if used with intent to inflict harm to person or property or to assault or threaten harm to a person or property or when used in a reckless manner.

C.	EXCEPTIONS: For i) the purpose of protecting livestock against wildlife predators and hunting, the discharge of firearms is permitted in the AT Agricultural Transition District in the City, provide that persons discharging firearms are not in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. as amended, and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources hunting regulations; or ii) in connection with the use of a firearm at a lawfully established indoor shooting range.

D.	DISPLAY AND SALE OF SPECIFIED WEAPONS: No pawnbroker, second-hand dealer or other person engaged in business in the City shall display or place on exhibition in any show window or other window facing upon any street, any pistol, revolver or other firearm, with a barrel less than 12 inches in length, or any brass or metal knuckles, or any club loaded with lead or other weight, or any blackjack or billy club. Weapons displayed for sale shall be incapable of firing. In non-business hours said weapons shall be stored in a secured and locked vault, safe or security box.

E.	PENALTY. Any person violating this Section 40.07 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.

40.8	DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DEFINITIONS Amended, 09-4-5
 

A.	In addition to the terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, the definitions contained herein shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.

The term “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS 550/3 et seq. and 720 ILCS 570/202 through 212, as amended. It includes, but is not limited to:

1.	Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or cannabis or from which a controlled substance or cannabis can be derived;

2.	Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substance or cannabis;

3.	Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or cannabis;

4.	Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength effectiveness or purity of controlled substances or cannabis;

5.	Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances or cannabis;

6.	Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances or cannabis;

7.	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;

8.	Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances or cannabis;

9.	Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances or cannabis;

10.	Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or cannabis;
 
11.	Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish oil into the human body, such as:

a.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;

b.	Water pipes;

c.	Carburization tubes and devices;

d.	Smoking and carburization masks;

e.	Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

f.	Chamber pipes;

g.	Carburetor pipes;

h.	Electric pipes;

i.	Air-driven pipes;

j.	Chillums;

k.	Bongs; and

l.	Ice pipes or chillers.

In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

1.	Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

2.	Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substances;

3.	The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this Section 40.08;

4.	The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

5.	The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
 
6.	Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this Section 40.08; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this Section 40.08, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;

7.	Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

8.	Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

9.	National and local advertising concerning its use;

10.	The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

11.	Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;

12.	Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;

13.	The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

14.	Expert testimony concerning its “use.”

B.	It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, display, furnish, supply or give away any cocaine spoon, marijuana pipe, hashish pipe or any drug paraphernalia.

C.	The prohibition contained in this Section 40.08 shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropractors and podiatrists, veterinarians, pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers or warehousers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia, nor to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self injection.

D.	PENALTY: Whoever violates any provision of this Section 40.08 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to the owner of any property damaged or destroyed. Nothing herein shall preclude such additional civil remedies available to the person whose property has been damaged or destroyed. Each day any violation or any provision of this Section 40.08 shall continue shall constitute a separate violation.
 

40.9	PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES ON THEIR PREMISES

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who are the owners or occupants of any premises to allow, initiate or maintain any gathering on that premises in which tenants, invitees, visitors or trespassers engage in any unlawful activity. Unlawful activity shall include, but not be limited to, violations of any sections of this Chapter 40. A person will be deemed to have permitted the gathering if that person is on the premises while the unlawful activity is occurring and has not informed the police thereof. For purposes of this Section 40.09 only, a gathering shall consist of two or more persons who are not occupants or owners of the premises.

B.	Any person violating this Section 40.09 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.

40.10	UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF CANNABIS 09-4-5

A.	A person commits unlawful possession of cannabis if he or she, while in the Village, has in his or her possession any substance containing cannabis.

B.	For the purpose of this Section, cannabis includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinal (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.

C.	Whoever violates any provision of this Section shall be fined not less than $100 or more than $750.

40.11	PENALTY (ALTERNATIVE)

A.	Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter 40, any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this Chapter 40 shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.
 

B.	A defendant who has been found guilty and ordered to pay a fine under this Chapter 40 may petition the court to convert all or part of the fine into court-approved public or community service, to be performed as directed by and to be verified by the Department of Court Services.

C.	The public or community service work assigned shall be, whenever available, for the benefit of the City, or agency or department thereof. If no public or community service work opportunities are available for the benefit of the City or agency or department thereof, the defendant shall be assigned to perform public or community service work for a not-for-profit organization or agency which provides service to or otherwise benefits the citizens of the City.

D.	One hour of public or community service shall be equivalent to $5 of fine, upon conversion.

E.	Neither restitution obligations nor mandatory court costs or attorneys fees may be converted to or discharged by public or community service work.

F.	Neither the City nor any agency or department thereof, the Department of Court Services, public or community service programs or site, nor any official or employee thereof acting in the course of their official duties shall be liable for any injury or loss a person may receive while performing public or community service as ordered by the court pursuant to this Section 40.10, nor shall they be liable for any tortious acts of any person performing public or community service, except for willful wanton misconduct or gross negligence on the part of such governmental unit, official or employee.

G.	No person assigned to a public or community service program shall be considered an employee for any purpose, nor shall the City, McHenry County or not-for-profit organization or agency be obligated to provide any compensation to such person.
 
CHAPTER42
VEHICLE LICENSE TAX

42.0 l Definitions
42.2	License Required
42.3	Application for License
42.4	License Fees
42.5	Replacement of License
42.6	Plate or Sticker
42.7	Penalty



42.1	DEFINITIONS

In addition to the definitions found in Appen dix A of this Code, whenever the tenn "motor vehicle" is used in this Chapter 42, it is construed to include vehicles propelled by automotive power, such as automobiles and motorcycles, with the exception of traction engines, farm tractors, road rollers and steam railways. This Chapter 42 does not apply to bicycles or other vehi cles propelle d by muscular power.

42.2	LICENSE REQUIRED

A.	It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle registered in the City to use or to cause or permit any of his agents or employees to operate or store a motor vehicle in the City unless the same is licensed as hereinafter provided.

B.	All vehicles for whi ch a license is required by this Chapter 42, not owned by persons residing in the City, but kept in the City or used for more than 30 cumulative days are declared to be within the City and subject to the provisions of this Chapter 42, if operated or stored in the City. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of carrying passengers for hire, in motor vehicles, within the corporate limits of the City, without first obtaining a license as provided by herein.

C.	Ifa vehicle is not in operation at the time a violation is found, a ticket may be issued to the owner of said vehicle who shall be presumed to he in control of such vehicle at the time of th e violation. A ticket may be issued as in cases of parking violation s by finnly affixing the ticket to the vehicle.

 


42.
 
D.	EXEMPTIONS: Taxing bodies shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter
 

42.3	APPLICATION  FOR LICENSE

Application for a vehicle license is made in writing to the City. The application shall include the name, address and telephone number of the vehicle 's owner ;state license plate number; and vehicle description. The vehicle registration must be shown to verify the application . Upon payment of the license fee to the City, the City shall issue the license.
 

42.4	LICENSE FEES Amended, 09-4-3

A.	ANNUAL FEE: The license fee to be paid annually to the City shall be as follows:

I.	Vehicles owned by persons under age of 65: $20.

2.	Vehicles owned by persons 65 and over: $5.


3.	Any proprietor, finn or corporation owning and operating more than one vehicle for commercial purposes shall pay $10 per vehicle for the first four vehicles owned and operated in the busine ss and $5 per vehicle for any additional vehicles owned and operated for commercial purposes.

Such license fees are due and payable annually in the first day of August of each year; all issued licenses expire on the last day of July in each year. When issued for a period of less than one year, the fee shall remain the same.

B.	NEW VEHICLE PURCHASES: Applicants for licenses who have purchased motor vehicles after August 30 have 30 days to purchase a vehicle license. If the vehicle license is purchased within the 30-day period, the applicant is entitled to the same fee as those purchasin g
 
vehi cle licenses prior to the 301
 
day of August of each year.
 

C.	TRANSFER LICENSE: If an applicant is transferring a license to  a unlicensed
vehicle , a $2 transfer fee shall be requ ired .

D.	GRACE PERJOD: A non-resident who becomes a resident of the City may, for a period of the first 60 days ofresidence in the City, operate any motor vehicle without complying with the provis ions of this Chapter 42.

E.	DELINQUENT FEES: In the event the license fee is not paid as requ ired herein, the
fee shall be doubled and the vehicle owner subject to a fine as provided herein.

42.5	REPLACEMENT  OF LICENSE

Any licensee whose license is mutilated, destroyed or otherwise require replacement may obtain a replacement upon proof of the mutilation , destruction or other circumstances requiring replacement of his/her original license, and the payment of a replacement fee of$2 to the City .

42.6	PLATE OR STICKER

Each appl icant, upon pa yment of the fee, is given a license plate or wind shield sticker, without charge, of such design and material as approved by the City Council. The plate or sticker must be fastened on the lower right hand comer of the vehicle's windshield at all times  the vehicle is operated and/or stored in the City. At no time should a succession of windshield stickers obstruct the view of the vehicle's operator.
 

42.7	PENALTY Amended , 09-

Every v iolation of this Chapter 42 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $150 and not more
than $500 for each violati on.
 
CHAPTER 43
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS

43.1	Disorderly Conduct
43.2	Resisting or Obstructing a Peace Officer
43.3	Battery
43.4	Assault
43.5	Firearms and Air Rifles
43.6	Fireworks
43.7	Barbed Wire Fences
43.8	Noise
43.9	Damaging Property
43.10	Littering
43.11	Trespasses
43.12	Combustible Refuse
43.13	Parades and Demonstrations
43.14	Bathing
43.15	Possession, Use of Tobacco, Smokeless Tobacco, Tobacco Accessories and Smoking Herbs
43.16	Curfew
43.17	Parental Responsibility
43.18	Theft of Service
43.19	Bicycles, Tricycles, Skateboards or Similar Motorized and Non-motorized Recreational Devices
43.20	Non-Smoking Environment
43.21	Remote Control Devices
43.22	Truancy
43.23	Public Indecency
43.24	Theft
43.25	Public Use of Cannabis

43.1	DISORDERLY CONDUCT

No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the City. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:

1.	Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace.

2.	Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists.

3.	Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger
 
human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place.

4.	Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed.

5.	Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it.

43.2	RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER

No person shall resist or obstruct a peace office in the City. A person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his official capacity commits the offense of resisting or obstructing a peace officer.

43.3	BATTERY

No person shall commit a battery in the City. A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification and by any means:

1.	Causes bodily harm to an individual

2.	Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.

43.4	ASSAULT

No person shall commit an assault in the City. A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.

43.5	WEAPONS Amended, 14-3-5

A.	WEAPONS: A person who is not a City Law Enforcement Officer, shall not carry about his person any concealed pistol unless authorized by law, switchblade, knife with a blade in excess of five inches, razor, slingshot, metal knuckles or any other weapon or thing of deadly character.

B.	No person shall sell, give or transfer any such weapon to any minor person.

43.6	FIREWORKS Amended, 12-10-2

No person shall sell, offer for sale, use or explode any fireworks in the City except the City Administrator and the Chief of Police may grant a permit for a public display of fireworks under
 
such conditions as the may impose under the provisions of 425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq.

43.7	BARBED WIRE FENCES

No person shall maintain any fences containing barbed wire along or near any public sidewalk.

43.8	NOISE Amended, 08-11-1

A.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to the definitions found in Appendix A of this Code, for purposes of this Section 43.08, the following words and phrases, whether capitalized or not, shall have the following meanings:

Construction: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or of public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.

Demolition: Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar property.

Emergency: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.

Emergency Work: Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.

Impulsive Sound: Sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms.

Industrial Area: As defined in the Marengo Zoning Code.

Motor Carrier Vehicle Engaged in Interstate Commerce: Any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to Section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce.

Motor Vehicle: Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger car, truck, truck trailer, semitrailer, camper, go-cart, snowmobile, amphibious raft on land, dune buggy or racing vehicle, but not including motorcycles.

Motorcycle: An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor scooters and minibikes.

Muffler or Sound Dissipative Device: A device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
 

Noise: Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.

Noise Disturbance: Any sound which either:

1.	Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or

2.	Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person or normal sensitivities, or

3.	Endangers or injures personal or real property.

Person: Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.

Powered Model Vehicle: Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.

Public Right-of-Way: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

Public Space: Any real properties or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

Real Property Boundary: An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions.

Residential Area: As defined in the Marengo Zoning Code.

Weekday: Any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday.

B.	NOISE  SENSITIVE  ZONE  RECOMMENDATIONS:  The  City  Council  may
designate the noise sensitive zone which contains noise sensitive activities. Existing quiet zones shall be considered noise sensitive zones until otherwise designated. Noise sensitive activities include, but are not limited to, operation of a school, public library, church, hospital and nursing home.

C.	NOISE DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED: No person shall unreasonably make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way shall be exempt from this Section 43.08-C.

D.	RADIOS,  TELEVISION  SETS,  MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS  AND SIMILAR
 
DEVICES: No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:

1.	Between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone, except for activities open to the public and for which a permit has been issued by the City Council;

2.	In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance at 50 feet or 15 meters from such a device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space;

3.	In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated by any passenger on a common carrier;

4.	This Section 43.08-D shall not apply to noncommercial spoken language covered until Section 43.08-E herein.

E.	LOUDSPEAKER OR PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS: No person shall;

1.	Use or operate for any noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. the following day, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone.

2.	Use or operate for any commercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device as follows:

a.	Such  that  the  sound  creates  a  noise  disturbance  across  a  real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone; or

b.	Between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. the following day on a public right-of-way or public space.

F.	STREET SALES: No person shall offer for sale or sell anything by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area except by permit issued by the City Council.

G.	ANIMALS AND BIRDS: No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or bird which frequently or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone.
 
H.	LOADING AND UNLOADING: No person shall load, unload, open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 8 p.m. and 7 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone.

I.	CONSTRUCTION: Except as provided herein and except for emergency work of public service utilities, no person shall operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. The proper working hours shall be as follows:

1.	Between the hours of 7 a.m. and 8 p.m. on weekdays.

2.	Between  the  hours  of  8  a.m.  and  8  p.m.  on  Saturdays,  Sundays  and holidays.

J.	VEHICLE  OR  MOTORBOAT  REPAIRS  AND  TESTING:  No  person  shall
repair, rebuilt, modify or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone.

K.	PLACES OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT: No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment at a sound level greater than 90 dBA as read by the slow response on a sound level meter at any point that is normally occupied by a customer, unless a conspicuous and legible sign is located outside such place, hear the public entrance, stating “WARNING: SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE PERMANENT HEARING IMPAIRMENT.”

L.	POWERED MODEL VEHICLES: No person shall operate or permit the operation of powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, in a public space or within a noise sensitive zone between the hours of 10
p.m. and 7 a.m. the following day. The maximum sound levels in a public space during the permitted period of operation shall be measured at a distance of 50 feet or 15 meters from any point on the path of the vehicle.

M.	STATIONARY   NON-EMERGENCY   SIGNALING   DEVICES:   Except   for
devices used in conjunction with places of religious worship, no person shall sound or permit the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place for more than 10 minutes in any hourly period.

N.	EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICES:

1.	Except for emergency purposes or for testing, no person shall intentionally
 
sound or permit the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling devices.

2.	Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at the same time of day each time such test is performed but not before 7 a.m. or after 6 p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed 60 seconds.

3.	Testing of a complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before 7 a.m. or after 6 p.m. A time limit shall be applicable to such complete system testing.

O.	NOISE SENSITIVE ZONES: No person shall create or cause the creation of any sound within any noise sensitive zone so as to disrupt the activities normally conducted within the zone or disturb or annoy the patients of a hospital, nursing home or similar activity, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone.

P.	DOMESTIC POWER TOOLS: No person shall operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. the following day so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary.

Q.	EMERGENCY EXCEPTIONS: The provisions of this Section 43.08 shall not apply to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.

R.	EXCEPTIONS: Exceptions to this Section 43.08 may be granted by the City Council upon the filing of an application. Said application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity into compliance with this Section
43.10 would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, the City or on other persons.

S.	MOTOR VEHICLES: No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWT) in excess of 10,000 pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary for reasons other than traffic congestion, on a public right-of-way or designated noise sensitive zone, between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. the following day.

T.	PENALTY: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section 43.08, or willfully or knowingly violates any of its provisions, shall be fined not less than
$75 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues.

43.9	DAMAGING PROPERTY Amended, 01-8-3
 

A.	No person shall damage, disturb, destroy or deface any City property or any public or private property.

B.	GRAFFITI DEFINED: Graffiti is any permanent display of any name, identification, letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, a picture, outline, character, spectacle, delineation, illustration, symbol or any combination thereof, which without authorization is marked, written, drawn, painted, scratched, inscribed or affixed, and which is a different color from the color of the exterior of those objects or structures described above and to which it is affixed.

C.	PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful, and is hereby declared a nuisance to place graffiti, or permit graffiti to remain upon any public or private curb stone, flagstone, brick, sidewalk or any portion of any part of any sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, lamp post, telephone pole, utility box, utility pole, stanchion, postal mail receptacle, sign, hydrant, fence, door, wall, window, garage or enclosure, vehicle, bridge, pier or upon any other public or private structure or building.

D.	GRAFFITI REMOVAL. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to serve or cause to be served, a notice upon the owner and person in possession of any such object or structure upon which graffiti is present and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within five days. All exterior surfaces shall be kept clean and free of graffiti. Surfaces which have been exposed to graffiti shall be cleaned, painted or in some manner covered, so as to effect the complete removal or the graffiti from that surface and return the surface to its prior condition within 5 days of receipt of the violation notice to the owner. The duty of the owner and person in possession shall be joint and several.

E.	PENALTY: Whoever violates any provision of this Section 43.09 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including attorney fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to the owner of any property damaged or destroyed.

43.10	LITTERING

No person shall litter any public or private property with paper or other debris or foreign matter. Any stored or transported materials susceptible to blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or protected to prevent littering.

43.11	TRESPASSES

A.	PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within this City upon either public or private property.

B.	SPECIFICALLY  ENUMERATED  TRESPASSES;   SUPPRESSION:  Without
 
constituting and limitation upon the provisions of this Section 43.11, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of this Section 43.11, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this Section 43.11, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows, to-wit:

1.	An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protect given orally or in writing, by any owner or occupant thereof; or

2.	The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of any entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or

3.	A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, wither orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant thereof; or

4.	An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.

43.12	COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE

It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such manner as to create a fire hazard, or to throw or deposit, or cause to thrown or deposited, any such refuse of any kind on or in any street, highway, or alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the City.

43.13	PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS

A.	No person shall participate in or promote any parade or demonstration on any street or other public property unless a permit has been issued by the City Council.

B.	Application for such permit shall provide such information as the Chief of Police shall require for proper protection of the public.

C.	No such parade or demonstration shall be held during the night time, or in any such manner as to obstruct the orderly use by the public of any street or public place.

D.	The City Council may issue such permit subject to such reasonable restrictions as it shall deem necessary to safeguard the residents of the City and to protect private and public
 
property.

43.14	BATHING

It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place, or in any place open to public view, unless such person is adequately or decently clothed or garbed in a bathing suit; and it shall be unlawful for any person to robe or disrobe at any public place or in any place open to public view, or to change clothing, or to change into or out of a bathing suit at any public place or in any place open to public view, or in an automobile or other motor vehicle on or in any street, highway, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the City.

43.15	POSSESSION,  USE  OF  TOBACCO,  SMOKELESS  TOBACCO,  TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS Amended, 10-8-2

A.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to those terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, terms used in this Section 43.15 are defined as follows:

Bidi cigarette: a product that contains tobacco that is wrapped in temburni or tendu leaf or that is wrapped in any other material identified by rules of the Illinois Department of Public Health that is similar in appearance or characteristics to the temburni or tendu leaf.

Smoking herbs: all substances of plant origin and their derivatives, including but not limited to broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops, ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as smoking materials.

Smokeless tobacco: any finely cut, ground, powdered or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the oral cavity; any tobacco product that is suitable for dipping or chewing.

Tobacco accessories: cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and other items, designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal under any statute or of substances whose sale, gift, barter or exchange is unlawful.

Tobacco products: cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco or tobacco.

B.	PURCHASE	AND	USE	OF	BIDI	CIGARETTES,	SMOKING	HERBS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS:

1.	No person under 18 years of age shall purchase any tobacco product in any of its forms. No person shall sell, purchase for, distribute samples of or furnish any tobacco product in any of its forms to any person under 18 years of age. Tobacco products may be sold through a vending machine only when such tobacco products are not sold along with non-tobacco products in the vending machine and only in the following locations:
 

(a)	Factories, businesses, offices, private clubs and other places not open to the general public.

(b)	Places to which persons under 18 years of age are not permitted access.

(c)	Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises.

(d)	Places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision (which means that the owner or employee has an unimpeded line of sight to the vending machine) of the owner of the establishment or an employee over 18 years of age. The sale of tobacco products from a vending machine under direct supervision of the owner or an employee of the establishment is considered a sale of tobacco products by that person.

(e)	Places where the vending machine can only be operated by the owner or an employee over age 18 either directly or through a remote control device if the device is inaccessible to all customers.

2.	PENALTY: Any person violating any provision of this Section 43.15-B is guilty of a petty offense and for the first offense shall be fined $200, $400 for the second offense in a 12-month period, and $600 for the third or any subsequent offense in a 12-month period and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees.

C.	POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS:

1.	No person under 18 years of age shall possess any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms.

2.	PENALTY: If a minor violates this Section 43.15-C the minor shall be guilty of a petty offense and may be fined $25 or sentenced to 15 hours of community service for the first offense. If a second violation occurs within a 12-month period after the first offense, the fine shall be $50 and 25 hours of community service. For a third or subsequent violation that occurs within a 12-month period after the first offense, the fine shall be $100 and 30 hours of community service. If there is a second or subsequent violation not within a 12-month time period after the first violation, a fine of $25 or 15 hours of community service shall be assessed. For any violation the violator shall be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees.
 
D.	TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS:

1.	SALE TO MINORS PROHIBITED: No person shall knowingly sell, barter, exchange, deliver or give away or cause or permit or procure to be sold, bartered, exchanged, delivered or given away tobacco accessories or smoking herbs to any person under 18 years of age.

2.	SALE OF BIDI CIGARETTES: No person shall knowingly sell, barter, exchange, deliver or give away a bidi cigarette to another person, nor shall a person cause or permit or procure a bidi cigarette to be sold, bartered, exchanged, delivered or given away to another person.

3.	SALE OF CIGARETTE PAPER: No person shall knowingly offer, sell, barter, exchange, deliver or give away cigarette paper or cause, permit or procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered, exchanged, delivered or given away except from premises or an establishment where other tobacco products are sold.

4.	SALE  OF CIGARETTE  PAPER  FROM  VENDING MACHINES: No
person shall knowingly offer, sell, barter, exchange, deliver or give away cigarette paper or cause, permit or procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered exchanged, delivered or given away by use of a vending or coin-operated machine or device. For purposes of this Section 43.15- D4, cigarette paper shall not include any paper that is incorporated into a product to which a tax stamp must be affixed under the Cigarette Tax Act (35 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) or the Cigarette Use Tax Act (35 ILCS 135/1 et seq.).

5.	USE OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS: No person in the furtherance or facilitation of obtaining smoking accessories and smoking herbs shall display or use a false or forged identification card or transfer, alter or deface an identification card.

6.	WARNING TO MINORS: Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation operating a place of business where tobacco accessories and smoking herbs are sold or offered for sale shall post in a conspicuous place upon the premises a sign which there shall be imprinted the following statement: SALE OF TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW. The sign shall be printed on a white card in red letters at least one-half inch in height.

7.	PENALTY:
 
(a)	Except for Section 43-15-D2, any person who knowingly violates or shall knowingly cause the violation of any provision of this Section 43.15-E shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined pursuant to 730 ILCS 5/5-4.5-65(e). The violator shall be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees.

(b)	Any person who knowingly violates or shall knowingly cause the violation of Section 43.15-D2 shall be guilty of a petty offense for which the offender shall be fined as follows: for the first offense, not less than $100 or more than $500, for a second offense within a 2-year period of the first offense, not less than $250 or more than
$600, and for a third or subsequent offense within a 2-year period of the first offense, not less than $500 or more than $1,000. In addition, the violator shall be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees.

43.16	CURFEW Amended, 04-4-2

A.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to those terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, the following definitions are applicable to this Section 43.16:

Emergency: An unforeseen combination of circumstances for the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury of loss of life.

Establishment: Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.

Guardian: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.

Minor: A person less than 17 years of age.

Operator: Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.

Parent: A person who is (1) a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent or another person; or
(2) at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
 
Public place: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

Remain: To linger or stay; or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.

Serious bodily injury: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.

B.	CURFEW: Except as provided in Section 43.16-C herein, it is unlawful for any person less than 17 years of age to be on any public road, street, alley, park or other lands used for public purposes or in any public place of business or amusement in the City between the hours of 12:01 a.m. Saturday and 6 a.m. Saturday, and between 12:01 a.m. Sunday and 6 a.m. Sunday and between the hours of 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. on any other day of the week.

C.	EXCEPTIONS: The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of the curfew:

1.	At any time when accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person responsible for or having the legal care, custody and control of the individual, or an authorized adult;

2.	If participating in, going to or returning from, without any detour or stop:

(a)	an emergency as defined herein;

(b)	lawful employment;

(c)	attending an official school, religious or other social or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a unit of government, civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the attendees;

(d)	an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution (or those similar rights protected by the State of Illinois Constitution), such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.

3.	Is married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended (750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.).

D.	ESTABLISHMENTS: The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
 
establishment during curfew hours or fails to promptly notify the Police Department that a minor is present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave.

E.	ENFORCEMENT: Before taking any enforcement action under this Section 43.16, a police officer shall ask the suspected offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises. The police officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this Section 43.16 unless the police officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no exception in Section 43.16-C applies.

F.	PENALTY: Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section 43.16 shall be fined in not more than $500 for each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.

43.17	PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY

A.	It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor who resides with such parent of legal guardian to fail to pay for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of such minor which cause injury to a person or to property.

B.	A parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for actual damages caused by said minor and shall be presumed to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have acted with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian in violation of this Section 43.17 whenever:

1.	Said minor shall be adjudged to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts which cause injury to a person or property.

2.	Said parent or legal guardian shall have served upon them a notice in writing that said minor has received a non-judicial sanction from the City Police Department or other governmental agency as a result of an admission of guilt by said minor of a violation of an ordinance, law or statute prohibiting will full and malicious acts which caused injury to a person or property and subsequent to receipt of said notice said minor is adjudicated to be in violation of an ordinance, law or statute or receives a non-judicial sanction from any governmental agency as a result of an admission of guilt by said minor in violation of an ordinance, law or statute.

C.	Recovery of damages shall be pursuant and limited to an amount provided by 740 ILCS 115/5, as amended.
 
D.	This Section 43.17 shall not affect the recovery of damages in any other cause of action where the liability of the parent or legal guardian is predicated on a common law basis.

E.	Any person violating any provision of this Section 43.17 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.

43.18	THEFT OF SERVICE

A.	UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION PROHIBITED: No person shall make any unauthorized connection, physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of the cable television system existing in the City for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence transmitted over said cable television system without payment to the owner of the cable television system.

No person shall, without the consent of the owner of the cable television system, willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires, or other equipment used for the distribution programs, sounds, or any other information or intelligence transmitted over said cable television system.

B.	PENALTY: Any person violating any provision of this Section 43.18 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.

43.19	BICYCLES,  TRICYCLES,  SKATEBOARDS  or  SIMILAR  MOTORIZED  and NON-MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL DEVICES Amended, 04-5-2

A.	DEFINITIONS: In addition to the terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, the following words, when used in this Section 43.19, shall have the following meanings:

Central Business District: The B-1 Central Business District as identified in the Marengo Zoning Code.

City property: Any sidewalk, street right-of-way, City park, City parking lot/area or any other public property owned by the City.

Motorized wheelchair: As defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-148.3, as amended.

Personal use vehicle and personal use device: Vehicles, devices or means of transportation or recreation which include, but are not limited to, the following: skateboard, bicycle, tricycle, roller blade, roller skate, or other similar device, whether non-motorized or motorized (electric, gasoline engine or other form of external power), mini-bike, pedalcycle, recreational device or vehicle, snowmobile, go-kart, moped, all-terrain vehicles (ATV), golf cart or other such motorized or non-motorized devices or vehicles or modes of transportation.
 

B.	USE OF PERSONAL USE VEHICLES AND DEVICES: Except as provided in Section 43.19-C herein, it shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to operate, ride on, be pushed on or traverse on a personal use vehicle or personal use device on any City property or on any private property without the permission of the property owner.

C.	EXEMPTIONS:

1.	Motorized wheelchairs shall be permitted to operate on any City property so long as operated in a safe and orderly manner.

2.	Non-motorized bicycles, tricycles, skateboards and other non-motorized recreational devices or vehicles may be operated on sidewalks in residential zoning districts provided the operators remain in single file, yield the right-of-way to pedestrians, and, when approaching a pedestrian, reduce the speed of the device to a speed which is no greater than necessary to continue the safe operation of the device, and without impairing the right-of-way of the pedestrian or without causing alarm or danger and/or damage to the pedestrian and/or property.

3.	Non-motorized tricycles, operated by children accompanied by an adult, shall be permitted in Calvin Spencer Park.

4.	Special events that are conducted with a written permit issued by the Chief of Police.

5.	Any personal use vehicle or device licensed and registered pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be permitted on any City street or parking lot/area.

6.	Any employee of any unit of government may operate any personal use vehicle or device owned by a unit of government in the course of his or her duties on any City property.

D.	PENALTIES: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section 43.19 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which the violation occurs or continues.

43.20	NON-SMOKING ENVIRONMENT

The City does hereby concur in the policy as set forth by the Illinois General Assembly in the Illinois Clean Indoor Air Act that tobacco smoke is annoying, harmful and dangerous to human beings and a hazard to public health. Pursuant to the requirements of the Illinois Clean Indoor Air Act, no person shall smoke on premises owned and controlled by the City nor in a public place which is any enclosed indoor area used by the public or serving as a place of work.
 

43.21	REMOTE CONTROL DEVICES

No remote control device shall be operated on any City sidewalk, street, parking lot or park.

43.22	TRUANCY 06-5-1

A.	For purposes of this Section 43.22, the term “truant” is (1) any person between the ages of 7 and 16 who is subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent, without valid cause, from school attendance during a regular school day or any portion thereof or during a required summer school program established pursuant to 105 ILCS 5/10-22.33B; and (2) any person who is 16, 17 or 18 years of age and enrolled in a public school and who is absent, without valid cause, from school attendance during a regular school day or any portion thereof or during a required summer school program.

The following children are not considered truant:

1.	Any child attending a private or parochial school where children are taught the branches of education taught to children or corresponding age and grade in the public schools, and where the instruction of the child in the branches of education is in the English language;

2.	Any child who is not enrolled in a public school and is instructed by a legal guardian in a manner equal or superior to that obtainable in the public schools;

3.	Any child who is physically or mentally unable to attend school, such disability being certified to either Marengo Community High School District 154 or Marengo-Union Elementary School District 165 (hereinafter “school district”) truancy officer or McHenry County Regional Office of Education truancy officer, by a licensed physician or by a Christian Science practitioner residing in Illinois and listed with the Christian Science Journal; or who is excused for temporary absence for cause by the principal or teacher of the school which the child attends; the exemptions in this Section 43.22-A2 do not apply to any female who is pregnant or the mother of one or more children, except where a female is unable to attend school due to a complication arising from her pregnancy and the existence of such complication is certified to the school district truancy officer or McHenry County Regional Office of Education truancy officer by a competent physician;

4.	Any child necessarily and lawfully employed according to the provisions of the law regulating child labor may be excused from attendance at school by the school district Superintendent of Schools or by the Regional Superintendent  of  Schools,  on  certification  of  the  facts  by  and  the
 
recommendation of either the school district Board of Education. If a part- time continuation school is run in either school district, children so excused shall attend the continuation school at least 8 hours each week;

5.	Any child over 12 and under 14 years of age while in attendance at confirmation classes;

6.	Any child absent from school on a particular day or days or at a particular time of day for the reason that he is unable to attend classes or to participate in any examination, study or work requirements on a particular day or days or at a particular time of day, because the tenets of his religion forbid secular activity on a particular day or days or at a particular time of day; and

7.	Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or herself from school without parental or legal guardian permission shall not constitute truancy if permission for such absence has been obtained from the parent or legal guardian and such permission is submitted to the proper school authorities within 24 hours of such absence.

B.	TRUANCY PROHIBITED: Upon a complaint signed by an authorized school district official, it shall be unlawful for any person to be truant. Any person who is truant shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth in this Section 43.22.

C.	PERMITTING MINOR TO BE TRUANT PROHIBITED: It is  unlawful for a
parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate this Section 43.22.

D.	PENALTY: Upon a complaint being signed by an authorized school district official, any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section 43.22 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues.

43.23	PUBLIC INDECENCY 19-4-1

A.	It shall be unlawful, and constitute the offense of public indecency, for any person to defecate or urinate on any public sidewalk, street, alley, park, right-of-way or any other publicly owned property, or anywhere in the City in public view.

C.     Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be fined pursuant to Chapter 1 of this Code for each offense in a sum not less than $100 and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys’ fees.
 




43.24	THEFT	19-4-1

A.	Retail Theft: It shall be unlawful to commit the offense of retail theft of property, not exceeding $300 in value. A person commits the offense of retail theft when such person knowingly:

1.	Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise;

2.	Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise;

3.	Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise;

4.	Under-rings a sale with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise;

5.	Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail merchandise establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; or

6.	Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.

7.	If any person:
 
a.	Conceals upon their person or among their belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and

b.	Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payment for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment.

Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be guilty and subject to a fine pursuant to Chapter 1 of this Code of not less than $100.

B.	General Theft: It shall be unlawful to commit the offense of theft of property not exceeding $500 in value. A person commits the offense of theft when such person knowingly:

1.	Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;

2.	Obtains by deception control over property of the owner;

3.	Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or

4.	Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen.

Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be guilty and subject to a fine pursuant to Chapter 1 of this Code, not less than $100.

43.25	PUBLIC USE OF CANNABIS  19-10-4

No person shall use cannabis in or about any public place or places. As used in this section 43.25, “public place” means any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be observed by others.  “Public place” includes all parts of buildings owned in whole or part, or leased, by the State or the City.
 
CHAPTER 44
ADULT BUSINESS LICENSES'

 
44.01
44.02
44.03
44.04
44.05
44.06
44.07
44.08
44.44
44.10
44.11
44.12
44.13
44.14



44.01
 
Definitions License
Application for License
Standards for Issuance of License Fees
Display of License Renewal of License Revocation of License Employees
Physical Layout of Adult Business Responsibilities of the Operator Exclusions
Penalties and Prosecution Enforcement


DEFINITIONS
 

In addition to the terms defined in Appendix A of this Code, capitalized terms, when used in this Chapter 44, shall have the following meanings:

Adult Business: Any establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade or business activ ity in a use such as, but not limited to the following: Adults-Only Bookstores, Adults­ Only Motion Picture Theaters, Adult Entertainment Centers, Rap Parlors, Adults-Only Nightclubs or Adults-Only Saunas, where  explicit sexual conduct  is depicted and/or sexual  activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated .

Adult Entertainment Business : Synonymous with "Adult Business," as defined herein.

Adult Entertainment Center : An enclosed building or part of an enclosed building, which contains one or more coin-operated mechanisms which when activated permit a customer to view a live person nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view the human male or female genitalia; pubic hair; buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; or, female breast, at or below the areola thereof. In addition, the viewing of a live person, in the above described manner, after paying of any admission or fee for the viewing of same activity.

Adults-Only : Any items or activities emphasizing, depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether auto-erotic, heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise}, bestiality or sadomasochistic   activity.

Adults-Only Bookstore: An adults-only establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin-operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their principal emphasis on matters depicting,describing or relating to nudity,explicit sexual conduct
{whether auto-erotic , heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity.


1 Established by Ordinance 02-8-4, 8/26/02
 
An establishment, having adults-only items as a substantial or significant portion of its stock, that sells or displays adults-only items for sale to patrons therein .

Adults-Only Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building used regularly and routinely for presenting adults-only material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity,explicit sexual conduct (whether auto-erotic, heterosexual,homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity, for observation by patron therein.

Adults-Only Sauna: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing a steam bath and/or massage services, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.

Booth: Any enclosure that is specifically offered to patrons of an Adult Business for the private viewing of any adults-only item or movie. Said definition does not include enclosures that are used as private offices by any operator, employee or agent for attending to the tasks of their employment and are not offered for use by the public .

Cubicle: Synonymous with "booth,"  as defined herein.

Door: Full, complete, non-transparent closure device that obscures the view or activity taking place within the enclosure.

Adults-Only Nightclub: An establishment or place either occasionally or primarily in the business of featuring topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted an/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged  or tolerated.

Nightclub: An establishment serving food and/or liquor and providing music and space for dancing by patrons only . A nightclub shall not include an "Adult Business."

Nudity: The display of the human male or female genitalia; pubic hair; buttocks;perineum; anal or pubic regions; female breast, at or below the areola thereof, with no covering or with a less than fully opaque covering; or, male genitalia, in a discernible turgid state, with or without covering.

Obscene : Any material or performance is obscene if: ( 1) the average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
(2) the average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts
or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals ;and (3) taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. [Statutory Reference : 720 ILCS 5/11-201

Operator : For purposes of an Adult Business, as defined herein, any person, (whether said persons be an individual, partner, corporation, joint stock company, fiduciary , officer, director, stockholder, employee, or Administrator), which conducts, maintains or owns any Adult Business .

Patron: For purposes of an Adult Business, as defined herein, any customer, patron or visitor to an Adult Business who is not employed by any operator of said establishment.

Rap  Parlor:  An  establishment   or  place  primarily  in  the  business  of  providing   non-professional
 
conversation or similar services for adults, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated .

Room: Synonymous with "booth," as defined herein.

Sadomasochistic Activity : Flagellation or torture by or upon a nude person; a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume . In addition, the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained with the intent to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the recipient.
Sell: Includes to solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell. Sexual  Conduct: Ultimate  sex  acts  (whether  auto-erotic,  heterosexual,  homosexual  or  otherwise),
bestiality  or  sadomasochistic  activity.  In addition,  physical contact,  intended to  stimulate  or  arouse
sexually the initiator and/or the recipient, with a person's unclothed genitalia, buttocks, perineum,anal or pubic regions, or female breast.

Underage: Any person under 18 years of age,the legally minimum age at which one can purchase or view adults-only items. (Statutory Reference : 720 ILCS 5/ 11-20)

Wall Sign: Any flat sign which is placed against a building or other structure and attached thereto in such manner that only one side is visible .

44.2	LICENSE

A.	Except as provided in Section 44.02-D herein, from and after the effective date of this Chapter 44 (insert date), no Adult Business shall be operated or maintained in the City without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the City .

B.	A license may be issued only for one Adult Business located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation which desires to operate more than one Adult Business must have a license for each.

C.	No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person, partnership or corporation .

D.	All Adult Businesses ex isting at the time of the passage of this Chapter 44 must submit an applicat ion fo r a license within 90 days of the passage of this Chapter 44 . If an application is not received within  said 90 day period, then such existing Adult Business shall cease operations.

44.3	APPLICATION FOR LICENSE

A . Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the Administrator. The application shall be filed in triplic ate with and dated by the Administrator . A copy of the applicat ion shall be distributed promptly by the Administrator to the Police Department.

B.	The applicatio n for a license shall be upon a form provided by the Administrator. An applicant for a license, which shall include all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, and all officers or directors of a corporate applicant and all stockholders holding more than five percent of
 
the stock of a corporate applicant or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business, shall furnish the following information under oath:

1.	Name and address, including all aliases.

2.	Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age .

3.	All residential addresses of the applicant for the past  10 years.

4.	The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.

5.	The business, occupation or employment of the  applicant  for  10 years immediately preceding the date of application.

6.	Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, City or state under an Adult Business license or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation.

7.	All criminal statutes, whether federal or state, or City ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except  minor traffic violations.

8.	Fingerprints and two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches of the applicant.

9.	The address of the Adult Business establishment to be operated by the applicant.

10.	If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent.

C.	Within 21 days of receiving an application for a license the Administrator shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied .

D.	Whenever an application is denied, the Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within 10 days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within 10 days thereafter before the City Council, as hereinafter provided.

E.	Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this Chapter 44, shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Administrator .

44.4	STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
 
A.	To receive a license to operate an Adult Business, an applicant must meet the following standards :

1.	If the applicant is an individual:

a.	The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.

b.	.     The applicant shall not have been convicted of, pleaded no contest or stipulated to the facts involving a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately  preceding the date of the application.

c.	The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this Chapter 44 within five years immediately preceding the date of the application.

2.	If the applicant is a corporation:

a.	. All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under Section 44.03-B-10 herein shall be at least 18 years of age .

b.	No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under Section 44.03-8-10 herein shall have been convicted of, pleaded no contest or stipulated to the facts involving a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application.

c.	No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under Section 44.03-B-10 herein shall have been found to have previously violated this ordinance within five years immediately preceding the date of the application .

3.	If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:

a.	All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of age.

b.	No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted of, pleaded no contest or stipulated to the facts involving a felony or any crime involv­ ing moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application.

c.	No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have violated any provision of this Chapter 44 within five years immediately preceding the
 
date of the application .

B.	No license shall be issued unless the Police Department has investigated the qualifications of the applicant to be licensed. The results of that investigation shall be filed in writing with the Administrator no later than 14 days after the date of the application.

44.5	FEES

A license fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with the application  for a license. If the application  is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. License fees paid less than 12 months prior to renewal shall not be prorated.

44.6	DISPLAY OF LICENSE

The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the Adult Business such that it may be readily seen by a person entering the premises .

44.7	RENEWAL OF LICENSE

A . Every license issued pursuant to this ordinance will terminate on April 30 of each year unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the Administrator. The application for renewal must be filed no later than 60 days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the Administrator. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the Administrator to the Police Department and to the operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Administrator and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license .

B.	A license renewal fee of $250 .00 shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100.00 shall be assessed against the applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the license expires . If the application is denied,one-half of the total fees collected shall be returned.

C.	If the Police Department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the Administrator .

44.8	REVOCATION OF LICENSE

A.	The City Council shall revoke a license for any of the following reasons:

1.	Discovery that false or misleading information  or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application.

2.	The operator or any employee of the operator, violates any provision of this Chapter 44 or any rule or regulation adopted by the City pursuant to this Chapter 44; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the City Council shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
 
knowledge.

3.	The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.

4.	Any cost or fee required to be paid by this Chapter 44 is not paid.

5.	Any alcoholic  liquor  is served  or  consumed  on  the  premises  of  the Adult Business.

6.	Violation of any City ordinance, code or regulation and failure to pay the required fine or penalty or failure to cure the violations.

7.	The transfer of a license or any interest in a license.

B.	The City Council, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give the operator at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against him, and the opportunity for a public hearing before the City Council.

C.	Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an Adult Business for six months from the date of revocation of the license.

44.09	EMPLOYEES

It shall be unlawful for any Adult Business licensee or his Administrator or employee to employ in any capacity within the Adult Business any person who is not at least 18 years of age.

44.10	PHYSICAL LAYOUT OF ADULT BUSINESS

A.	Any Adult Business having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements:

1.	Access : Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the Adult Business, and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices.

2.	Construction : Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements .

a.	Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall.

b.	Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same.

c.	All walls shall be solid and without any openings , extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, non­ absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
 
d.	The floor must be light colored, non-absorbent , smooth textured and easily cleanable.

e.	The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use shall be a minimum of 10 foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor .

3.	Occupants : Only one individual shalt occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.

B.	Any Adult Business as defined herein which features dancers or other entertainers or forms of entertainment, must comply with the following requirements :

1.	All dancing or other entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor .

2.	No dancing or other entertainment shall occur closer than 10feet to any patron .

3.	No dancer or other entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or other entertainer .

4.	No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity or tip to any dancer or other entertainer and no dancer or other entertainer shall directly or indirectly solicit any pay or gratuity or tip from any patron.

44.11	RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR

A . The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth date, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, Social Security number, date of employment and termination and duties of each employee. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three years following termination.

B.	The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection upon demand of a member of the Police Department at all reasonable times .

C.	Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter 44 shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.

D.	Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter 44 shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed .

E.	No employee of an Adult Business shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent an Adult Business .
 
F.	The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary  manner at all times.

G.	The operator shall maintain at least 10 foot candles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times . However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles, provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one foot candle of illumination in said aisles, as measured from the floor .

H.	The operator shall insure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this Chapter 44 .

44.12	EXCLUSIONS

All private schools and public schools, as defined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, located within the City are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when instructing pupils in sex educat ion as part of their curriculum.

44.13	PENALTIES ANO PROSECUTION

A.	Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this Chapter 44 shall be fined not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 per offense plus costs of prosecution incurred by the City including reasonable attorney fees and shall result in the revocation of any license .

8. Each violation of this  Chapter 44 shall  be considered  a  separate  offense, and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a separate offense .

44.14	ENFORCEMENT

The Police Department shall have the authority to enter any Adult Business at all reasonable times to inspect the premises and enforce this Chapter 44.
