6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 1/649
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the
left, have been passed, but have not been incorporated in the
actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any
questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-30
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 1, CHAPTER 11, PERSONNEL
MANUAL, OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA,
WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY, AND KENDALL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
______________________________________________________________________
WHEREAS, on February 27, 2018, the Village passed Ordinance no. 2018-07, adopting a sexual
harassment policy that complied with the requirements set forth in Public Act 100-0554 (eff. November 16,
2017); and
WHEREAS, on August 24, 2018, the Illinois General Assembly enacted Public Act 100-1066, an
Act concerning State government (the “Act”), which became effective immediately; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the Act, the time-frame for filing human rights violations with the Illinois
Department of Human Rights has been changed; and
WHEREAS, in light of the changes made by the Act, it is necessary to amend the provisions of
Title 1, Chapter 11, Personnel Manual, of the Municipal Code of the Village of Minooka to make the
Village’s sexual harassment policy consistent with the Act; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 2/649
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the citizens of the Village of Minooka to now amend the
provisions of Title 1, Chapter 11, Personnel Manual, of the Municipal Code of the Village of Minooka as
set forth in this Ordinance.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF
THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS, PURSUANT TO ITS STATUTORY
AUTHORITY, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. The Village President and Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals
contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are true, correct and complete and are hereby incorporated
by reference hereto and made a part hereof.
SECTION 2. That Section 1.4 Sexual Harassment, and Section 1.5 Reporting Harassment and/or
Discrimination Allegations, of the “Personnel Manual of the Village of Minooka, Illinois, 2015” are deleted
in their entirety and replaced with the language as set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto.
SECTION 3. Each section and part hereof of this Ordinance is deemed to be severable and
should any section or port hereof be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such ruling shall not affect the validity of constitutionality of the remaining portion(s) of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance are hereby
repealed and of no further force and effect to the extent of any such conflict.
SECTION 5. The Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
SECTION 6. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Ordinance# 2018-30 was adopted by roll call vote on November 27, 2018.
1-4. Sexual Harassment
It is Village policy to prohibit harassment of any employee by any other employee, the public, or any vendor on
the basis of sex or gender. The purpose of this policy is to ensure that all employees are free from sexual
harassment. While it is not easy to define precisely what types of conduct could constitute sexual harassment,
examples of prohibited behavior include unwelcome sexual advances; requests for sexual favors; obscene
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 3/649
gestures; displaying sexually graphic magazines, calendars, or posters; sending sexually explicit emails and/or text
messages; and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature, such as uninvited touching of a sexual nature or
sexually related comments. Depending upon the circumstances, improper conduct also can include sexual joking,
vulgar or offensive conversation or jokes, commenting about an employee’s physical appearance, conversation
about your own or someone else’s sex life, or teasing or other conduct directed toward a person because of his or
her gender which is sufficiently severe or pervasive to create an unprofessional and hostile working environment.
This includes the use of Village equipment and/or systems to transmit or receive offensive material, statements, or
pictures.
Discrimination and discriminatory harassment does not include actions that are in accordance with established
rules, principles, or standards, including:
a. Acts or omission of acts based solely upon bona fide occupational qualifications under the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission and the Illinois Department of Human Rights guidelines.
b. Bona fide requests or demands by a supervisor that an employee improve his/her work quality or
output, that the employee report to the job site on time, that the employee comply with Village or
departmental rules or regulations, or any other appropriate work-related communication between
supervisor and employee.
If you feel that you have been subjected to conduct which violates this policy, you should follow the Village’s
policy for reporting harassment and/or discrimination allegations (see Section 1.5). Every report of perceived
harassment will be fully investigated and corrective action will be taken where appropriate. Any violation of this
policy will result in corrective action, up to and including termination. All complaints will be kept confidential to
the extent possible, but confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. In addition, the Village will not allow any form of
retaliation against individuals who report unwelcome conduct or who cooperate in the investigations of such
reports in accordance with this policy.
Employees who knowingly or intentionally make false complaints in bad faith shall be subject to corrective
action, up to and including termination. Any disciplinary action taken against any person for knowingly or
intentionally making a false complaint shall be in addition to any and all other civil and criminal remedies and
penalties that are legally available to the Village and to any falsely-accused person or persons.
1.5 Reporting Harassment and/or Discrimination Allegations
A. If an employee feels that they have been the victim of harassment and/or discrimination, they should
inform the harasser that his/her actions are unwelcome and offensive. The employee is encouraged to
document all incidents of harassment in order to facilitate the most comprehensive investigation possible.
B. Next, the employee must report the incident to the Village as soon as is practicable and in accordance
with the procedures set forth herein. In addition, any employees who learn of or witness harassment or
discrimination are strongly encouraged to report it pursuant to this policy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 4/649
1. If the alleged offender is the employee’s co-worker or subordinate, then the employee should report
the incident to either their Supervisor or the Village Administrator.
2. If the alleged offender is the employee’s Supervisor, the employee should report the incident directly
to the Village Administrator.
3. If the alleged offender is the Village Administrator, the employee should report the incident directly
to the Village President.
4. If the alleged offender is the Village President, the employee should report the incident directly to the
Village Administrator.
5. If the alleged offender is a member of the Village Board, the employee should report the incident
directly to the Village Administrator or Village President.
6. Any employee who is not comfortable with reporting violations of this policy to a supervisor may
bypass the chain of command and make the report to a higher-ranking supervisor or manager.
Complaints may also be filed with the Chief of Police, the Village Finance Director, or the Village
Administrator.
C. The Village has a sample written complaint form (See Appendix D) available to employees who believe
that they have been subjected to harassment and/or discrimination. Employees are encouraged to use the
complaint form and submit it to the appropriate official above when reporting the incident, including any
and all pertinent documents and facts. Use of this written complaint form is encouraged but is not
mandatory. The employee is expected to cooperate fully with the investigative process.
D. Supervisors receiving information regarding an alleged violation of this policy shall determine if there is
any basis for the allegation and shall proceed with resolution as stated below.
a. Continually monitor the work environment and strive to ensure that it is free from all types of
unlawful discrimination, including sexual harassment or retaliation.
b. Take prompt, appropriate action within their work unit to avoid and minimize the incidence of
any form of discrimination, harassment or retaliation.
c. Stopping any observed acts that may be considered harassment and taking steps to intervene.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 5/649
d. Ensure their subordinates understand their responsibility under this policy.
e. Ensure that any employees who make complaints or oppose any unlawful employment practices
are protected from retaliation and that such matters are kept confidential to the extent possible.
f. Notify the Village Administrator or Finance Director in writing of the circumstances surrounding
any reported allegations or observed acts of discrimination, harassment or retaliation no later than
the next business day.
g. Failure to carry out these responsibilities may be grounds for discipline.
E. To facilitate a thorough and fair investigation of the alleged incident, it is strongly encouraged that all
reports of harassment and/or discrimination be made as soon as practical, but preferably within seven (7)
days.
1. Upon receipt, the Village Administrator, or his/her designee, shall conduct an investigation to
consider appropriate resolution alternatives based on the facts uncovered, and swiftly resolve the
matter. The receiving official shall inform the complainant and accused of the progress of the
investigation if it is not resolved within seven (7) days.
2. All reports of harassment and/or discrimination shall be taken seriously and fully investigated. There
can be no guarantee of complete confidentiality, but to the extent possible, the investigation and the
identity of the parties and persons cooperating in the investigation will be kept in strict confidence
with only those on a need-to-know basis involved.
3. All parties involved will be expected to keep all comments and personal opinions confidential. Full
cooperation from all parties involved is required during the investigation. Failure to fully cooperate
with such investigation may subject the employee to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination of employment.
4. All persons accused of harassment and/or discrimination are considered innocent until proven
otherwise.
F. Within seven days of initiating an investigation, the receiving official shall give notification to the
Finance Director. Further, upon the completion of the investigation, the Village official shall prepare a
written report of findings and recommend remedies and outcome to the Village Administrator unless the
complaint involves the Village Administrator, in which case it shall be forwarded to the Village President.
The Administrator or Village President shall notify the Village Board of the incident and the final
outcome. The written report will be maintained for the period established in the Village’s records
retention schedule.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 6/649
G. Employees who are found guilty of harassment and/or discrimination shall be subject to corrective or
disciplinary action up to and including termination depending on the circumstances. If upon the
completion of an investigation, the alleged offender is found innocent or the allegations are
unsubstantiated, then no record of the incident shall appear in their personnel file.
H. Village prohibits retaliation against any individual who reports or files a charge of discrimination or
harassment. Retaliation is treating a person differently or engaging in acts or reprisal or intimidation
against the person because he/she has engaged in protected activity, filed a charge of discrimination,
participated in an investigation or opposed a discriminatory practice. Retaliation will be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
I. If the complainant is found (1) to have been acting maliciously with the intention of intimidating or
retaliating against the alleged offender, or (2) to have knowingly or intentionally made a false complaint,
then the accuser shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. Any disciplinary
action taken against any person for knowingly or intentionally making a false complaint shall be in
addition to any and all other civil and criminal remedies and penalties that are legally available to the
Village and to any falsely-accused person or persons.
J. Whistleblower Protection
1. Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides whistleblower protection from any retaliatory action (such
as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion, or transfer) that occurs in
retaliation against an employee who does any of the following:
a. Discloses or threatens to disclose any activity, policy, or practice of any person subject to this
policy that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of any law, rule, regulation, or this
policy;
b. Provides information to or testifies before any public body conducting an investigation,
hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law, rule, regulation, or this policy; or
c. Assists or participates in any proceeding to enforce the provisions of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act.
2. Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), this Village may not retaliate against any
employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative hearing, or before a legislative
commission or committee, or in any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to
believe that the information disclosed demonstrates the existence of a violation of any State or
federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, the Village may not retaliate against any employee that
discloses information to any government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 7/649
reasonable cause to believe that the information disclosed demonstrates a violation of any State or
federal law, rule, or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
3. According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a civil rights violation for a
person (or for two or more people, conspiring together), to retaliate against any person because
he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment
in employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
4. An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed over for a promotion after
filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a retaliation charge with the appropriate body (such
retaliation charges are due within 300 days of the alleged retaliatory action).
K. Conflicts with Binding State or Federal Laws
1. The provisions of this policy shall apply to the maximum extent permitted by law. In the case of a
direct conflict between this policy and any binding provision of state or federal law, the provisions of
such state or federal law shall control over the conflicting provisions of this policy, but only to the
extent of the conflict.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-01
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 7,
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS, IN THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL
COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY AND KENDALL COUNTY, STATE OF ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka, Will County, Grundy County and
Kendall County, Illinois have the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to
its government and affairs and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 8/649
WHEREAS, the purpose of this Ordinance is to maintain this Village’s eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program, to make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the Village by fulfilling
the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, and to comply with the rules and regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees have determined that Title 4, Chapter 7, Flood Hazard
Areas, of the Village of Minooka Code of Ordinances, must be updated to reflect the most recent information
published by Federal, State or other sources regarding flood hazard areas; and
WHEREAS, the current “Model Floodplain Ordinance for Communities within Northeastern Illinois”
incorporates numerous updates made by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources which should be incorporated
into the Village’s Flood Hazard Areas Ordinance.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BY THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY AND KENDALL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. The President and Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals contained in the preamble
to this Ordinance are true, correct and complete and are hereby incorporated by reference herein.
SECTION 2. That Chapter 7 of Title 4 of the Village Code shall be replaced in its entirety as follows:
Chapter 7
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
4-7-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
4-7-4: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
4-7-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
4-7-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
4-7-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
4-7-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED:
4-7-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOOD PLAIN AREAS AND
PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS:
4-7-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
4-7-11: VARIANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 9/649
4-7-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
4-7-13: PENALTY:
4-7-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
4-7-15: SEVERABILITY
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-
1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this Chapter is to maintain this Village's
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including
loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface
waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land
resources. This Chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(g), "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the
Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State of Illinois", approved June 10, 1911, as amended.
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable
conditions susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and
utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; and
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the Village by fulfilling the requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program.
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as
amended.
H. To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
I. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and flood plains and to protect water
quality and aquatic habitats;
J. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood
and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development.
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACT: "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State of Illinois", 615 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 10/649
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal
structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit
issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in subsection 4-7-7B of this Chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
The base flood is also known as the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any
location is as defined in Section 4-7-5 of this Chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a
gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or prefabricated building. This term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough,
ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks
or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or
banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom or banks. Channel modification does not
include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of
channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of
the existing channel (e.g. straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the
FLOODPLAIN used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed
within the flood plain. The uncompensated loss of natural flood plain storage can increase off-site flood water
elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by
IDNR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency of a proposed change to the Floodway Map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this Chapter, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate
use is constructed according to permitted plans, the Floodway Map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as
shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are
submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a
specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 11/649
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if flooded,
would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such
as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges,
critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples of critical facilities where flood protection is
recommended include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any,
constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DELEGATED COMMUNITY: A community delegated state permitting authority in the floodway.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent
to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the
existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood
conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10 percent increase in velocities.
A. The floodways are designated for on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Maps of Will County,
Grundy County, and Kendall County prepared by FEMA and dated, respectively, February 15, 2019; August 2,
2012; and January 8, 2014. When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall
prevail.
B. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Kendall and Grundy Counties that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village that may be annexed into the Village are designated for Aux Sable Creek
on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA, and for Kendall County dated January 8, 2014;
and for Grundy County dated August 2, 2012. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Will County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village that may be annexed into the Village are designated for the
DuPage River and the I and M Canal in the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA and dated
February 15, 2019.
C. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be
scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps.
Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR
should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 12/649
B. Substantial improvement of an existing building;
C. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel
trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days in any calendar year. If a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle is on site for more than 180 days in any calendar year, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
D. Installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects;
E. Demolition of a structure, redevelopment of a site, clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification;
G. Filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, drilling, mining or other non-agricultural alterations of the
ground surface;
H. Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks, and channel
modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters;
I. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water,
including extensive vegetation removal;
Development does not include such activities as re-surfacing of pavement when there is no increase in elevation, or
gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to
certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per the Illinois Compiled Statutes
including state, federal or local units of government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings
to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the Village initial floodplain
management regulations.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79, as amended.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 13/649
1986. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from
overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated
magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway. .
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the floodplain or Special
Flood Hazard Area within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not
depict floodways and show base flood elevation. .
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one
foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base
flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The floodplains are those
lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 6, 1995, and such other amendments
or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. The SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into
the village are generally identified as such on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared for Will County by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated February 15, 2019, and such other amendments or revisions to
such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Grundy
County that are within extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed to the village are generally
identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Grundy County by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated August 2, 2012, and such other amendments or revisions to such study and maps as
may be prepared from time to time. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Kendall County that are within
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed to the village are generally identified as such on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Kendall County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
January 8, 2014, and such other amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time. .
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used
to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency floods plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODWAY: Designated Floodway.
FREEBOARD: Freeboard An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety
for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 14/649
unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams..
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is: Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register; certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic
district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; individually
listed on the State inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; individually listed on a
local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine expected flood
flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a
100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM. .
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations,
floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM. .
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a buildings lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
(2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development
activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or subdivision for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) has been completed on or after the effective date of the Village floodplain management regulations.
NAVD 88: National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 (NGVD)..
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of
the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil
and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the stream
caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel
meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions
by man through regrading and revegetation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 15/649
of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public
agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study
of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design,
engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are
not public agencies.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in
whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition
were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their waters into
navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is: Built on a single chassis; 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a light duty truck; and Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects which are considered minor
projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR Part 3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois designated floodways. A
complete listing of the terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois, under The Illinois Land
Surveyors Act. (225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.)
REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (P.E.): An engineer registered in the State of
Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act. (225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.)
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the
outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10)
year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds
twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A
detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN: Any floodplain or SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream,
ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding
from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding. .
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the
ground or collected in channels or conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in
bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): “Floodplain”.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 16/649
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects that are considered minor
projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part 3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and
STRUCTURE: “Building”.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage of
damage during a 10-year period equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this
determination. The term includes Repetitive Loss Buildings. “Repetitive Loss”.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure
taking place during a 10-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, or increases the floor area by
more than twenty percent (20%). "Substantial Improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial
damage, regardless of the actual work done. The term does not, however, include either: any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a “historic structure” listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross-section to a
wide cross-section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance, is presumed to be in violation, until such time as that documentation
is provided.
4-7-3: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 4-7-4 of this
chapter.
To fulfill those duties, the Building Officer and Inspector first should use the criteria listed in section 4-7-5, "Base
Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once it
has been determined that the site is located within a floodplain, the Building Officer and Inspector must determine
whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway or floodplain on which no floodway
has been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe, the Building Officer and Inspector shall require that the
minimum requirements of section 4-7-6 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Building Officer
and Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section 4-7-7 of this chapter be met. If the site is
located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the Building
Officer and Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section 4-7-8 of this chapter be met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 17/649
In addition, the general requirements of section 4-7-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section 4-7-6, 4-7-7, or 4-7-8 of this chapter. The Building Officer and Inspector shall assure that all
subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 4-7-10 of this chapter.
If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Building Officer and Inspector shall review the requirements of
section 4-7-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the Building Officer and Inspector shall
complete all notification requirements.
In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the Building Officer and Inspector
may take any and all actions as outlined in section 4-7-13 of this chapter.
4-7-4: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this
chapter which shall include the following:
A. Determining The Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they
are in a floodplain using criteria listed in Section 4-7-5, Base Flood Elevations. If they are in a floodplain, determine
whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and
which drains more than one (1) square mile. If the site is within a flood fringe, the Building Officer and Inspector shall
require that the minimum requirements of Section 4-7-6 be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Building Officer and
Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of Section 4-7-7 be met. If the site is located within a floodplain
for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the Building Officer and Inspector shall require that the
minimum requirements of Section 4-7-8 be met.
B. Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one square mile, the permit shall be
referred to a P.E. under the employ or contract of the Village for review to ensure that the development meets
Sections 4-7-7 or 4-7-8. In the case of an Appropriate Use, the P.E. shall state in writing that the development
meets the requirements of Section 4-7-7.
C. Dam Safety Requirements: Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage potential in
the event of failure. Permits for dams may be required from IDNR/OWR. Contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a
permit is required. If a permit is required, a permit application must be made to IDNR/OWR prior to the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required federal, state and local permits are received
prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuances: Ensure that all development activities within the floodplains of
the jurisdiction of the Village meet the requirements of this Chapter. Issue a floodplain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and other regulations of this community when the development meets
the conditions of this Chapter..
F. Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure
proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Schedule on an annual
basis an inspection of the floodplain and document the results of the inspection.
G. Substantial Damage and Substantial Improvement Determinations: Establish, in coordination with the
(insert Building Official title), procedures for administering and documenting determinations, as outlined below, of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 18/649
substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to Section 4-7-9. Determine the market value or
require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the
building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of
the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition,
or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure.
Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or substantial damage.
Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial
damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Village and this Chapter is
required.
H. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files including: An Elevation Certificate
certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject to
Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter, and/or; the elevation to which a non-residential building has been floodproofed, using
a Floodproofing Certificate, for all buildings subject to Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter.
I. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request all permit
records, including but not limited to base flood data, floodplain and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or
state permit documents, variance documentation, soil compaction records, Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment, "as-built" elevation, floodproofing certificates and elevation
certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this Chapter. .
J. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all
development projects subject to Sections 4-7-7 and 4-7-8 of this Chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been
delegated to the Village. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the Village and shall require
review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this Chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes;
2. IDNR/OWR projects, dams and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including
projects of the Village, except for those projects meeting the requirements of Section 4-7-7;
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood
damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per Section 4-7-7;
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to Section 4-7-7;
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in
Section 4-7-7;
6. Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
7. Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
K. Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies
to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this
Chapter; submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map within 6 months
whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the
floodplain map; submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program; and notify FEMA of any
proposed amendments to this Chapter. .
L. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the
provisions of this Chapter, subject however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any Chapter
changes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 19/649
M. Variances: If a variance is to be granted, the Building Officer and Inspector shall Review the
requirements of Section 4-7-11 to make sure they are met. In addition, the (*insert title community official
responsible*) shall complete all notifications requirements.
N. Enforcement: In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in the Chapter, the
Building Officer and Inspector may take any and all actions as outlined in Section 4-7-13.
4-7-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for Will, Grundy, and Kendall Counties. If a
base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available in federal, state or other sources. When a party
disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing
data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any development
of the site. (Ord. 2012-34, 12-18-2012)
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the DuPage River shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by FEMA for Will, Grundy, and Kendall County and
dated, respectively, February 15, 2019; August 2, 2012; and January 8, 2014, and such amendments to such study
and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into
the village shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Will County prepared by
FEMA and dated February 15, 2019, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the Floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Grundy County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed
into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Grundy County
prepared by FEMA and dated August 2, 2012, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts
of unincorporated Kendall County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Kendall
County prepared by FEMA and dated January 8, 2014, and such other amendments or revisions to such study and
maps as may be prepared from time to time.
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone"
or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will,
Grundy, and Kendall Counties.
D. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated
as an "A Zone" on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will, Grundy, and Kendall Counties shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations. When no base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine floodplain
shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The
flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1,
TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey
for estimating peak flood discharges.
4-7-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or
100-year frequency flood by proper elevation and compensatory storage and other provisions of this chapter are met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 20/649
No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments
located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of section 4-
7-9 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the Building
Officer and Inspector.
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Building Officer and
Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property
line dimensions and legal description for the property, and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land
surveyor; existing grade elevations using the NAVD of 1988 and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed
buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on
the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section 4-7-9 of this chapter.
2. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Building Officer and Inspector shall compare
the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on
land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and
which has not been filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map without a permit, as required
by this Chapter, is not in the floodplain and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
The Building Officer and Inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood
Insurance Rate Map identification.
3. The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all
other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity. The
Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have
been obtained.
4. A development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the Start of Construction, for work
authorized by such permit, is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not
more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public
health and safety.
1. Elevation Of Site: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from
FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
2. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation
taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at
least equal to one and five-tenths (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case
of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall
be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 21/649
C. Construction of a Building under a LOMR Based on Fill:
A person who has obtained a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill that removes a site in the floodplain due to the
use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the Village to construct the lowest floor of
a building below the BFE in the floodplain. The Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue such a permit unless
the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following subsection and maintain the documentation
verifying such compliance.
1. Compensatory storage shall be provided per Section 4-7-6(B)(2).
2. The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e., window wells, access ways) shall be at
or above the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE).
3. The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the FPE, for a minimum distance of
ten (10) feet beyond the outside face of the structure. However, if site conditions are such that this
requirement cannot be met, the Building Officer and Inspector may waive the ten (10) foot minimum setback
if an Illinois Licensed P.E. certify that an alternative method to protect the building from damage due to
hydrostatic pressures has been met. The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural
design analysis, which shall be submitted to the Building Officer and Inspector for review. The Building
Officer and Inspector may require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed
shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance be less
than four (4) feet.
4. The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a distance of twenty (20) feet from the
structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
obtained, the Building Officer and Inspector may waive the twenty (20) foot minimum setback distance if an
Illinois Licensed P.E. certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to
hydrostatic pressures have been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter
setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall be submitted to the Village for
review. In no case shall the setback distance be less than four (4) feet.
5. The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets all requirements of this subsection
and is at least five (5) feet thick under the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted
to require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F, if such fill consists of
material, including soils of similar classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL,
SC or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
6. The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the soil must be all of one material, and
the engineering priorities must be in the same direction.
7. All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and inspected by an Illinois Licensed
P.E., as warranted by the site conditions.
8. The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than five (5) below the BFE.
9. There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and minimum of one quarter (¼)
horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump
shall be rated at four (4) times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away from
the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor under the effect of the seepage
pressure.
10. The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of preventing backflow.
11. All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic pressure in accordance with
accepted engineering practices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 22/649
12. If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set forth in the preceding paragraphs of this
subsection, the Building Officer and Inspector may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE only
if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set
forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that
the proposed structure is reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering
analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be completed in
accordance with the latest edition of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being
prepared by an Illinois Licensed P.E.
13. In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in no case shall the depth of excavation
in the front and side yards of the lot exceed eighteen (18) inches, as measured from the previously existing
natural grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if necessary. All such
excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use
of mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.
4-7-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a
designated floodway. The designated floodway for DuPage River shall be as delineated on the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Will, Grundy, and Kendall Counties and referenced in Section 4-7-2. Only those uses and
structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of
Section 4-7-9.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by state law,
shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from IDNR/OWR.
1. In a Delegated Community, an application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Officer and Inspector. The application shall include the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the Designated
Floodway Map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Name of stream or body of water affected;
d. Description of proposed activity;
e. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
f. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
g. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
h. Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application
form;
j. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
k. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him as trust
officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 23/649
trust by name and address and defining the respective interest therein.
l. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in
the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions
including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations, using the NAVD of 1988, adjacent
property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any
existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated floodway limit,
floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and
orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale.
(3) Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions
including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or
numerical scales (horizontal and vertical).
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of
the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and
revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
(5) A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the designated
floodway location. .
m. Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this
type of development.
n. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work
will meet the permit criteria of subsection 4-7-7B of this Chapter.
o. If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will
change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until the
IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the Designated Floodway Map change. No
structures may be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
p. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale
showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting
from any proposed excavation or filling, and flood plain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of
all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter.
q. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following
information:
(1) A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
(2) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the
proposed work;
(3) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the physical and
biological conditions of the body of water affected;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 24/649
(4) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection
B2d(1) of this Section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
and, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
(5) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project water affected.
2. The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all
other local, State and Federal permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The
Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue the development permit unless all required Federal and State
permits have been obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the Village
shall review and approve applications reviewed under this Section.
B. Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:
1. Floodway Development: The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate
uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently
impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part
3708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures,
fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate
otherwise non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as
a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved
appropriate uses are as follows:
a. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to
the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
b. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as
pumping and treatment facilities and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating,
commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
c. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
d. Underground and overhead utilities;
e. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related fencing (at
least 50 percent open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood
flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage;
f. Detached garages, storage sheds or other non-habitable accessory structures without toilet facilities
to existing buildings that will not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;
g. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification
thereto;
h. Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency
flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot) and aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;
i. The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking lot formally agrees to restrict access
during overbank flooding events and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access
during all overbank flooding events
j. Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a positive non-erosive slop toward a
watercourse;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 25/649
k. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction
of watertight window wells, elevating structures or construction of floodwalls around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more
than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and which are not considered
substantial improvements to the structure;
l. The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided that the outside
dimensions are not increased, and if the building was damaged to fifty (50%) percent or more of the
market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation;
m. Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of the
building below the 100-year frequency flood elevation, and which will not block flood flows
including but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty (50%) percent or more of the market value before the modification
occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation.
2. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate
uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and
storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an Appropriate Use. Within the designated
floodway, the construction of an Appropriate Use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed
project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting
plans, calculations and data by a licensed P.E. and provided that any structure meets the protection
requirements of Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter:
a. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate
uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated
floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following
factors shall be taken into consideration:
(1) Designated floodway conveyance,
'K' = 1.486 AR 2/3
n
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section and "R" is the ratio of
the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York.)
(2) The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded
maintenance agreement with a Federal, State or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions
will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative land cover.
(3) Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway
conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can
prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency:
(A) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to
expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(B) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to
contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 26/649
(C) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical
transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length shall be used.
(D) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions
and when meeting the designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(E) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
b. Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream Flooding: Compensatory
storage shall be provided for any designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the
volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory
storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and five-tenths (1.5) times the volume of
flood plain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a
bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be
placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All
designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below
the existing 10-year flood elevation. All designated flood elevation storage lost above the existing 10-
year flood elevation shall be replaced above the 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be
placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate through
a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is
hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a
floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
c. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For
all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not
result in an increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage, for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts
or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood
flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
d. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches: The proposed
structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1')
when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event, or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of
existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will
increase upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1'), the developer must contact
IDNR/OWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam safety permit or waiver.
(1) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and
corresponding flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in Section 4-7-5 of this
Chapter. Bridges and Culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic
models.
(2) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection B2b of this Section.
(3) Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection B2c above.
(4) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an
IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
(5) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and
proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required
by subsection B of this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 27/649
(6) All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection B2h of this Section.
e. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And Approach Roads:
(1) The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed within no
more than one-tenth foot (0.1') increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies
up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage.
(2) If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or
structures in the upstream flood plain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream
and downstream properties.
(3) The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be
redesigned must be prepared in accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
f. Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to the existing
conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained
within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within
the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any
structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All
dams and impoundment structures as defined in Section 4-7-2 shall meet the permitting requirements
of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be
demonstrated that:
(1) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation
or regional storm water detention.
(2) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to
upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning.
(3) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions.
Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation
basin.
(4) A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of
sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants. If
there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is
constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control.
(5) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this Section.
g. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is
required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the
floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing
activities.
h. Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert
openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or
to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for
the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's
engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 28/649
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand
no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract
no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical
transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length shall be used.
(4) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
i. If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact
to the natural conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the flood plain, clearing the
channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel
modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat.
(2) Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification
and no significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an
equivalent degree of natural resource values.
(3) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its
adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
(A) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the
existing channel in length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified,
restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into channel modification design, where
practical.
(B) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the
project, designed such that they will prevent erosion.
(C) One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian)
vegetation should be limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
(D) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel.
(E) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to
vertical, wherever practicable. Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions or construction rubble should be
avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(F) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as
possible upon completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize
disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative cover.
(G) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles and other
similar features, such features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where appropriate.
(H) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce
sedimentation and degradation of downstream water quality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 29/649
(I) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including
vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel.
(J) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any
frequency flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of
a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
(K) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume
of floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
(4) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 4-7-7.
j. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization
plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
k. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading,
filling and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The construction areas shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction
shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to the initiation of
improvements.
(2) Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a
minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any
portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but will
remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
(3) Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on
the site to prevent the movement of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale, fences, check dams, diversion ditches and sediment basins.
(4) A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty-five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or re-established,
where possible, along existing channels (see subsection B2p of this Section). Construction vehicle use of
channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize
erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with
"Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known
as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
l. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this
Section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and
hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in
increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event.
m. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
(1) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study, referenced in Section 4-7-5
must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have
changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions
data to use.
(2) If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 30/649
be shown to meet the requirements of this Section for the 100-year frequency flood elevations of the
designated floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
(3) If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments or a private owner that a downstream
restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control
project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five (5) years, the proposed
construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this Section for both the existing
conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
n. Conditional letter of map revision. If the Appropriate Use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to
IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional
concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is issued. The final designated
floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling,
grading, dredging, or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In
the case of non-government projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in
unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated floodway map revision
before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take
place until a conditional approval is issued. After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with
concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
o. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the
supervision of a registered professional engineer.
p. For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty-five feet (25') of the
channel, the following criteria shall be met:
(1) A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty-five feet (25') of the ordinary
high water mark of the channel.
(2) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a
vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon completion of construction.
(3) The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall
be provided, when necessary, for stream maintenance purposes.
After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may
proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an Appropriate Use may be placed in
that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received. The
designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of
the "as-built" plans..
3. State Review. For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the following criteria shall
be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit
by a community or county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway.
a. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection B2d of
this Section.
b. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood
damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection B2e of this
Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 31/649
c. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsection B2a, 2b,
and 2h of this Section.
d. The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in Section 4-7-2 of this Chapter)
and all other federal, state, or local units of government projects, including projects of the
municipality or county.
e. An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater from a downstream
receiving stream may be built with a smaller opening.
f. Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles.
g. Projects in public bodies of water.4. Other permits: In addition to the other requirements of
this Chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from
IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be
required if the project meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3. No permit from IDNR/OWR
shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated this responsibility to the Village.5. Permits for Dams:
Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in 4-7-2 per 17 Ill.
Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to
the start of construction of a dam. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam that does not have
an IDNR/OWR permit, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office. If Building Officer and Inspector the finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA). 6. Activities
That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be
permitted without a registered professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this Chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(1) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(2) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
(3) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of
three feet (3') below the existing stream bed, and
(4) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in
such a fashion as not to catch debris.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(1) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(2) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(3) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground
equipment and patios at grade.
d. Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
(1) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
(2) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 32/649
(3) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
(4) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion
problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative
stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete,
construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
e. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(1) The approach roads will be five-tenths foot (0.5') (1/2 foot) or less above natural grade.
(2) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank
vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert.
(3) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank.
Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
(4) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation
and again upon removal of construction.
(5) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (Ord. 1995-
28, 8-8-1995)
4-7-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE
NOT IDENTIFIED:
A. In floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones) where no floodways have been
identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining
more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
1. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall
commence any development in a floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the Building
Officer and Inspector. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Building Officer and Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale
showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter.
The application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
a. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated
floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity.
d. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in
the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale and north arrow;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 33/649
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions
including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations, using the NAVD 1988, adjacent property
lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and
navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water),
floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
(3) Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of
the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and
revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
e. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work
will meet the criteria of subsection B of this section.
f. Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of
development. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
2. Calculation And Documentation: Based on the best available existing data according to federal, state or
other sources, the Building Officer and Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's
engineer shall calculate the elevation according to Section 4-7-5D of this chapter. Any development located
on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance
Rate Map Identification is not in the floodplain and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this
Chapter. The Building Officer and Inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation
at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first
Flood Insurance Rate Map identification. 3. Permits: The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible
for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or waivers that
may be required for this type of activity. The Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue the development
permit unless all required federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the floodplain, where a floodway has not been
determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public
health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel or
impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation
methods as called for in this chapter.
1. Standards: Within all riverine floodplains where the floodway has not been determined, the following
standards shall apply:
a. The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through
supporting plans, calculations and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of
subsection 4-7-7B2a through B2l of this chapter, for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of subsection 4-7-5D of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to
IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a designated floodway. Upon acceptance of the floodway by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements
of section 4-7-7 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according
to the definition of "designated floodway" in section 4-7-2 of this chapter.
b. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from
IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 34/649
c. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in Section 4-7-2
per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit
prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam that does
not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam which is believed to be
in unsafe condition, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify the owner of the
dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
d. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or
calculation of a base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter:
(1) Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit number 2;
(2) Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 3;
(3) Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 4
(4) Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 5;
(5) Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6; activities
(not involving fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit:
(6) Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
(7) Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No.
8;
(8) Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 9;
(9) Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
(10) Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of DNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;
(11) Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 12;
(12) Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13;
(13) Special Uses of Public Waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 14; and
(14) Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a flood fringe area shall be
exempt from State Floodway permit requirements.
e. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
2. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use, the volume of space
which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken
from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least
equal one and five-tenths (1.5) times to the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of
streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied. All flood plain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall
be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 35/649
4-7-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOOD PLAIN AREAS
In addition to the requirements found in Sections 4-7-6, 4-7-7 and 4-7-8 of this Chapter, for development in flood
fringes, designated floodways and flood plains where no floodways have been identified, the following requirements
shall be met:
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials
below the flood protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored
storage tank and certified by a P.E. or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of
Section 4-7-10 of this Chapter.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
4. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems
may be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are
watertight.
5. All other activities, defined as development, such as pools, fences, filling, paving, etc., shall be designed
so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the
Village shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the
alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings:
1. In addition to the damage prevention requirements in Sections 4-7-6B and 4-7-7B of this Chapter, all
buildings located within a floodplain, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an existing building
valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,500) or seventy (70) square feet.
b. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing building that increase
the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty
percent (50%). Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during a 10- year period. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
c. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured
cumulatively during a 10-year period. If substantially damaged the entire structure must meet
the flood protection standards of this section.
d. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing
site (the building protection requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 36/649
the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).
e. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days per year; and
f. Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 4-7-2.2. This building
protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
a. The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before compaction and should extend at least
ten (10) feet beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
(3) The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten (10) foot minimum
may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures.
(4) The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other
structural measure.
(5) The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not include debris or refuse material.
(6) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties and,
when necessary, include stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins.
b. The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(1) The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that
is permanently open to flood waters.
(2) If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation shall address hydrostatic
pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or by having a minimum of one (1) permanent opening on each wall no more
than one (1) foot above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings shall provide a total net
area of not less than one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation, and
(3) The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation.
(4) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed, and certified so as to minimize
exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
(5) All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant
to flood damage.
(6) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other service facilities may
be located below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
(7) The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for parking or building access and not
later modified or occupied as habitable space.
(8) In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these requirements may be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 37/649
c. The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood protection
elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
(2) Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic
pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each
wall having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch per one (1) square foot of enclosed area. The
openings shall be no more than one (1) foot above grade.
(3) The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection elevation must not be more than two (2)
feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
(4) The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawl to the top of the
foundations wall must not exceed four (4) feet at any point.
(5) An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the
crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a flood event.
(6) Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage.
(7) Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
d. Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation)
provided a licensed professional engineer or architect submits a FEMA Floodproofing
Certificate, documenting that:
(1) Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and
capable of resisting the effects of the base flood, including sewer back flow.
(2) The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact from debris and ice.
(3) Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
(4) Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this
subsection.
e. Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site for more than 180
days in any year shall be:
(1) Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the
rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
f. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days
per year shall meet the elevation requirement and anchoring requirements of Section 903.4
unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck.
(2) The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 38/649
(3) The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and porches.
(4) The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use rather than as a
permanent dwelling.
(5) The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four hundred (400) square feet.
(6) The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
(7) Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for movement out of the floodplain.
(8) Propane tanks and electrical and sewage connections must be quick-disconnect and be above the base
flood elevation.
(9) The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park model, and must either be
entirely be supported by jacks, or have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground
and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to be easily removed by used of the hitch
jack.
g. Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing
residential use may be constructed with the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The structure must be non-habitable.
(2) All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof
material.
(3) The structure must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools and cannot be modified later into
another use.
(4) The structure must be located outside of the floodway or have the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
(5) Below the base flood elevation, the structure must be built of materials not susceptible to flood damage.
(6) All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be elevated above the flood
protection elevation.
(7) The structure must have at least one permanent opening on each wall not more than one (1) foot above
grade with one (1) square inch of opening for every one (1) square foot of floor area.
(8) The structure must be less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) in market value or replacement cost
whichever is greater or less than five hundred and seventy-six (576) square feet (24’x24’).
(9) The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning.
(10) All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the
flood protection elevation.
(11) The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood insurance
implications.
(12) If located in a designated floodway, the structure shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage and shall also meet the Appropriate Use criteria of
Section 4-7-8 and all other applicable requirements of Sections 4-7-7, 4-7-8 and 4-7-9.
h. Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more restrictive
Appropriate Use standards included in Section 4-7-7. Non-conforming structures located in a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 39/649
designated floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with Section 4-7-8. A non-conforming structure damaged by flood, fire,
wind or other natural or man-made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to
this Chapter.
i. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be located outside the
limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the level of the
100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures
must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities.
D. Filing Fee And Engineer's Services:
1. A filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time of filing of any
application under this Chapter.
2. The cost incurred by the Village for the review of applications, plans and specifications, and for inspection
of any development, by the Village Engineer, or by a registered professional engineer under the employ or
contract of the Village, shall be paid by the applicant. Such costs shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time
of issuance or denial of any permit under this Chapter, or at the time of the issuance or denial of any variance
under this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
4-7-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions
related to land management, use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and planned unit developments
(PUDs) within the floodplain shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with
sections 4-7-6, 4-7-7, 4-7-8 and 4-7-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act5. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit
developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not available
from an existing study filed with the federal, state or other sources, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 4-7-5D of this chapter and the
floodway delineation per the definition of "designated floodway" in section 4-7-2 of this chapter and submitting it
for review and approval as best available regulatory data. (Ord. 2012-34, 12-18-2012)
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as
to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within
parks or other public grounds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 40/649
D. The board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision
located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
4-7-11: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in "designated floodway", as defined in section 4-7-2 of
this chapter. However, when a development proposal is located outside of a designated floodway, and whenever the
standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the
village for a variance. The plan commission shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the board of trustees.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are
met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially
aquatic habitat or creation of a nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and
functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
6. The provisions of subsections 4-7-6B and 4-7-8B of this chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a designated floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the
NFIP;
9. All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been obtained; and 10. The granting of the
variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
B. The Building Officer and Inspector shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of section 4-7-9 of this chapter, that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing
that he assumes the risk and liability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 41/649
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
4-7-2 “Historic Structures”, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of Sections 4-7-11,
subject to the conditions that:
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure; and
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure.
4-7-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based
on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that development, either inside
or outside of the floodplain, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part
of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
4-7-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a
variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this Chapter. Upon due investigation, the Building Officer and
Inspector or Municipal Attorney may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this Chapter exists.
The Building Officer and Inspector or Municipal Attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this
chapter or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
4. The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
B. The Building Officer and Inspector shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a
willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
C. The Building Officer and Inspector is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the
subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall
order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
D. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the
Building Officer and Inspector. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: (1) the
grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or revocation; and (2) the time and place of the hearing. At such
hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 42/649
E. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy
any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-
1995)
4-7-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This Chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village of Minooka Board of Trustees to fulfill
the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. However, this ordinance does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this ordinance repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing annexation agreements, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this ordinance and
other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
4-7-15: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this Ordinance shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this
Ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
SECTION 3. In the event that any provision or provisions, or portion or portions of this Ordinance shall be declared to
be invalid or unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in no way affect or impair the
validity or enforceability of any of the remaining provisions or portions of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or portions.
SECTION 4. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be and the same is hereby repealed.
SECTION 5. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
SECTION 6. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication
in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Ordinance# 2019-01 was adopted by roll call vote on January 22, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-06
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 7,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 43/649
SECTION 4-7-2: DEFINITIONS, OF THE VILLAGE CODE IN THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL
COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY AND KENDALL COUNTY, STATE OF ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka, Will County, Grundy County and
Kendall County, Illinois have the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to
its government and affairs and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees passed Ordinance 2019-001, “An Ordinance Amending Title 4, Chapter
7, Flood Hazard Areas, in the Village of Minooka, Will County, Grundy County and Kendall County, State of
Illinois” on January 22, 2019; and
WHEREAS, the Counsel for the Village submitted a copy of Ordinance 2019-001 to the NE Floodplain
Program Coordinator for the Illinois Department of Natural Resources prior to passage of the Ordinance for
compliance with FEMA submission requirements; and
WHEREAS, following passage of the Ordinance, the NE Floodplain Program Coordinator for the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources requested an amendment to the Ordinance, which requires a change to the
definition therein for “Floodplain”; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees find that the amended definition will help clarify the
floodplain locations by reference to appropriate map panels; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees find that it is in the best interest of the Village to amend the
definition as requested.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BY THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY AND KENDALL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. The President and Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals contained in the preamble
to this Ordinance are true, correct and complete and are hereby incorporated by reference herein.
SECTION 2. That Section 4-7-2, “Definitions” of the Village Code shall be amended by replacing the
definition for “Floodplain” as follows:
FLOODPLAIN (OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)): These two terms are synonymous and mean
any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. Floodplain also includes those areas of
known flooding as identified by the community. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village
that are subject to inundation by the base flood and those parts of unincorporated Grundy, Kendall and Will counties that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village. The floodplains are
generally identified as such on panel number(s):
A. 17063C 0055F, 0060F, 0065F, and 0070F of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Grundy
County as prepared by the FEMA and dated August 2, 2012.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 44/649
B. 17093C 0140H, 0145HF, and 0225H of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Kendall County as
prepared by the FEMA and dated January 8, 2014
C. 17197C 0140F, 0255F, and 0265F of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will County as
prepared by the FEMA and dated February 15, 2019.
SECTION 3. In the event that any provision or provisions, or portion or portions of this Ordinance shall be declared to
be invalid or unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in no way affect or impair the
validity or enforceability of any of the remaining provisions or portions of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or portions.
SECTION 4. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be and the same is hereby repealed.
SECTION 5. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
SECTION 6. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication
in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Ordinance# 2019-06 was adopted by roll call vote on February 26, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-07
AN ORDINANCE ADDING CHAPTER 18, FATS, OILS AND GREASES, TO TITLE 4, BUILDING
REGULATIONS, OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY,
GRUNDY COUNTY, AND KENDALL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka, Will County, Grundy
County, and Kendall County, Illinois have the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate rules and
regulations that pertain to its government and affairs and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
its citizens; and
WHEREAS, the Village of Minooka owns and operates a sanitary sewer system, which serves the
residents and business of the Village of Minooka; and
WHEREAS, improper collection and disposal of fats, oils, and greases into the Village of Minooka’s sanitary sewer
system has the potential to clog and impair the proper functioning of the sanitary sewer system and create health
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 45/649
and safety hazards to the citizens of the Village of Minooka and result in unnecessary maintenance costs; and
WHEREAS, the Village of Minooka is authorized under 415 ILCS 5/22.30 of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Act (“Act”), as the owner of the treatment works and sewers, to regulate the discharge, deposit, or dispose of any
grease trap sludge into its treatment works or tributaries; and
WHEREAS, Section 5/22.30 of the Act further authorizes the Village to establish a program to license or register
the collection and transportation of grease trap sludge from grease traps and to require the use of a particular form
of shipping paper; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees find that it is necessary of the health and safety of the citizens of the Village of
Minooka to establish regulations to monitor the installation, cleaning, and maintenance of grease traps within the
Village of Minooka.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the corporate authorities of the Village of Minooka as
follows:
SECTION 1. The Corporate Authorities hereby find that all of the recitals contained in the
preamble to this Ordinance are true, correct and complete and are hereby adopted as part of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 2. That Chapter 18 be added to Title 4 of the Village of Minooka Code of Ordinances as follows:
4-18-1: Title:
This Ordinance shall be known and may be referred to as “Village of Minooka Sanitary Sewer Fats, Oils,
and Greases (FOG) Ordinance”.
4-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACTIVE INTERIOR RECOVERY DEVICE (AIRD): An active automatic separator and remover of grease,
fats and oils from effluent or wastewater discharge that cleans itself of accumulated grease, fats and oils
at least once every 24 hours, utilizing an electromechanical apparatus to accomplish removal.
CLEAN-OUT: A pipe that extends from the ground surface to the interior of the passive exterior device
(PED), or other grease recovery system device, so as to allow access, maintenance, and inspection of the
interior of the device.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A manhole structure, located downstream of a grease recovery system, designed
and constructed to provide access to a sewer pipe or sewer main for sampling and metering commercial
wastes discharged to a public sewer. For existing FOG producing facilities, where no control manhole
exists or has been installed, the control manhole shall be at the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
VILLAGE: The Village of Minooka, Illinois.
DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT (DFU): A value used to determine the required drainage capacity from the
fixtures and their service systems as defined in the Illinois Plumbing Code.
EFFLUENT TEE-PIPE: A Tee-shaped pipe extending from the ground surface below grade into the PED
to a depth allowing recovery of water located under the layer of fats, oils, and/or greases to be
discharged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 46/649
EXTERIOR GREASE TRAP: A grease trap, located outside of the exterior walls of the building or
structure, which contains baffles sufficient to allow a proper separation of grease from water.
FOG: Fats, Oils, and Greases.
FOG PRODUCING FACILITY: A food processing, food sales, or food service establishment, as
hereinafter defined.
FOOD: Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for
use, or for sale, barter, or exchange, in whole or part for human consumption.
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial establishment in which food is manufactured or
packaged for human consumption. The term does not include a food service establishment, retail food
store, or commissary.
FOOD SALES ESTABLISHMENT: A retail and wholesale grocery store(s); retail seafood store(s); food
processing plant(s); bakeries; confectionaries; fruit, nuts, and vegetable store(s), and places of business;
and, similar establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for consumption
off premises.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals,
lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts or other edible products. The term includes:
restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which
manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias, catering establishments, food
vending vehicles and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever named called or
by whomever operated.
GREASE RECOVERY SYSTEM: A system of interceptors, separators, traps, or grease recovery devices,
which prevents free floating grease, fats and oils from entering the sewage system by recovering and
removing these substances from water.
GREASE-LADEN WASTE: Effluent discharge that is produced from food processing, food preparation or
other commercial source where grease, fats and oils enter automatic dishwasher pre-rinse station, sinks
or other appurtenances.
GREASE TRAP: An interceptor, separator, or recovery vehicle that prevents free-floating grease, fats and
oil from entering the sewage disposal system. Also includes a passive interceptor whose rated flow
exceeds 50 gallons per minute or minimum storage capacity of 500 gallons or more and which is located
outside the building.
HAULER: A waste disposal firm, licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture, that hauls and
disposes of fats, oils, and greases wastes as described in this Chapter.
MANIFEST: A log or document record of the hauler name, address, and State license/permit number;
and, the volume, date of removal and disposal destination of pumped materials or wastes from a grease
trap or other interceptor device. (See, 415 ILCS 5/22.30(d) and (e)).
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED: Any new FOG producing facility that has not been issued a final Certificate of
Occupancy by the Village or municipal building official as of the effective date of this Chapter.
PASSIVE EXTERIOR DEVICE (PED): An oil/water separating container that requires pumping and is
housed outside a building or structure. A passive interceptor with no moving parts with a rated flow of
greater than 50 gallons per minute.
PASSIVE INTERIOR DEVICE (PID): An oil/water separating container that requires normal manual
cleaning, by pumping or bailing, and is housed inside a building or structure. A passive interceptor with no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 47/649
moving parts with a rated flow of 50 gallons per minute or less that serves as fixture trap and is located
inside a building.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): May sometimes be known or referred to as a
sewage treatment plant or wastewater reclamation facility or plant.
PREFERRED WASTE HAULER: A hauler that has the demonstrated capability to maintain required
records, to discharge waste according to all applicable rules and regulations, and is fully licensed to haul
FOG waste.
PUMP-AND-RETURN METHOD: The method of decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the
grease recovery system from which waste was removed or to any other grease recovery system or
sanitary sewer connection.
REMODELED: Any facility that requires a building permit to make planned changes to an existing or a
new FOG producing facility.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any FOG producing facility that requires an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit, issued by the local POTW pursuant to applicable federal and State laws and
regulations.
SLUDGE: Any material or solids, either organic or inorganic, that has settled to the bottom of the grease
trap.
SOLIDS TRANSFER/GREASE RECOVERY DEVICE: An active automatic pretreatment device, which
macerates coarse solids and separates/recovers free floating grease, fats and oils from effluent. The
device cleans itself of accumulated grease, fats and oils at least once every 24 hours, utilizing
electromechanical apparatus to accomplish recovery and removal.
TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT RULE (25% Rule): All grease traps and/or grease interceptors (GI) shall be
cleaned based on the 25% Rule.
For example: If the total depth (TD) of the PED is 40 inches, the maximum allowable depth (d) of
floatable grease and settled sludge equals 40 inches multiplied by 0.25 or d=TD X 0.25 = 10 inches.
Therefore, the maximum allowable depth of floatable grease and sludge of the vessel should not exceed
ten (10) inches.
USER: Any FOG producing facility, its owner(s) or operator(s), or their agent(s), that contribute to the
Village wastewater collection system.
4-18-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall enforce all of the provisions of this
Chapter, and shall act on any questions relating to the design or construction of grease recovery systems
or devices, except as may otherwise be specifically provided by statute, or federal or state regulation(s).
4-18-4: APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS:
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall receive applications and issue
installation permits for the siting and installation of grease recovery systems or devices, for all food
processing, food sales, and food service establishments as defined herein. The Superintendent of Public
Works, or his or her designee, shall also review building plans, review grease recovery system(s) design
plans, inspect the premises for which such installation permit(s) have been issued, and enforce
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
4-18-5: NOTICES AND ORDERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 48/649
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall issue all notices or orders necessary to
insure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
4-18-6: AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES:
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, after identification, shall have the authority to
enter any property at any reasonable time to inspect for sanitation purposes and compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
4-18-7: INSPECTIONS AND TESTING:
A. Annual Inspections: The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee shall make or
conduct an annual inspection and such other or additional inspections as the Superintendent of Public
Works may deem necessary, of each FOG producing facility to evaluate and enforce compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
B. Newly constructed or remodeled FOG producing facilities, and grease recovery system replacement,
inspections: The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee, shall make or conduct those
inspections deemed necessary by the Superintendent of Public Works to assure compliance with
installation permits issued. These inspections shall, at a minimum, consist of an initial or in-progress
construction or installation site inspection, and a final inspection following completion of the permitted
installation.
C. Follow-up Inspections: A user charged with a Notice of Ordinance Violation (NOV), issued by the
Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee, shall be inspected at any time within thirty (30)
days of the date of NOV issuance. Subsequent re-inspection(s) may occur at any time for as long as the
user is non-compliant under the original NOV.
D. Demand Inspections: Any time a sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) or blockage occurs at or
downstream of a FOG producing facility, a demand inspection shall be made or conducted by the
Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee. If the user or FOG producing facility is found to be
in violation of any provision of this Chapter, and that violation(s) caused or resulted in the SSO or
blockage, the user shall be responsible for the payment of the demand inspection fee, as well as the
labor, equipment, and material cost(s) to correct the SSO or blockage.
4-18-8: CREDENTIALS:
Village of Minooka employees and authorized agent(s) or representative(s), shall carry proper credentials
of their respective office for the purpose of inspecting any grease recovery system or device, or carrying
out any other duties or responsibilities, in the performance of his/her duties under this Chapter.
4-18-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING FACILITIES:
Every existing user shall have a grease recovery system. An existing user, serviced by a grease
recovery system, that is non-compliant with the technical or design standards of this Chapter, shall be
permitted to continue discharging to the Village wastewater collection system provided that the user’s
FOG discharge, as measured at the control manhole, does not exceed the Village daily maximum
discharge limit(s), as set forth in Appendix A, and is otherwise in compliance with the current Village
General Sewer Use Ordinance. The Superintendent of Public Works may include conditions, restrictions,
or performance standards on any existing non-compliant grease recovery system to minimize the risk of
discharge(s) exceeding maximum pollutant discharge standards.
4-18-10: NEW CONSTRUCTION, CHANGE OF USE, AND REMODELED FACILITIES:
Every newly constructed or remodeled food processing, food sales, and food service establishment(s)
(FOG producing facilities) or user(s) that discharge water or wastes to a Village sanitary sewer or to a
Village wastewater reclamation facility shall be required to install, operate, clean and maintain a grease
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 49/649
recovery system of appropriate size and design to achieve compliance with requirements of the Illinois
Plumbing Code. Each FOG producing facility shall have a control manhole installed and located at a point
downstream of the grease recovery system. No person shall construct or install a grease recovery system
without the prior approval of the Superintendent of Public Works and issuance of an installation permit.
Such approval shall include both the approval of a plan for the proposed grease recovery system
construction or installation, and permission to conduct the work required.
4-18-11: REGISTRATION:
Each user shall register its grease recovery system with the Superintendent of Public Works. Registration
information shall include name, address, and telephone number(s) of owner(s) and on-site manager(s), if
different; a scale sketch/drawing of the location of the grease recovery system on the FOG producing
facility premises; location of the access manhole (and control manhole, if different); the components,
design, and size/capacity of the grease recovery system; and such other information as may be
applicable.
4-18-12: PERMITS, PROCEDURES, INSPECTIONS, AND FEES:
A. Non-transferable: Installation permits issued under this Chapter are not transferable.
B. Installation permits: An installation permit shall be required for all newly constructed FOG producing
facilities, all remodeled FOG producing facilities, and for the replacement of any existing grease recovery
system. An installation permit shall be valid for a 365 day period following issuance.
C. Repairs: Repairs to a grease recovery system do not require an installation permit.
4-18-13: DISCHARGE LIMITS:
The discharge from each grease recovery system, as measured from the control manhole, shall not
exceed the Village maximum discharge limit(s) as set forth in Appendix A.
4-18-14: SYSTEM MAINTENANCE:
A. General: All grease recovery systems, both existing and new, shall be maintained in a safe and
sanitary condition, and in good working order, so that any discharge therefrom, as measured from the
control manhole, does not exceed the Village daily maximum discharge limit(s).
B. Maintenance Responsibility: The owner(s), or the owner(s) and any designated agent(s) shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the grease recovery system for a FOG producing facility at all times.
All costs and expenses relating thereto shall be the responsibility of the owner(s).
C. Maintenance Requirements:
1. All users shall maintain any grease recovery system so that the fats, oils, and grease discharge
therefrom, as measured from/at the control manhole, does not exceed the Village daily maximum
discharge limit(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 50/649
2. All grease traps, and all other grease recovery systems, shall have all floating material removed at a
minimum of 90 days.
3. All grease traps, and all other grease recovery systems, shall be completely pumped out semiannually,
or when the contents of the trap exceed the 25% Rule. Semi-annual maintenance, and
maintenance due to exceeding the 25% Rule, shall include the complete recovery of all contents,
including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludge and solids. The frequency of maintenance
may be increased to comply with the Village daily maximum discharge limit(s) or the manufacturer's
recommendation. The frequency of removal shall be as often as necessary to prevent overflows of fats,
oils, and greases entering into the Village wastewater collection system.
4. The Pump-and-Return Method of decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the grease
recovery system is prohibited.
5. Any removal and hauling of fats, oils, and greases shall be performed by a waste disposal or
rendering firm licensed by the State of Illinois.
6. If any grease recovery system discharge wastes fail to meet the Village daily maximum limit(s), the
Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to demand or order the user to repair, replace, or upgrade
its grease removal system, at the sole expense of user.
4-18-15: MAINTENANCE RECORDS:
Each user, at each FOG producing facility, shall maintain an accurate and complete record of all
cleaning(s) or maintenance of its FOG producing facility grease recovery system. The following records
shall be kept on-site at the FOG producing facility.
A. Haulers: The hauler shall provide the user, at the time of service, a manifest conforming to all State
statutes and regulations (see, 415 ILCS 5/22.30(e)), and the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Manifest(s): The removal of grease recovery system contents shall be recorded on a manifest that
identifies the pumping, hauling and disposing of the wastes.
C. Manifest Information: Each manifest shall contain the following information, and such other
information as may be required by statute:
1. User information, including name, address, the volume or weight of waste pumped from each grease
recovery system, and date and time of the pumping.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 51/649
2. Hauler information, including company name, address, State license/permit number, and
disposal/receiving facility location information;
3. Receiving facility information, including the facility name and address, date and time of receiving, and
EPD number.
D. Manifest/Maintenance log: The owner(s) of each FOG producing facility shall maintain, and keep
available on the premises, a continuous log of manifests (and other similar record(s)) regarding each
cleaning or maintenance of the grease recovery system for the previous 24 months. The log shall be kept
on the FOG producing facility premises in a location where the log is available for inspection or review by
the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designees.
E. Preferred Waste Hauler: The owner may employ a preferred waste hauler approved by the Village.
The preferred waste hauler would provide the Village with the required manifest and maintenance
information for the owner, which would allow the owner to be compliant with maintaining maintenance
records.
4-18-16: REGISTERED GREASE RECOVERY SYSTEM REQUIRED:
A registered grease recovery system(s) shall be operated and maintained, or installed, in each FOG
producing facility that discharges into the Village wastewater collection system. Each FOG producing
facility shall have a control manhole.
4-18-17: TECHNOLOGY REQUIRED:
An approved grease recovery system shall consist of one or a combination of the following methods:
A. Passive technology that is an approved exterior grease trap.
B. Active technology including:
1. An approved grease recovery device; or
2. An approved solids transfer/grease transfer device.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 52/649
4-18-18: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE:
A. Waste that does not contain grease, fats or oils and that otherwise does not require
grease separation treatment shall not be discharged into the grease recovery system.
B. Wastewater from dishwasher machines or wastewater that otherwise exceeds 150 degrees
Fahrenheit shall not be introduced into any grease recovery device.
C. Food-waste grinders shall not discharge into the building drainage system through a grease trap or
grease recovery device.
4-18-19: HIGH TEMPERATURE DISHWASHER DISCHARGE:
Wastewater that exceeds 150 degrees Fahrenheit is prohibited from being discharged into the Village
wastewater collection system.
4-18-20: DUMPSTERS/DUMPSTER PADS:
Dumpsters/dumpster pads may be allowed to connect to the wastewater collection system under the
following conditions:
1. The dumpster/dumpster pad is covered and constructed to protect the drainage connection from
storm water runoff; and
2. The drain is connected to an exterior grease trap of at least 1000 gallons, which will be maintained by
the user in the method prescribed by this section for other exterior grease traps.
4-18-21: PASSIVE EXTERIOR DEVICE (PED) REQUIREMENTS:
A. Review: Each PED, or other grease recovery system device design including size, type and location
shall be reviewed and approved by the Superintendent of Public Works in substantial conformity to a
grease trap detail as follows:
1. Shall be sized and engineered based upon the anticipated load and/or conditions of actual use.
2. Shall be constructed of sound, durable material, not subject to excessive corrosion or decay, and
shall be water and gas tight if PED’s are of precast or poured-in- place concrete.
3. Shall be traffic-worthy with accessibility to both the influent and effluent tee pipes.
4. Shall contain baffles sufficient to allow a proper separation of grease from water.
5. Shall be a minimum of 500 gallons and a maximum of 3,000 gallons in size. Multiple PED’s, or other
approved grease recovery devices, are allowed.
B. PID credit: Passive interior devices (PIDs). PID volume shall be credited towards the total PED
capacity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 53/649
C. Sizing of PEDs: All PEDs shall have a grease retention capacity in accordance with the Illinois
Plumbing Code.
D. Inlet chamber: The inlet chamber of the vessel shall incorporate an open sanitary-tee, which extends
equal to or greater than 12 inches below the water surface.
E. Outlet chamber: The outlet chamber of the vessel shall incorporate an open sanitary-tee that
extends two-thirds below the water surface.
F. Sanitary-tees: The sanitary-tees (both inlet and outlet) shall not be capped, but opened, to allow
visual inspection of the waste stream.
G. Exemptions to Sizing PEDs: Food service establishments that serve 18 or fewer meals per day, or
serve only continental breakfast, may be granted an exemption from the sizing requirements for PEDs.
4-18-22: ACTIVE INTERIOR RECOVERY DEVICE REQUIREMENTS:
AIRDs may be allowed in lieu of PEDs or other approved grease recovery system devices in accordance
with the following conditions:
A. The method of food preparation involves and/or creates little or no discharge of grease; or
B. A technically logistical reason exists as to why an exterior grease trap cannot be installed (i.e.,
conflicts with existing utilities, elevation disparities or location on a second floor).
C. The installation or use of all grease recovery devices must be approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
D. Grease recovery devices shall receive all grease-laden waste discharge from the major point
sources. A floor drain shall not be considered a major point source.
E. Grease recovery devices shall be sized based upon the anticipated load and/or conditions of actual
use and manufacturer's recommendation
4-18-23: ALTERNATIVE METHODS AND TREATMENT AGENTS:
A. Alternative technology/methods: Engineered alternative technology or methods may be permitted,
provided the technology or method meets the minimum performance standards set forth in the Illinois
Plumbing Code.
B. Biological or chemical treatment agents: The use of biological or chemical agents that dissolve
grease to permit it to be discharged into the sanitary sewer is not permitted.
4-18-24: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 54/649
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be as set out
under section 1-4-1 of this Code.
APPENDIX A
Village of Minooka wastewater maximum discharge limit(s):
Fats, Oils, and Greases …………………..….. 100mg/liter pH…………………………………………………
5.5 to 9.5 Temperature………does not exceed 150 degrees Fahrenheit
SECTION 3. That in the event that any provision or provisions, or portion or portions of this
Ordinance shall be declared to be invalid or unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such
adjudication shall in no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining provisions
or portions of this Ordinance that may be given effect without such invalid or unenforceable provision or
provisions, portion or portions.
SECTION 4. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of
this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 5. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
SECTION 6. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Ordinance# 2019-07 was adopted by roll call vote on February 26, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-08
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 7,
SECTION 8-7-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE, OF THE VILLAGE CODE, IN THE VILLAGE OF
MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY AND KENDALL COUNTY, STATE OF ILLINOIS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 55/649
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka, Will County, Grundy County and
Kendall County, Illinois have the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to
its government and affairs and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and
WHEREAS, the 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code provides that the Village may “provide by
ordinance . . . for the imposition of a reasonable administrative fee related to its administrative and processing costs
associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage, and
release of [a properly impounded] vehicle; and
WHEREAS, the Village finds that the amount currently charged for an administrative fee as authorized
under 625 ILCS 54/11-208.7 is insufficient to cover the Village’s costs; and
WHEREAS, The President and Board of Trustees find the authorized fee should be raised to $400.00 to
more accurately reflect the Village’s costs associated with properly impounded vehicles; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees find that it is in the best interest of the Village to amended
the Village Code to reflect the new administrative fee amount.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BY THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY AND KENDALL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. The President and Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals contained in the preamble
to this Ordinance are true, correct and complete and are hereby incorporated by reference herein.
SECTION 2. That Section 8-7-3, “Administrative Fee” of the Village Code shall be amended by replacing the
text of the first paragraph therein as follows:
In addition to all other remedies, the owner of record of such motor vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment
shall be liable to the village for an administrative fee in the amount of $400.00. This chapter is in addition to and
shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal laws or any ordinance that relates to the
seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any fee in this chapter shall be in addition to any and all
penalties that may be assessed or imposed by a court for any criminal charges. This chapter shall not apply:
SECTION 3. In the event that any provision or provisions, or portion or portions of this Ordinance shall be
declared to be invalid or unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in no way affect or
impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining provisions or portions of this Ordinance that may be given
effect without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or portions.
SECTION 4. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be and the same is hereby repealed.
SECTION 5. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 56/649
SECTION 6. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Ordinance# 2019-08 was adopted by roll call vote on February 26, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-09
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 3, SECTION 3-4-7(A)
(LIQUOR CONTROL, NUMBER OF LICENSES; FEES)
OF THE MINOOKA VILLAGE CODE
______________________________________________________________________
WHEREAS, 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq. authorizes the Village of Minooka to regulate the sale of
alcoholic liquor in the Village; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka desire to amend Title
3, Section 3-4-7(A) (Liquor Control, Number of Licenses; Fees) of the Minooka Village Code to decrease
the number of Class A2 Liquor Licenses issued by the Village.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY, AND KENDALL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. That the President and Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals
contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 2. That the number of Class A2 liquor licenses issued by the Village of Minooka in Title
3, Section 3-4-7(A) shall be decreased from 3 to 2.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 57/649
SECTION 3. That each section and part hereof of this Ordinance is deemed to be severable and
should any section or part hereof be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such ruling shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portion(s) of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. That all ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance are
hereby repealed and of no further force and effect to the extent of any such conflict.
SECTION 5. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
SECTION 6. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage as provided by
law.
Ordinance# 2019-09 was adopted by roll call vote on February 26, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-10
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 3, SECTION 3-4-7(A)
(LIQUOR CONTROL, NUMBER OF LICENSES; FEES)
OF THE MINOOKA VILLAGE CODE
______________________________________________________________________
WHEREAS, 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq. authorizes the Village of Minooka to regulate the sale of
alcoholic liquor in the Village; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka desire to amend Title
3, Section 3-4-7(A) (Liquor Control, Number of Licenses; Fees) of the Minooka Village Code to decrease
the number of Class A Liquor Licenses issued by the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 58/649
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY, AND KENDALL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. That the President and Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals
contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 2. That the number of Class A liquor licenses issued by the Village of Minooka in Title
3, Section 3-4-7(A) shall be decreased from 3 to 2.
SECTION 3. That each section and part hereof of this Ordinance is deemed to be severable and
should any section or part hereof be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such ruling shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portion(s) of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. That all ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance are
hereby repealed and of no further force and effect to the extent of any such conflict.
SECTION 5. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
SECTION 6. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage as provided by
law.
Ordinance# 2019-10 was adopted by roll call vote on February 26, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 59/649
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-12
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 3, SECTION 3-4-7(A)
(LIQUOR CONTROL, NUMBER OF LICENSES; FEES)
OF THE MINOOKA VILLAGE CODE
______________________________________________________________________
WHEREAS, 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq. authorizes the Village of Minooka to regulate the sale of
alcoholic liquor in the Village; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka desire to amend Title
3, Section 3-4-7(A) (Liquor Control, Number of Licenses; Fees) of the Minooka Village Code to increase
the number of Class A3 Liquor Licenses issued by the Village.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, WILL COUNTY, GRUNDY COUNTY, AND KENDALL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. That the President and Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals
contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 2. That the number of Class A3 liquor licenses issued by the Village of Minooka in Title
3, Section 3-4-7(A) shall be increased from 3 to 4.
SECTION 3. That each section and part hereof of this Ordinance is deemed to be severable and
should any section or part hereof be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such ruling shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portion(s) of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. That all ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance are
hereby repealed and of no further force and effect to the extent of any such conflict.
SECTION 5. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 60/649
SECTION 6. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage as provided by
law.
Ordinance# 2019-12 was adopted by roll call vote on April 23, 2019.
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Minooka, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 2018-29, passed October 23, 2018. Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1997-14
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE VILLAGE CODE OF MINOOKA, ILLINOIS
Be it ordained by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Minooka, Illinois, an
Illinois Municipal Corporation:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village Code of the Village of
Minooka, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a
general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing
body of the Village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and Law of the
Village as enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of
binding together with the continuous supplement service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby
each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting
provisions of the Official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper
place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village
Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is
regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official Village Code shall be considered
as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 61/649
eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official Village Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy
ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances, shall continue
in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the Village Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official Village Code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or
tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict,
hereby repealed.
Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and approval in accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by order of
the Village President and Board of Trustees.
An Act to Incorporate the Town of Minooka
Section 1.
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois represented in the General Assembly, That the
inhabitants of the town of Minooka in the county of Grundy and state of Illinois be, and the same are
hereby incorporated and constituted a body corporate and politic by the name and style of "The President
and Trustees of the town of Minooka" and by that name and style shall have perpetual succession, and
may have and use a common Seal, which they may alter or change at pleasure, and in whom the
government of the Corporation shall be vested and by whom its affairs shall be managed.
Section 2.
All that district of county embraced within the following boundaries, to-wit:
The whole of section one (1), in township thirty-four (34), north range eight (8), east of the third principal
meridian, in Grundy county, Illinois, is hereby declared to be within the boundaries of the said town of
Minooka.
Section 3.
The inhabitants of said town by the name and style aforesaid, shall have power to sue and be sued, to
plead and be impleaded, defend and be defended, answer and be answered unto, in all courts of law and
equity in this state, in all actions whatever; to purchase, receive and hold property, real and personal
within or without the corporate limits of said town for burial grounds and other public purposes for the use
and benefit of the inhabitants of said town, to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the property real and
personal of said town for the use and benefit of the same, and to improve and protect such property and
to do all the acts and things in relation thereto that natural persons might do.
Section 4.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 62/649
The corporate powers and duties of said town shall be vested in five (5) trustees, who shall constitute a
board for the transactions of the business of town and who shall be elected annually on the first Monday
of April of each year, and who shall hold their offices for the term of one year, and until their successors
are elected and qualified, unless sooner removed by death, resignation or otherwise as provided by this
act, or the ordinances of said town. The persons elected as trustees shall be citizens of the United States
and of this state; they shall possess a freehold estate within said town, and shall have actually resided
within said town three months next preceding their election.
Section 5.
Ten (10) days previous notice shall be given of all elections to be held under the provisions of this act, or
any ordinances of said town by posting up notices in writing in at least three (3) public places in said town
or by publication in some newspaper published therein. The first election after the passage of this act
shall be called by the Town Clerk of the town of Aux Sable and shall be held on the first Monday of April in
the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine, or as soon thereafter as practicable. All
subsequent elections shall be called by the President of the board of Trustees of the town of Minooka.
Said notices shall specify the time and place of holding such elections, the hour of the day at which the
polls shall be opened, and the hour at which they shall close. The voters who may be present at the time
and place specified for holding any such election shall, at the hour specified for opening the polls, appoint
by acclamation three (3) of their number to act as judges of such election, and the said judges shall
appoint two (2) clerks of such election. Said judges and clerks, before entering upon the duties of their
offices, shall qualify in the same manner as is required of judges and clerks of elections for State and
County purposes. All such elections shall be by ballot and all who by the laws of this state are entitled to
vote for state and county officers, and who shall have been actual residents of said town six (6) months
next preceding such election shall be entitled to vote thereat, and all cases of contested elections under
this act shall be tried and determined by the Police Magistrate of said town, in such manner as may be
provided by ordinance.
Section 6.
The Trustees-elect, before entering upon the duties of their offices, shall take and subscribe an oath to
support the constitution of the United States and of this State, and that they will, to the best of their
abilities, faithfully discharge the duties of their office. They shall hold at least one regular meeting every
three (3) months and shall, at the first meeting after their election, appoint one of their number President.
A majority of such trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn
from day to day and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such
penalties as may be by ordinance provided. Such board may make such rules and regulations as to them
may seem proper; they shall have power to fill vacancies in the board of trustees occasioned by death,
resignation or removal, or otherwise, by appointment. They may punish their members for disorderly
conduct and by vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the board, may expel a member. They shall also have power to
remove from office by four-fifths (4/5) vote of all the members, any subordinate officer of said town who
holds his office by appointment of the board of trustees of said town.
Section 7.
They shall have power and it shall be their duty to appoint a clerk, town constable, treasurer, assessor,
collector, and one or more street commissioners and such other officers, (if any), as may be necessary for
carrying into effect the provisions of this act, and the ordinances of said town and to require them, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices, to give such bonds and security as may be necessary
to ensure the faithful performance of their duties. They shall also require all persons appointed to office by
them, before entering upon the discharge of their duties of their respective offices, to take and subscribe
an oath that they will support the constitution of the United States and of this State, and that they will
faithfully and to the best of their ability, discharge the duties of their offices.
Section 8.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 63/649
They shall have power and authority to levy, assess and collect taxes upon all property, real and personal,
within said town, which is subject to taxation for State and county purposes not exceeding fifty cents
($0.50) annually, on the hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed valuation thereof and they may assess
and enforce the collection of such taxes by any ordinance or ordinances not repugnant to the constitution
of this state or of the United States. They shall also have power to appropriate money and to provide for
the payment of the debts and expenses of the incorporation.
Section 9.
They shall have power to make regulations for securing the health and comfort of the inhabitants of said
town; to define and declare what shall be considered a nuisance and to provide for the prevention,
removal or abatement of the same and to provide for the punishment of the authors thereof by fines,
penalties or imprisonment in the county jail of Grundy county, or by both such fines and imprisonment,
and to authorize, direct and enforce the summary abatement of any such nuisance or nuisances.
Section 10.
They shall have power and it shall be their duty to cause all streets, alleys and public roads within said
town to be kept in good repair and for that purpose they may require every male resident of said town
over the age of twenty one (21) years and not exceeding fifty (50) years to labor thereon not exceeding
three (3) days in each and every year or to pay at the time of being notified to work, the sum of one dollar
fifty cents ($1.50) for each day's labor thereby required of him, and if the labor and money performed and
received be not sufficient for that purpose, they shall appropriate so much from the general fund of the
Corporation as may be necessary therefor, and the inhabitants of said town shall be exempt from working
in any road outside of the same.
Section 11.
They shall have power to open, alter, vacate, widen, extend, establish, grade, pave or otherwise improve
any street, avenue, lane, alley, public grounds, and public roads within the limits of said town and to
establish, erect, construct, build and keep in repair bridges, culverts, sewers, sidewalks, pavements and
crossways and to regulate the construction and use of the same and punish the abuse thereof, and to
levy and collect from time to time a tax on the lot or lots in front of which such sidewalk or sidewalks,
pavement or pavements shall be ordered and proposed to be made or repaired, provided, that every such
tax shall be levied on such lots proportionate to the length of their respective fronts, and provided further
that such tax shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the actual cost of such making and repairing and that the
other half of the cost of such making and repairing shall be paid out of the general fund of the Corporation
provided that the tax provided for in this section shall not be taken or held to be any part of the tax
provided for in section eight of this act.
Section 12.
They shall have power to provide the town with water, to sink and keep in repair public wells, and to erect
and keep in repair such public buildings, as the necessities of the town may require and provide for the
inspection and weighing of hay, stone, coal and the measurement of wood, fuel and building stone to be
used in said town.
Section 13.
They shall have power to license and tax and regulate auctioneers, merchants, family grocery stores,
eating houses, hawkers and peddlers and to regulate the fixing of chimneys, and the flues thereof; also to
regulate the storage of gunpowder, and other combustible materials in said town, to restrain and prohibit
every description of gambling and fraudulent devices, and to suppress and prohibit gambling houses,
bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, and all other disorderly houses within said town, and one mile from the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 64/649
limits of said town.
Section 14.
They shall have power to tax, license and regulate or suppress and prohibit all exhibitions of common
showmen, shows of every kind, caravans, circuses and exhibitions and amusements of every kind, unless
gotten up in said town by the citizens of said town. They shall also have power to provide for the arrest,
trial and punishment of persons who may be guilty of any assault, assault and battery, affrays, routs, riots,
disturbing the peace of the inhabitants or of any public meeting, whether religious or otherwise, of said
town or disorderly assemblages of any kind within the limits of said town, to prohibit and impose penalties
on the authors thereof, any indecent exposure of person or dumb beast to the public view, or the public
use of indecent or obscene language, or the exposure to public view of any indecent or obscene picture
or publication within the limits of said town.
Section 15.
They shall have power to prevent the running at large of dogs, and to provide for the destruction of the
same when found at large contrary to the provisions of any ordinance in such cases made and provided;
to prevent the firing of squibs, guns, rockets or other fire works or combustibles within said town.
Section 16.
They shall have power to prevent the encumbering of any street, lane, avenue, road, alley or public
ground of said town; to prevent the obstruction of the streets by the unnecessary detention of railroad
trains upon the crossings, or by leaving of cars upon the crossings of any public street; to regulate the
rate of running speed of railroad trains through said town; to protect shade trees; to compel persons to
fasten horses, mules and other animals attached to vehicles or saddled or bridled for use, while standing
in any street, lane, road, alley or uninclosed lot within said town; to prevent horses, cattle, sheep, hogs or
other animals running at large, within said town and to provide for the distraining and impounding of any
such animal or animals and the sale thereof to satisfy costs and charges and penalty or penalties incurred
under any ordinance of said town; to prevent racing within said town with horses or other animals; to
prevent any immoderate riding or driving of horses, or other animals within said town, and also to prohibit
and punish the abuse of and cruelty to any and all animals within said town.
Section 17.
The President and Trustees of the town of Minooka shall have and exercise complete and exclusive
control as hereinafter provided, over the licensing, selling, bartering, exchanging, giving away, or in any
manner trafficking in any wine, rum, gin, brandy, whiskey, ale, beer, or any intoxicating liquor within the
limits of said town, or within one mile thereof, and may by ordinance declare any such selling, bartering,
exchanging, giving away or trafficking in any manner in any such wine, gin, rum, brandy, whiskey, ale,
beer, or any other intoxicating liquors within the corporate limits of said town or within one mile thereof,
and the place or places where the same is carried on or either of them, a nuisance, and shall have and
exercise the same power and authority to provide for prohibition or prevention, removal or abatement of
any such nuisance or nuisances and for the punishment of the authors thereof as they have and may
exercise by virtue of Section nine of this act in the case of other nuisances, provided that all fees paid for
the granting of licenses shall be paid into the common fund of the incorporation and provided further that
bona fide druggists shall not be prohibited from selling in good faith any intoxicating liquor for purely
medicinal, mechanical or sacramental purposes under such rules and regulations as may be by ordinance
prescribed.
Section 18.
They shall have power to direct the location and regulate the construction of tanneries, blacksmith shops,
foundries, livery stables and packing houses; to direct the location and regulate the construction and
management of or to restrain, abate and prohibit within said town and to the distance of one mile from the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 65/649
limits thereof, breweries, distilleries, slaughtering establishments, establishments for rendering lard,
tallow, offal and other establishments and places where nauseous, offensive or unwholesome business
may be carried on.
Section 19.
They shall have power to restrain and prohibit vagrants, mendicants, beggars, prostitutes and to provide
for the arrest and punishment of the same or of any person or persons found intoxicated in any street,
alley or other public places in said town.
Section 20.
They shall have power to make such regulations for the prevention and extinguishment of fires, as they
may deem expedient; they shall have power to procure fire engines, to organize fire, hook, hose, ax and
ladder companies, and make rules and regulations for the government of the same.
Section 21.
They shall have power to enlarge the boundaries of said town by ordinances provided, such proposed
enlargements shall first be submitted to the decision of the qualified voters of said town, and also of the
legal voters residing in the limits of the proposed enlargements, and the enlargement shall be authorized
by a majority of votes cast at such election.
Section 22.
They shall have power to make all ordinances, which may be necessary or proper for carrying into effect
the powers and authority conferred on them by the provisions of this act, or which may be necessary for
the better regulation of the internal police of the said town not inconsistent with the Constitution of this
State, or of the United States, and to cause the same to be executed. They shall also have power to
impose fines and penalties, provided, that in no case shall any fine for any one offense exceed the sum of
one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor shall they impose a penalty of imprisonment in the county jail for any
one offense of more than six (6) months.
Section 23.
The President shall preside at all meetings of the board when present and in case of his absence from
any meeting, the members of the Board present shall appoint one of their members chairman, who shall
preside at that meeting. The President or any two (2) members of the board may call special meetings of
the board. The President shall be active and vigilant in enforcing the laws and ordinances of said town.
He shall inspect the conduct of all subordinate officers and cause negligence or willful violation of duty to
be punished; he shall have power to call on all male inhabitants of said town over the age of twenty one
(21) years, to aid in enforcing the laws and ordinances of said town, and any and every person who shall
neglect or refuse to obey such call shall forfeit and pay to said town the sum of not less than five (5) nor
more than twenty five dollars ($25.00); he shall have power whenever he may deem it necessary to
require of any officer of said town a written exhibit of his books and papers, and shall have power, and it
shall be his duty to do all other acts and things that may be required of him by the laws and ordinances of
said town.
Section 24.
At the first election of trustees of the town of Minooka held under the provisions of this act, and every four
(4) years thereafter, there shall be elected by the legal voters of said town a police magistrate of said
town, who shall be ex-officio a justice of the peace for the County of Grundy; he shall qualify in the same
manner and be subject to the same penalties that are provided by the general laws of this State for other
justices of the peace; he shall hold his office for the term of four (4) years and until his successor shall be
elected and qualified; he shall possess and may exercise all the powers, jurisdiction and authority that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 66/649
other justices of the peace of the County of Grundy might have and exercise in similar cases.
Section 25.
Said police magistrate shall be a conservator of the peace of said town of Minooka and shall have
exclusive original jurisdiction, except as herein otherwise provided in all cases arising out of or under the
laws and ordinances of said town, or this act, and shall in such cases possess and may exercise all the
rights, powers and authority now conferred on police magistrates by virtue of an act entitled, "An act for
the better government of towns and cities and to amend the characters thereof" approved February 27th,
A.D., 1854. Whenever there shall occur a vacancy in the office of Police Magistrate of said town, the
board of trustees of said town or the President of said board shall, within twenty (20) days from the
occurring of any such vacancy, call an election to fill the same and the person so elected shall hold his
office until his successor shall be elected and qualified.
Section 26.
He shall in all cases be entitled to the same fees and emoluments that are by the laws of this State
allowed to other Justices of the Peace for similar services. In case of the absence of said police
magistrate or of his inability, any other justice of the peace of the County of Grundy having an office in
said town shall have the same jurisdiction, power and authority under the laws and ordinances of said
town, as the said police magistrate possesses in like cases. The rule of practice and proceedings in all
cases arising out of the laws or ordinances of said town, shall conform to the practice and proceedings
before other Justices of the Peace, except cases where such rules of practice and proceedings shall be
changed or modified by the laws or ordinances or charter of said town, in which case the rule of practice
or proceeding shall conform to the rule prescribed by such laws, ordinances or charter.
Section 27.
In all cases arising under any ordinance of said town or under this act, changes of venue and appeals
shall, when applied for, be allowed to the circuit court of the County of Grundy in the same manner as is
provided in other cases, before justices of the peace, provided that in all cases arising out of any
ordinance of said town or under this act, if either party wishes to appeal, he or they shall give notice in
writing thereof to the justice of the peace before whom the case was tried on the day of trial thereof, and
shall file the necessary appeal bond with such justice of the peace within twenty (20) days from the day of
trial.
Section 28.
The town constable of said town shall qualify in such manner as the board of trustees may by ordinance
prescribe and shall have power and authority to execute all warrants and other processes issued by the
police magistrate of said town, or any other justice of the peace of said County of Grundy; he shall have
and may exercise in all cases the same power and authority that are given to other constables of said
county by the laws of the State of Illinois, and shall be entitled to like fees for his services and shall in all
cases of nonfeasance and misfeasance of duty be subject to the same penalties and liabilities that are
provided by the law of the State of Illinois for other constables in like cases.
Section 29.
In all cases arising under the laws or ordinances of said town any constable of the County of Grundy shall
have the same right, power and authority to serve or execute any process issued therein, original or
otherwise, that the said town constable would possess. Whenever the constable of said town shall see
any person or persons engaged in any assault, assault and battery, riot, rout, affray, disturbing the peace
of the inhabitants of said town, disturbing any public meeting, religious or otherwise, or unlawful
assemblage of any kind within said town, it shall be his duty to make immediate arrest of such person or
persons on view without warrant, and in all such cases any constable of the County of Grundy shall have
the same power to arrest, without warrant, as the said town constable in such cases would possess, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 67/649
in all such cases of arrest without warrant, the constable making such arrest shall forthwith take such
person or persons before the police magistrate of said town, or in case of his absence or inability to act,
before any justice of the peace having an office in said town, and shall inform such police magistrate or
justice of the peace of the nature of the offense for which such person or persons were arrested and the
said police magistrate or justice of the peace, shall thereupon institute a suit against such person or
persons and proceed therein in all the respects the same as if any such person or persons had been
arrested and brought before him under warrant duly issued; the same town constable shall faithfully
perform all other acts and duties required of him by the laws and ordinances of said town.
Section 30.
Until the board of trustees of said town of Minooka shall provide by ordinance for enforcing the collection
of taxes due said town, the same shall be collected in the same manner provided in the ninth Section of
an act entitled, "An act to incorporate towns and cities" approved February 10th, 1849, for the collection of
other corporation taxes.
Section 31.
All prosecutions under the laws and ordinances of said town of Minooka for assaults, assaults and battery,
affrays, riots, routs, disturbing the peace of the inhabitants of said town, disturbing any public meeting,
religious or otherwise, unlawful assemblages of any kind and cases in which the penalty attached by law
or ordinances of said town is imprisonment in the County Jail of said County of Grundy shall be (except in
cases of arrest without warrant as hereinbefore provided) commenced by complaint and warrant in the
same manner prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois for the regulation of criminal proceedings in
justice courts, and in all such cases, the rules of practice, and proceeding shall be the same as are
prescribed in such cases for justice courts by the laws of this State, except when the laws and ordinances
of said town prescribe new rules or different rules of practice or proceeding, in which case the rule or
practice or proceeding shall conform to the rule prescribed by the laws or ordinances of said town.
Provided that the right of trial by jury shall in no case be denied to any person charged with a breach of
any of the provisions of this act or of any ordinance of said town.
Section 32.
In all other cases for violating the laws or ordinances of said town, the penalties or penalty therefor shall
be recovered by action of debt, in the name of "the President and Trustees of the town of Minooka," and
in all such actions of debt the first process shall be by summons to be issued, served and returned as
other summons and actions of debt issued by justices of the peace of said County of Grundy, unless
some competent person shall before the commencement of any such action of debt, file with the justice of
the peace before whom such writ is about to be commenced, an affidavit accusing the person or persons
about to be sued with some one or more violations of the same nature of the laws or ordinances of said
town specifying such offense or offenses, and stating that he or she verily believes that unless the person
or persons so accused shall be forthwith arrested and brought to trial, there is danger that the penalty or
penalties in such case shall be lost, and specifying the facts, on which this belief is founded in which case,
if the said police magistrate or justice of the peace shall be of the opinion that there is reason to believe
that the opinion set forth in such affidavit is correct, he may issue a warrant against the person or persons
so accused, causing him or her or them to be forthwith arrested and brought before him, and he shall
proceed at once to the trial of such suit, which shall be by action of debt for the recovery of the penalties
or penalty attached to the offense or offenses specified in the affidavit aforesaid and if the said defendant
or defendants shall be found guilty or severally of any one or more of the offenses specified in such
affidavit, the police magistrate or justice of the peace before whom such suit is tried, shall enter into
judgment thereon for the amount of the fines assessed and the cost of suit as in other cases.
Section 33.
In all actions of debt for offenses committed against the laws or ordinances of said town, it shall be lawful
for the plaintiff in the same suit to allege and prove and recover for any number of offenses of the same
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 68/649
nature, provided, that the amount recovered shall in no case exceed the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00). All fines or penalties received or collected for any violation of the laws or ordinances of said
town shall by the person or persons receiving or collecting the same, be paid into the treasury of said
town.
Section 34.
The President and Trustees of said town shall not in any suit in which they are concerned for the violation
of any law or ordinance of said town, either before the commencement or during the pendency thereof, be
compelled to give any security therein for costs, the president or trustees or any other officer of said town
shall be a competent witness for either party, in any suit for a violation of the laws or ordinances of said
town.
Section 35.
Upon the rendition of any judgment for a breach of any law or ordinance of said town, the police
magistrate or other justice of the peace rendering such judgment shall forthwith issue an execution for the
amount of such judgment and cost of suit which may be levied upon and collected out of any property of
the defendant or defendants, not exempt from executions by the laws of the State of Illinois. But if the
constable having such execution shall return thereon that he cannot find sufficient property of the
defendant or defendants, not exempt from execution, to satisfy such execution, then the said justice shall
issue a capias against the body or bodies of the defendant or defendants, and the constable shall arrest
such person or persons and convey him, her or them to the jail of the County of Grundy thereto remain
forty eight (48) hours, and if the said fines and costs exceed the sum of five dollars ($5.00), then to remain
in said jail twenty four (24) hours for every five dollars ($5.00) over and above the said five dollars ($5.00),
provided, however that if the president and trustees of said town or other attorney shall require a
transcript of the judgment and costs to be certified to the clerk of said County of Grundy, to have the same
levied upon real property and shall signify the same to such justice. He shall not issue a capias as
aforesaid, but shall, without delay, certify a transcript thereof, according to law to said clerk which shall be
filed and recorded as in other cases and such judgment shall have from the date of filing of such
transcript, the same force and effect as judgments rendered in said circuit court in civil cases. Provided,
that if the defendant or defendants shall, in any case arising under the provisions of this act or under any
law or ordinance of said town as hereinbefore provided, signify his, her or their intention of appealing and
shall file the necessary appeal bond within the time required, the justice shall, if he approve such appeal
bond, order the return of any property that may have been taken under execution to satisfy such payment.
Section 36.
Whenever it shall become necessary to take private property for opening or altering any public street or
alley, the corporation shall make a just compensation to the owner or owners of such property and pay or
tender the same before opening or altering such street or alley or before taking any private property for
public use and in case the amount of such compensation cannot be agreed upon, the police magistrate
shall cause the same to be ascertained by a jury of six (6) disinterested freeholders of said town. All jurors
empaneled to ascertain such damages shall be sworn to that effect. They shall proceed to examine the
property in question and after carefully considering both the advantages and disadvantages that will
probably accrue to the owners thereof by such taking and the proposed use of such property, they shall
within ten (10) days make out and return their verdict in writing, signed by each of said jurors, to the police
magistrate of said town, assessing to such owner or owners such damages as they think just. Said police
magistrate shall file and docket such verdict, and shall forthwith cause the president and trustees or their
clerk or attorney and the owner or owners of property, included in such verdict, to be notified of the
contents of the same. The said police magistrate may at any time within ten (10) days of the filing of such
verdict, for good cause shown set aside such verdict and grant a new inquest of damages. If either party
shall be dissatisfied with the verdict of the second inquest, they shall be allowed an appeal to the circuit
court of the County of Grundy. When any such verdict, not exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00), shall be filed with the police magistrate and entered on his docket, unless set aside or
appealed from, it shall be a judgment against the president and trustees of said town of Minooka, in favor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 69/649
of such owner, including therein the amount of damages thereby assessed to him, and in case the sum
assessed to any owner, exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), the said police magistrate shall on
application of the person entitled thereto, certify to the clerk of the circuit court of Grundy County a full and
complete transcript of the proceedings and verdict in such case, which shall be filed and recorded by the
clerk of the said court in the same manner as other transcripts from the justice's dockets and shall from
the time of such filing, have all the force and effect in favor of the person or persons entitled to such
damages as a judgment obtained in said circuit court.
Section 37.
The president and trustees shall require their clerk, and it shall be his duty, to make and keep a full and
faithful record of all their proceedings, by-laws and ordinances and of the time, place and manner of the
publication of such by-laws and ordinances in a book to be provided for that purpose and such book
purporting to be the record book of the corporation of the said town of Minooka, shall be received in all
courts without further proof as evidence of the matters therein contained and all ordinances, by-laws, acts,
resolutions and other things pertaining to and concerning the corporation of the town of Minooka shall be
sufficiently proven in any court of law or equity in the State of Illinois by the production in such court of the
book or books in which the same are recorded in the manner and form hereinafter provided, to-wit:
All ordinances, by-laws or rules passed or established by the board of trustees of said town before taking
effect, shall be published at least ten (10) days in some newspaper published in said town, or by posting
up copies of the same in at least three (3) public places in said town, and shall be signed by the president
and clerk of the board and authenticated by the common seal of the corporation, and shall be written out
in full on the record book or books of said corporation, and signed thereon by the president and clerk of
the board of trustees with their own proper signatures and said clerk, at the time of making such record,
shall attach thereon the common seal of the corporation and shall also note the date of the adoption of
said ordinances, by-laws or rules, the time of the taking effect thereof, and also the time, manner and
place or places of their publication.
Section 38.
In all cases of assault, assault and battery, affrays, riots, routs, disturbing the peace, disturbing public
meetings and unlawful assemblage of any kind committed within said town of Minooka, after the passage
of this act, and before the board of trustees of said town shall have provided by ordinances for the
punishment of any such offense, the criminal laws of the State of Illinois, applicable to such offense, shall
be deemed and held to be in full force and effect as to any such offense or offenses.
Section 39.
This act is hereby declared to be a public act, and may be read in evidence in any and all courts of law
and equity in the State of Illinois without proof and shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA )
) ss.
Office of Secretary
State of Illinois )
I, Edward Rummel, Secretary of the State of Illinois, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of "An Act
to Incorporate the Town of Minooka."
Approved March 27th, 1869.
Now on file in this office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 70/649
In witness whereof, I hereto set my hand and affix the Great Seal of the State of Illinois at the city of Springfield,
this 14th day of December, A.D. 1869.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter
constitute the official Village Code of the Village of Minooka. This Village Code of Ordinances shall be
known and cited as the MINOOKA VILLAGE CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Board
of Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of
the Village Attorney, acting for said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when
reference is made to this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1977 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in
all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Code. (1977 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the
section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said
ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Village Code.
Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code. (1977 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or
any page of this Village Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed
or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 71/649
by the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the
official copies maintained in the office of the Village Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official
copy of this Village Code shall make every effort to maintain this Code in an up to date and efficient
manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to
him or made available to him through the office of the Village Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual
possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and
shall be returned to the office of the Village Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Village Board.
(1977 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Village Code are hereby
repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force or are by necessary implication
herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which
are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries, and annexations; franchise ordinances and other
ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real
estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances. (1977 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to
the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this
Village Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Village Code may contain provisions
for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or
ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1977 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as
to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so
done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the
new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in
force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be
mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in
the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 72/649
virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances
contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty
accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right
of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Village
Code. (1977 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Village Code or any
part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this
Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each
section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1977 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural number is used in describing
or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be
included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the
singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any section of this Village Code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been changed in the content of this
Village Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational
and clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not meant to amend the
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1977 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: The Board of Trustees of the Village.
CODE: The Village Code of Minooka, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The County of Grundy, and/or the County of Will, State of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 73/649
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words, "of the Village of Minooka".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
(1977 Code)
FISCAL AND MUNICIPAL YEAR: The fiscal and municipal year of the Village shall commence on May 1
of each year, and end on April 30 in each calendar year. (1904 Code § 13.1)
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the
provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary
for less than one year may be imposed.
NEGLIGENT: Imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or
omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; or
any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of
another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of
such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the Village of Minooka".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint
tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or
any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights
in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such
building or land whether alone or with others.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 74/649
VILLAGE: The Village of Minooka, County of Grundy and/or County of Will, State of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village.
WHOLESALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or
willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate
law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: Includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but
when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond
required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Village Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (1977 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no other specific penalty is provided or not
listed in section 1-4-5 of this chapter, the violation of such provision of this code or any ordinance shall
be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or such other amount as
provided by law/ordinance, for any one offense. The revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. Every day that a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition, a penalty imposed for may include, or consist of, a requirement that the subject accused
perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in
public parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities.
C. No imprisonment as authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-9 for failure to pay any fine,
penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for one offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
1-4-2: LICENSE REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 75/649
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any license previously issued him by
the village may be revoked by the court or by the board of trustees, after allowing such licensee to be
heard in his own defense. (1977 Code; amd. 1997 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it
were a part of each and every separate section. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall be created by different clauses or
sections of the ordinances of the village, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but no
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-
20-2011)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to
make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1977 Code)
1-4-5: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE TICKETS:
A. Definition: "Administrative compliance ticket", hereinafter referred to as ACT, is defined as a courtesy
ticket used in the case of ordinance violations in lieu of arrest or penalty as provided in this code.
B. Issuance Of ACT: An ACT may be issued by village police officers and village code enforcement
officers or such other persons as authorized by the board of trustees.
C. Procedure: Any person accused of violating a provision of this code, except traffic offenses that must
be reported to the secretary of state in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204, may be
issued an ACT in lieu of arrest or penalty as provided in this code, which requires the violator to:
1. Pay the administrative fee as set forth in subsection E of this section to the Village within thirty (30)
days of the issuance of an ACT as a settlement and compromise of the claims against the violator.
2. Correct, repair or rectify any condition which constitutes a continuing violation of this Code within
the period specified in the ACT.
D. Compliance With ACT: If any person to whom ACT has been issued fails to:
1. Settle and pay the claim within the period specified in subsection C of this section; and/or
2. Correct, repair or rectify the violation within the period specified in the ACT,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 76/649
then a hearing date shall be issued to said person for the violation, and that person shall be subject
to fines and penalties as authorized by law/ordinance, with the maximum amount as set forth in
section 1-4-1 of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
E. Fee Schedule: The administrative fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) unless as otherwise specified. (Ord.
2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Description
Code
No. Fee
Insufficient funds 1-12-1
$25.00
plus bank
fees
Licensing Title 3,
chapter
1
$100.00
Solicitors Title 3,
chapter
2
50.00
Liquor Control Act Title 3,
chapter
4
250.00
Sale of alcohol to a minor 3-4-
17A
250.00
Possession/consumption of alcohol by a minor 3-4-
17B
100.00
Consumption of alcohol in public 3-4-
20A
75.00
Public intoxication 3-4-
20D
75.00
Underage use of video gaming terminal 3-5-8A
100.00
Permitting underage person (<21) to use video gaming terminal 3-5-8B
500.00
Violations of Video Gaming Act or Village Code provisions related to the
licensure of video gaming terminals, except violations related to underage
use of a video gaming terminal (includes, but is not limited to, violations of
the Act's requirements regarding: 1) maintenance of a valid liquor license, 2)
hours of operation, and 3) the location of each video gaming terminal)
3-5-8C
150.00
Contractors Title 3,
chapter
7
100.00
Tobacco: Title 3,
chapter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 77/649
11
First violation 200.00
Second violation in a calendar year 400.00
Third violation in a calendar year 600.00
Suspension and revocation of tobacco license Title 3,
chapter
11
See
section 3-
11-19 of
this Code
Failure to obtain tobacco license 3-11-5 $100.00
per day
Sale of tobacco to a minor 3-11-17
$250.00
Purchase/possession of tobacco by a minor 3-11-21
50.00
Business registration: Title 3,
chapter
15
100.00
Failure to cure within 14 days $100.00
plus fee
After 14 days, amount per day $25.00
plus fee
Building Code and Code regulations Title 4,
chapter
2
See
section 4-
2-12 of
this Code
Swimming pool Title 4,
chapter
6
$100.00
Trailer coach and trailer coach parks Title 4,
chapter
11
25.00
Failure to register 4-15-3
$100.00
plus cost
of
ownership
search
Zoning Title 5 See
section 5-
11-10 of
this Code
Parking restrictions for trailers, mobile homes, boats, recreational vehicles,
and motor vehicles
5-3-10
$ 50.00
Signs Title 5, 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 78/649
chapter
13
Subdivisions Title 6 25.00
Nuisance 7-1-1 100.00
Burning of waste materials 7-1-4 100.00
Garbage and refuse Title 7,
chapter
2
100.00
Littering 7-2-4 100.00
Weeds Title 7,
chapter
3
$200.00
plus cost
of mowing
Disorderly conduct: 8-2-1
First violation $100.00
Second violation in a calendar year 200.00
Third violation in a calendar year 400.00
Damaging property 8-2-2 200.00
Posting handbills/injuring property 8-2-5 200.00
Public indecency 8-2-6 750.00
Fireworks: 8-2-7
First violation 200.00
Second violation in a calendar year 400.00
Third violation in a calendar year 600.00
Trespass 8-2-8 100.00
Truancy 8-3-3 50.00
Animal control Title 8,
chapter
4
50.00
Abandoned vehicles Title 8,
chapter
5
$200.00
plus cost
of towing
and
storage
False alarm systems 8-6-7B
See
subsection
8-6-7B of
this Code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 79/649
Burglar alarm systems 8-6-7C
See
subsection
8-6-7C of
this Code
Administrative tow fee 8-7-3 $250.00
plus cost
of towing
and
storage
Disabled person Title 9,
chapter
1
See
section 9-
1-27 of
this Code
Parking at the curb Title 9,
chapter
1
$30.00
Traffic violations, except moving violations Title 9,
chapter
1
60.00
Distracted driving 9-1-19
60.00
Prohibited parking 9-1-20
30.00
Overweight 9-1-21
See
section 9-
1-27 of
this Code
Exhibition driving 9-1-22
$60.00
Snowfall parking 9-1-24
$50.00
plus cost
of tow
Engine braking 9-1-25
$250.00
Connection of water without permit 10-3-9
$100.00
plus
estimated
cost of
water
usage
Water meter required 10-3-
17
$100.00
Emergency water conservation 10-3-
18
100.00
Water cross connection Title 100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 80/649
10,
chapter
4
Village parks Title
10,
chapter
5
100.00
(Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012; Ord. 2013-04, 1-22-2013; Ord. 2014-24, 7-22-
2014; Ord. 2015-23, 9-22-2015; Ord. 2016-23, 7-26-2016; Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
1-4-6: FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE:
The fine payment schedule shall read as follows:
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
Standing And Parking
Violations (Except Handicap),
Condition And Use Of Vehicle
Equipment, And Display Of
Wheel Tax License
Handicapped
Parking
Step 1: If you are served with a "violation
notice" and pay before the first hearing, or
appear at the first hearing and found liable,
the fine shall be:
Amount of the fine per village
ordinance
Amount of the
fine per state
statute
Step 2: If you fail to appear at the first
hearing, the fine must be paid before the
second hearing and shall be:
Double the amount of the fine Double the
amount of the
fine; maximum
amount
$1,000.00
Step 3: If you fail to appear at the second
hearing, the fine must be paid before the
third hearing and shall be:
Double the amount due;
maximum amount $250.00
Double the
amount due;
maximum
amount
$1,000.00
Step 4: If you fail to appear at the third
hearing, or upon a final determination of
liability, the fine shall be:
Double the amount due;
maximum amount $250.00
Double the
amount due;
maximum
amount
$1,000.00
(Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 81/649
1-5-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village President shall be elected every other odd numbered year for a term of four (4) years, and
serve as President of the Board of Trustees, as provided by statute. (1977 Code)
1-5-2: BOND; OATH:
A. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the President shall give bond in the sum of three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with surety to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon
his faithful performance of his duties.
B. Oath: He shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. (1977 Code)
1-5-3: DUTIES:
The Village President is the chief executive officer of the Village, and shall perform all duties required of
him by statute or ordinance. He shall supervise the executive officers of the Village, and have the power
and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any officer of the Village at any time. (1977 Code)
1-5-4: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The Village President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, all
officers of the Village whose appointment or election is not otherwise provided for.
He may delegate to any officer any duty to be performed; and whenever there is a question as to the
respective duties and powers of any officer of the Village, this shall be settled by the Village President.
(1977 Code)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-6-1: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: There shall be a regular meeting of the Village President and Board of Trustees at
the Village Hall on the following days:
1. The fourth Tuesday of each month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.
2. If any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, then the Board shall designate another meeting date.
B. Special Meetings: The Village President or any two (2) Trustees may call special meetings of the Board
of Trustees and each Trustee, if in the Village, shall be notified of all special meetings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 82/649
C. Meetings Open To The Public: All meetings shall be open to the public in compliance with State law.
(Ord. 2017-21, 10-24-2017)
1-6-2: QUORUM:
A. In order to constitute a quorum for all public meetings of the Village Board, a majority of the Corporate
Authorities must be physically present for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may
organize and adjourn, from day to day, and may compel the attendance of absent members.
B. At a regular meeting, special meeting or committee meeting of the Board of Trustees, if a quorum is
physically present, a Trustee or the Village President ("Board member") may attend the meeting by
video or audio conference if the Board member is prevented from physically attending because of: 1)
personal illness or disability, 2) employment purposes or the business of the Village, or 3) family or
other emergency, so long as the Board member notifies the Village Clerk before the meeting (unless
advance notice is impractical) and the Board member participates by video or audio conference.
C. After a roll call establishing that a quorum is physically present where a Board member desires to
attend by video or audio conference, the presiding officer shall state that: 1) notice was received by a
Board member to attend by video or audio conference, and 2) the Board member will be deemed
authorized to attend, unless a motion objecting to the Board member's attendance is made, seconded,
and approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the Corporate Authorities physically present at the meeting. (Ord.
2006-52, 12-19-2006)
1-6-3: VILLAGE PRESIDENT TO ADVISE:
The Village President shall, annually and from time to time, give the Board of Trustees information relative
to the affairs of the Village, and shall recommend for their consideration such measures as he may deem
expedient. (1904 Code § 2.4)
1-6-4: COMMITTEES:
At the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees held after the regular Village election and qualification
of the Village President and members of the Board, or as soon thereafter as is convenient, and at the first
regular meeting in the month of May in nonelection years, the Village President, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, shall either:
A. Name the standing committees, which shall include:
1. Finance.
2. Economic development/public relations.
3. Public works.
4. Parks and recreation.
5. Public safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 83/649
6. Ordinances/building.
Unless otherwise specified, the committees shall consist of three (3) trustees, each with one trustee
to be designated as committee chair. Members of the above specified committees shall hold their
offices for one year or until their successors are appointed. When a vacancy shall occur in any of
the above committees, the village president shall fill the same forthwith with the advice and consent
of the village board. No member of the board of trustees shall be excused from serving on
committees; or (Ord. 2009-24, 6-23-2009)
B. Establish a standing committee known as the committee of the whole, which shall consist of the village
president and all of the trustees.
1. The committee of the whole shall consider and discuss, but not act upon, affairs of the village.
2. A quorum of the committee of the whole shall not be less than four (4). The village president shall
serve as chair of the committee of the whole and conduct the order and consideration of business of
the committee of the whole. In the absence of the village president, the trustees shall appoint one of
their number to act as temporary chairman, who shall perform the duties of chair for the time being.
3. The committee of the whole shall meet on the dates as determined at the annual reorganizational
meeting or thereafter. If any committee of the whole meeting falls on a legal holiday, then the
committee of the whole shall designate another meeting date. The village president or any two (2)
trustees may call special meetings of the committee of the whole and each trustee, if in the village,
shall be notified of all special meetings.
4. At any time during the fiscal year, the village board by an affirmative vote of the trustees present at
a regular or special meeting may reorganize the committee structure to the terms as set forth in
subsection A of this section.
5. Any reference in the village code to a committee listed in subsection A of this section, with the
exception of the committees referenced in subsection C of this section, shall be deemed as a
reference to the committee of the whole and those matters that by ordinance are assigned to a
committee so referenced shall be addressed by the committee of the whole.
6. Committee of the whole agendas will be prepared by the village administrator or clerk at direction of
the village president and village board. Any village board member can place an item on the agenda
by contacting the president, administrator, or clerk.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees, shall appoint the following standing committees:
Board of local improvements, to consist of two (2) trustees with the village president as chairman.
Budget, to consist of three (3) trustees to annually review the budget for presentation to the village
board prior to the beginning of the fiscal year.
Liquor commission, to consist of two (2) trustees with the village president as chairman.
D. Ad hoc committees may be established by the village president, subject to advice and consent of the
village board, for matters that the village president and board deem appropriate. (Ord. 2007-26, 5-22-
2007)
1-6-5: RULES OF ORDER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 84/649
At all meetings of the village president and board of trustees the following rules of order shall be
observed:
Rule 1. The village president shall preside at all meetings of the board of trustees, and shall take the chair
at the time appointed for the board to meet, and shall immediately call the members to order; and the
president may and shall, at the request of the members present, order the attendance of absent
members.
Rule 2. In the absence of the village president at any meeting, the board of trustees shall appoint one of
their number to act as chairman pro tem, who shall perform the duties of chairman for the time being.
Rule 3. At each meeting of the board of trustees, business shall be taken up (unless otherwise ordered) in
the following order:
1. Calling the roll of members, noting those absent as well as those present.
2. Reading minutes of previous meeting.
3. Reading and referring communications other than petitions.
4. Unfinished business.
5. Reports of committees.
6. Petitions and accounts.
7. New business.
Rule 4. The village president shall have the right to decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to
the board of trustees.
Rule 5. The village president shall preserve decorum, and if any member transgresses the rules of the
board of trustees, the village president shall, or any member may, call to order, in which case the member
called to order shall immediately sit down and be silent, unless permitted to explain; and the board of
trustees, if applied to, shall decide the matter.
Rule 6. Every member present when a question is put, shall vote, unless personally interested, or the
board of trustees shall, for special reason excuse him; except the village president shall not vote except in
case of a tie, when he shall give the casting vote.
Rule 7. Every motion, resolution or proposition shall, if the village president, village clerk or any other
member require it, be reduced to writing.
Rule 8. When a motion is made, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the board of trustees, and shall
be started by the president, or, being in writing, shall be read previous to debate.
Rule 9. After the motion is stated by the village president, or read, it may be withdrawn by the mover
thereof at any time before decision or amendment, on leave of the board of trustees.
Rule 10. All questions shall be put: "As many as are in favor of (as the case may be) say 'aye', contrary,
'no'", and in doubtful cases the president may direct or any member may call for a division.
Rule 11. No vote of the board of trustees shall be considered at a special meeting unless at such special
meeting there be present as large a number of trustees as were present when such vote was taken.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 85/649
Rule 12. Upon request of any two (2) trustees present, final action on any report of a committee of the
board of trustees shall be deferred to the next regular meeting of the board after the report is made.
Rule 13. When a question is before the board of trustees, no motion shall be received, unless to adjourn,
to lay on the table, the previous question, to amend, to refer or to postpone, the first three (3) of which
shall be decided without debate.
Rule 14. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, unless the board of trustees is engaged in voting.
Rule 15. The previous question shall be put in these words, "Shall the main question now be put?" and if
decided in the affirmative, the question shall be immediately taken on the main question, and
amendments thereto pending, in their order.
Rule 16. Any member may call for a division of the question when the sense will admit thereof.
Rule 17. The ayes and nays shall be taken and recorded upon the passage of all ordinances, and on all
propositions to create any liability against the village, or for the expenditure of its money, and in all other
cases upon the call of any one member; and the concurrence of a majority of all the trustees elected shall
be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or proposition; but a concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of
all the trustees elected shall be required to sell any village property.
Rule 18. Any member may protest against the passage of any ordinance, resolution or order of the board
of trustees, and have such protest entered upon the journal.
Rule 19. All committees shall be appointed by the village president, unless otherwise ordered by the
board of trustees; provided, that the standing committees of the board of trustees shall always be
appointed by the village president.
Rule 20. No member shall leave the meetings of the board of trustees in session, except by unanimous
consent.
Rule 21. All ordinances shall be read before final passage, and shall not be ordered to be put upon their
final passage at the same meeting at which they are introduced, if objections are made by any member of
the board of trustees to any further consideration until the next regular meeting.
Rule 22. No personalities or reflections injurious to the feelings or harmony of the board of trustees shall
be tolerated, and the members indulging in the same shall be called to order by the village president.
Rule 23. Members shall rise to speak or make a motion and shall respectfully address the chair as "Mr.
President" and shall not proceed until their names are called by that officer.
Rule 24. When the village president is personally interested in the decision of any question, the village
clerk shall put the motion.
Rule 25. All ordinances passed by the board of trustees shall be signed by the village president and
attested by the village clerk. (1904 Code § 2.6; amd. 1997 Code)
Rule 26. The village president or village clerk shall be responsible for meeting agenda. All subjects to be
placed on the agenda shall be requested or submitted to either the village president or village clerk before
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the Friday prior to the meeting. Only business on the meeting agenda shall
be presented to the board of trustees, except by majority agreement of the board of trustees. (Ord. 1978-
8, 1978; amd. 1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 86/649
Chapter 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
A. At the first regular meeting of the board of trustees held after the regular village election and
qualification of the village president and/or members of the board (every 2 years), or as soon
thereafter as is convenient, the village president and board of trustees shall appoint a village attorney
and village engineer who shall hold office during the municipal years for which they are appointed,
unless sooner removed and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
B. All officers not specifically listed in subsection A of this section shall be appointed by the village
president, subject to the advice and consent of the village board, and shall serve for the term of office
of the village president unless sooner removed and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Ord. 2007-26, 5-22-2007)
1-7-2: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
The village clerk and the village treasurer shall each, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute
a bond with security to be approved by the village president and board of trustees payable to the village in
such penal sum as may, by resolution, be directed by the board, conditioned for the faithful performance
of the duties of his office, and the payment of all monies received by such officers according to law and
the provisions of this code. All such bonds shall be filed with the village clerk, except that of the clerk,
which shall be filed with the village treasurer. (1904 Code § 29.2; amd. 1977 Code)
1-7-3: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
Any officer appointed by the village president and board of trustees may be removed by a vote of fourfifths
(4/5) of the board for incompetency or for any neglect, deviation or violation of his duty, whenever the
board of trustees deems the interests of the village shall require such removal; provided, that no officer
shall be removed as aforesaid without being first notified by the village president or village clerk of such
intended removal and the grounds therefor, and shall have the opportunity to exculpate himself before the
board from the charges against him. (1904 Code § 29.12)
1-7-4: VACANCIES:
Whenever any vacancies shall occur in any manner whatever in any of the offices provided for in this
chapter, the village president and board of trustees shall fill such vacancy at their next regular meeting,
unless the interests of the village require it to be done sooner, in which event the village president or any
two (2) members of the board may call a special meeting for that purpose. (1904 Code § 29.13)
1-7-5: SALARIES, COMPENSATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 87/649
A. The village president and board of trustees may establish and fix the amount of salary to be paid any
and all village officers as the case may be, except members of such legislative body, in the annual
appropriation bill or ordinance made for the purpose of providing for the annual expenses of the
village, or by some ordinance prior to the passage of such annual appropriation bill or ordinance; and
the salaries or compensation thus fixed or established shall neither be increased nor diminished by
such legislative authority during the year for which such appropriation is made, and no extra
compensation shall ever be allowed to any such officer or employee over and above that provided in
the manner aforesaid, except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
B. Compensation of certain village officers shall be as follows:
1. The village president shall receive as compensation the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
per year. In addition, the village president shall be reimbursed for his/her telephone expenses.
2. Each member of the board of trustees shall receive as compensation for his/her services the sum of
sixty dollars ($60.00) for each meeting of the board of trustees attended by him/her, and the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each committee meeting of the board of trustees attended by
him/her.
3. Each member of the planning and zoning commission shall receive as compensation for his/her
services the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) for each meeting of the planning and zoning
commission attended by him/her. (Ord. 2017-06, 2-28-2017)
1-7-6: VILLAGE CLERK:
It shall be the duty of the village clerk:
A. To attend all meetings of the board of trustees.
B. To keep a full record of the board's proceedings in the journal of the board.
C. To record in a book to be kept for that purpose all ordinances which are passed by the board.
D. To post in three (3) public places in the village copies of such ordinances as are required by law to be
published, within ten (10) days after the passage thereof, or cause the same to be published in
pamphlet form, or in some newspaper of general circulation published in the village.
E. To make at the foot of the record of each ordinance a memorandum of the date of its passage and of
publishing or posting thereof.
F. To keep and safely preserve all papers, books and documents pertaining to his office.
G. To have the custody and charge of the corporate seal and all papers, books, maps and documents
belonging to the village when not in actual use by some village officer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 88/649
H. To deliver, without delay, to the village president and board of trustees all communications and
documents addressed to the same which may come to his hands.
I. To provide, at the expense of the village, all necessary books and stationery for the use of the village
president and board of trustees.
J. To keep a correct account between the village and the treasurer by charging the treasurer with all
monies received by him as shown by his duplicate receipts accompanying the treasurer's monthly
reports, and crediting him with all monies paid out by him by order of the village president and board of
trustees, and such other credits as he may be entitled to by law and the village ordinances.
K. To make out and countersign all warrants drawn upon the treasurer by order of the village president
and board of trustees, and keep in his office memoranda thereof showing the date of each order, the
amount, in whose favor and for what purpose the same was drawn.
L. To perform such other acts in addition to the above as are now or hereafter may be required of him by
the ordinances of the village or resolution of the village president and board of trustees. (1904 Code
§ 29.3)
1-7-7: VILLAGE TREASURER:
It shall be the duty of the village treasurer:
A. To receive all monies belonging to the village, and to keep correct and true account of the same in an
intelligible manner, showing when and for whom and on what account received, and when, to whom
and on what account paid out, keeping a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the
debits and credits belonging thereto.
B. To give every person paying money to the treasury a receipt therefor specifying the date of payment
and upon what account paid, copies of which receipts he shall file with the village clerk at the date of
his monthly reports.
C. To render to the village president and board of trustees at each regular monthly meeting of the same a
report, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such report and the balance of
money in the treasury, which report he shall accompany with a detailed statement of all monies
received into the treasury from the date of the preceding monthly report, together with all warrants
redeemed and paid by him, which warrants he shall stamp or mark "paid", and he shall deliver the
same with any and all other vouchers held by him to the village clerk upon every day of such
settlement to be filed in the clerk's office.
D. To pay out all monies that may be ordered by the board of trustees, upon warrants signed by the
village president of the board and countersigned by the village clerk, and keep a register of all
warrants redeemed and paid describing such warrants by showing the amount, number, the fund from
which paid, of each warrant and the name of the person to whom paid, and when paid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 89/649
E. To, annually between May 1 and May 10, make out and file with the village clerk a full and detailed
statement or account of all receipts and expenditures of the village as shown by the books of his
office, up to the date of the statement, and of all his transactions as village treasurer, and shall show in
such account the state of the treasury at the close of each fiscal year, which account the clerk of the
village shall immediately post in place of holding meetings of the board of trustees.
F. In addition to the duties herein enumerated, the village treasurer shall perform such other duties as now
are, or hereafter may be, required of him by ordinance of the village or by the laws of the state. (1904
Code § 29.4)
1-7-8: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
A. The duties of the village attorney shall be:
1. To prepare such ordinances as the same may be requested by the village board or any of its
members.
2. To confer with and advise the village board or any of its members on any legal matters.
3. To prosecute violations of its ordinances and in general to do everything in and about the premises
as may be designated from time to time by the village board. (Ord. 1931-1, 5-8-1931)
B. The salary of the village attorney shall be established by the village board. (1977 Code; amd. 1997
Code)
1-7-9: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND, AGENT:
The village treasurer is hereby appointed the authorized agent for the village in the performance of all
duties in regard to the administration of the Illinois municipal retirement fund act, effective May 7, 1973.
He shall have the following powers and duties as such agent:
A. To certify to the fund whether or not a person is authorized to participate in the fund.
B. To file a petition for nomination, and to case the ballot for election of an executive trustee of the fund.
C. To certify to the fund that a participating employee is on an authorized leave of absence. (Res. 73-6, 5-
7-1973; amd. 1977 Code)
1-7-10: LIONS PARK DIRECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-26, 7-26-2016)
1-7-11: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
The office of village administrator is hereby created subject to the provisions of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 90/649
A. Qualifications: The village administrator shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with
special reference to specific professional education for, actual experience in, and knowledge of
accepted practice in respect to the administration of local government and to the duties of the office as
specified below. The appointment shall be made without consideration of the candidate's race, sex,
politics, or religious beliefs. The person appointed to this office need not be a resident of the village or
of the state of Illinois at the time of appointment. Neither the village president nor any member of the
village board shall receive such appointment during their term of office or within two (2) years after the
expiration of that term.
B. Employment Contract; Term: The village administrator shall be employed by contract, the terms of
which shall be agreed upon by both the village administrator and a majority of the corporate authorities
of the village. The term of the village administrator shall be for no less than one year and no longer
than the term of the village president holding office at the time the contract is entered.
C. Compensation: The rate of compensation of the village administrator shall be set by the village
president and board of trustees and may be adjusted from time to time as the village board deems
appropriate. Subject to the terms and conditions of state law and this section, the village board and the
administrator shall enter into an employment contract which specifies in writing the level of
compensation and other appropriate agreements describing the working relationship between the
administrator and the village board.
D. Removal: The village administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the village president and the board of
trustees. The administrator may be removed from office by the village president with the advice and
consent of four (4) members of the board of trustees.
E. Oath And Bond: Before entering upon the duties of this office, the village administrator shall furnish a
bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the board of trustees, but not to be
less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). The cost of such bond shall be paid by the village.
Before entering upon the duties of this office, the village administrator shall take and subscribe the
oath prescribed by the statutes of the state of Illinois in such case provided.
F. Temporary Absence: During the temporary absence or disability of the village administrator, the village
president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees may designate some qualified person to
act as village administrator until such time as the village administrator returns to duty.
G. Powers And Duties: The village administrator under and subject to the direction of the village president
and the board of trustees shall be the chief administrator of the village and shall be responsible to the
village president and board of trustees for the proper administration of the affairs of the village. To that
end, the village administrator shall have the authority and shall be required to:
1. On behalf of the village president and board of trustees, administer, supervise and control the affairs
of the village in accordance with the policies set by the village president and board of trustees.
2. Cooperate with such advisory boards and commissions that the village board has and shall create
at the direction from the village board.
3. Supervise and coordinate the work of all departments of the village in accordance with policies set
by the president and board of trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 91/649
4. Recommend for appointment, promotion, and dismissal the department heads and all personnel
necessary to fill all positions created by the village board which are vacant.
5. Receive and investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the
government of the village and the services maintained by the public utilities in the village and see
that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed.
6. Purchase all materials, supplies and equipment subject to and pursuant to directives of the village
board and within the bounds of the appropriations. These purchases shall be subject to and conform
with the law as set forth in the statutes of the state of Illinois, especially those laws pertaining to the
creation of liabilities against the village and pertaining to the expenditure of monies appropriated by
the village. The village administrator shall make all necessary purchases of supplies and equipment
for all departments of the village and for that purpose is authorized to make expenditures of up to
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) without preliminary authorization of the village board.
All expenditures are subject to the confirmation or approval of the village board and must be limited
to the budget or special appropriation. The village administrator may propose rules and regulations
governing requisitions and the transaction of the business of purchasing between himself as
purchasing agent and the heads of departments, officers and employees of the village.
7. Prepare or cause to be prepared on or before April 1 of each year a budget report indicating the
funds necessary to defray the estimated expenses of the village for the fiscal year:
a. Prepare or cause to be prepared the annual appropriation ordinance in time for consideration and
enactment by the village board as required by statute.
b. Prepare or cause to be prepared the annual tax levy. Nothing herein set forth shall give the village
administrator powers not permitted by professional ethics and standards.
8. Promptly following the end of the fiscal year, submit to the village board a complete report on the
finances and administrative activities of the village for said fiscal year.
9. Each month present to the village board a joint statement with the village treasurer showing the
financial condition of the village as of the end of the preceding month and showing expended
amounts and unexpended balances for each department in accordance with the annual budget.
10. Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the village and location of such
property. The village administrator shall be responsible for the care and the custody of all village
property which is not by statute or ordinance assigned to some other officer or body for caring and
control.
11. Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties, or in the case of a part time village
administrator, shall devote the time agreed upon with the village to the discharge of his official
duties.
12. Submit to the village board all matters requiring village board action or attention. All offices and
departments shall submit all matters requiring village board action or attention to the village
administrator. All requests by the village board of employees or departments relating to the village
board's administrative supervision and control of the affairs of the village and employees shall be
submitted to the village administrator who shall then act on behalf of the village board in accordance
with the board's direction.
13. Attend all meetings of the village board. The village administrator shall have the right to take part in
the discussion of all matters coming before the village board, but shall have no right to vote. (Ord.
1999-14, 6-8-1999)
1-7-12: BUDGET OFFICER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 92/649
A. Adoption Of Budget Law: The village of Minooka hereby adopts sections 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of
the Illinois municipal code1 to establish a budget officer, to be designated by the village president with
the approval of the corporate authorities. The budget officer shall take an oath and post a bond as
provided in section 3.1-10-25 of the Illinois municipal code2.
B. Position Established: The position of village budget officer is hereby established as an officer of the
village of Minooka. The village administrator shall serve as village budget officer.
C. Duties: The village budget officer shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting,
accounting and other fiscal management procedures in all village departments, commissions and
boards.
2. To compile an annual budget in accordance with state law governing the compilation and contents
of budgets3.
3. To examine all books and records of all village departments, commissions and boards which relate
to monies received by the village, its departments, commissions and boards; and paid out by the
village, its departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable; and amounts
owed by or to the village, its departments, commissions and boards.
4. To obtain such additional information from the village, its departments, commissions and boards as
may be useful to the village budget officer for purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such
information to be furnished by the village, its departments, commissions and boards in the form
required by the village budget officer. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make
such information as is requested of it available to the village budget officer shall not be permitted to
make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the village until such department, commission,
or board has complied in full with the request of the village budget officer.
5. To establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the
village, its departments, commissions or boards except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 2003-05,
2-11-2003)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE ELECTIONS
1-8-1: ELECTION REGULATIONS:
The elections within the Village shall be conducted pursuant to 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (1977 Code)
1-8-2: INAUGURATION OF OFFICERS:
The terms of newly elected Village officers shall commence on the first day of May following the
proclamation of the results of the election within the Village at which such officers are elected. (Ord. 1987-
11, 9-28-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 93/649
Chapter 9
VILLAGE DEPOSITORIES
1-9-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
CIBC, BMO Harris Bank, NA, Illinois Funds, Heartland Bank, Busey Bank, Illinois Metropolitan Investment
Fund ("IMET"), First Midwest Bank, Illinois National Bank, Numark Credit Union, Charles Schwab, 5/3
Securities, Inc., Twin Oaks Savings Bank and Wells Fargo Bank are designated as depositories in which
the funds of the Village may be deposited to its credit by any officer, agent, or employee of the Village.
Any two (2) of the following persons are designated to sign checks withdrawing funds from such accounts
and said banks are hereby authorized and directed to honor, pay and charge the account of the Village all
checks and orders for the payment of money so drawn when so signed by both persons:
A. Village Treasurer.
B. Village Clerk.
C. Village President.
D. Village Administrator.
For the Police Department bank accounts, any two (2) of the following persons are designated to sign
checks withdrawing funds from such accounts and said banks are hereby authorized and directed to
honor, pay and charge the account of the Village all checks and orders for the payment of money so
drawn when so signed by both persons along with the persons noted above:
A. Police Chief.
B. Police Clerk Supervisor. (Ord. 2018-11, 5-22-2018)
Chapter 10
CORPORATE SEAL
1-10-1: DESIGN OF SEAL:
A seal, the margin or upper outer circle of which shall contain the words, VILLAGE OF MINOOKA,
ILLINOIS, the lower outer circle of which shall contain the words, GRUNDY, KENDALL & WILL
COUNTIES. The interior and center of said circle the words, VILLAGE SEAL, shall be the seal of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 94/649
corporation (village), to be used in all cases that have been or shall hereafter be provided by the laws of
the United States, the laws of the several respective states of the United States and the ordinances of the
village, and in all cases in which, by the laws and customs of nations, it is necessary to use a seal by a
village.
(Per correspondence dated 2-9-2017)
1-10-2: CUSTODY:
The corporate seal shall be and remain in the custody of the village clerk, to be used by the village clerk
and the village president as is provided in section 1-10-1 of this chapter. (1904 Code § 4.2)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-30 - SEXUAL HARASSMENT. Go to
new ordinance.
Chapter 11
PERSONNEL MANUAL
1-11-1: PERSONNEL MANUAL ADOPTED:
The "Personnel Manual Of The Village Of Minooka, Illinois, 2015", is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference, verbatim, with the same force and effect as if the same were fully set out herein. Said
personnel manual, which sets forth the personnel rules for the Minooka village employees, shall be and
remain on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-27-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 95/649
Chapter 12
COLLECTION CHARGE
1-12-1: COLLECTION CHARGE:
There is hereby imposed a collection charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) upon any person who shall
present a check or other payment instrument to the Village in payment of any of the fees and charges of
the Village as listed hereafter in the event such check or payment instrument is dishonored; a) because
the drawer of the check or payment instrument does not have sufficient funds on account with the bank or
other financial institution upon which the check or other payment instrument is drawn, or b) because a
stop order has been issued by one of the account owners with regard to the check or payment instrument.
The collection charge as set forth above shall be in addition to any other charge, fee or penalty imposed
by this Code, and may be imposed one time for each such check or payment instrument which is
presented to the Village and subsequently dishonored. The following fees and charges imposed by this
Code may be the subject of a collection charge as imposed by this regulation: charges for the collection of
garbage; fees for water service and sewer service connections; rates and charges for water services,
sewer services, or combined water and sewer services; water and sewer deposits; building permit fees;
charges and fees with regard to the inspection of buildings pursuant to the Minooka Building Code and
the Minooka Fire Prevention Code; fines or penalties as may be imposed for violations of the provisions of
this Code; and fees or charges with regard to any licenses or permits which may be issued pursuant to
this Code. (Ord. 1989-14, 10-10-1989)
Chapter 13
DEVELOPERS AND PROFESSIONAL FEES
1-13-1: PROFESSIONAL FEES PAID BY DEVELOPER:
A. Execution Of Agreement:
1. Initial Request: Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association or group requesting, seeking
or applying for a zoning change, annexation, subdivision, resubdivision, development,
redevelopment and the like shall at the time of the initiation of said request execute a professional
fee agreement with the village, on file in the office of the village clerk, as set forth in appendix A
attached to the ordinance codified herein, which is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2005-48,
10-25-2005)
2. Pending Actions: Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association or group who presently has
any pending matter with the village shall execute an agreement in the form as described in
subsection A1 of this section before the village will proceed further in any respect with the
development. (Ord. 1996-4, 2-13-1996)
3. Payment Of Fees: The developer shall pay the village any and all professional staff fees, including
residential and nonresidential engineering fees and administrative costs, attorney fees and
architecture review fees, costs and expenses as set forth in the schedule attached as appendix B to
the ordinance codified herein, which is incorporated herein by reference. In the event the village
incurs fees that are not covered in appendix B, the developer shall pay such professional staff fees,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 96/649
costs, and expenses as may be billed by the village pursuant to the payment terms as set forth in
appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2005-48, 10-25-2005)
B. Issuance/Renewal:
1. Prior to the consideration, issuance, granting or renewal of any license, permit, approval or
inspection required under any provision of this code, the village department or employee charged
with the duty to issue or renew such license or permit, or conduct inspections, shall contact the
finance department to determine whether any monies are due and owing in excess of sixty (60)
days to the village from the applicant in relation to the project in regard to which the license or permit
is intended to be used. If monies are found to be due and owing the village in excess of sixty (60)
days, said license, permit, approval, or inspection shall not be issued, renewed, or approved until all
monies due and owing to the village have been paid in full, and the finance department so certifies.
2. If the finance department contacts an employee who issues or renews such license or permit, or
conducts inspections for a project that monies in excess of sixty (60) days are owed, said license,
permit, approval, or inspection shall not be issued, renewed, or approved until all monies due and
owing to the village have been paid in full, and the finance department so certifies.
C. Appeals: Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association or group desiring to challenge a bill,
fee or expense issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal the bill, fee or
expense to the finance committee within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the invoice. The appeal
must be in writing and shall contain a specific request for a hearing. If a hearing is requested, a
hearing before the finance committee shall take place at the next regular meeting of the finance
committee, but not earlier than fourteen (14) days after the written appeal is submitted. The finance
committee shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14) days of the hearing. Where a hearing is
not requested, the appealing party shall submit all supporting documentation with the written appeal
and the finance committee shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14) days after the
consideration of the appeal at a regular meeting of the finance committee. The failure to file a written
appeal shall be deemed to approve the amount(s) owed and/or services performed.
D. Nonexclusivity Of Remedy: Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the village shall have all
other rights and remedies as may be available to it at law or equity for violations of this section.
E. Incorporation Into Titles 3, 4, 5 And 6: The provisions of subsections B, C and D of this section are
expressly incorporated by reference into titles 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this code and shall apply to all monies
owed pursuant to those provisions and any regulations or rules adopted in conjunction therewith. (Ord.
2005-11, 3-22-2005)
1-13-2: DISCLOSURE OF OWNERSHIP INTEREST:
A. Application: Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership or group requesting, seeking or applying for a zoning change,
annexation, subdivision, resubdivision, development, redevelopment, preliminary plat, preliminary
PUD, final plat, final PUD, site plan review, special use, or variation, shall certify and file with the
village clerk a disclosure of ownership interest application. The application shall contain such
information as the village administrator may from time to time provide, including, but not limited to, the
following information:
1. The nature of the benefit sought;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 97/649
2. The nature and characteristics of the applicant;
3. The name and address of each person or entity who is at least a five percent (5%) shareholder in
the case of a corporation, a beneficiary in the case of a trust or land trust, a joint venture in the case
of a joint venture, general and limited partners in the case of a partnership or limited partnership,
members in the case of a limited liability company, or who otherwise had a proprietary interest,
interest in profits and losses, or right to control such entity (if applicable), and attach documentation
to corroborate ownership interest. If the applicant includes a land trust or trust, you must attach a
sworn statement from the trustee listing the beneficiaries;
4. Person making the disclosure on behalf of the applicant; and
5. A statement under oath that the applicant has withheld no disclosures as to economic interests in
the undertaking nor reserved any information, data or plan as to the intended use or purpose for
which it seeks village action.
B. Information To Be Kept Current: All disclosures and information shall be current as of the date upon
which the application is presented to the village, and shall be maintained current until such time as the
village shall take final action on the application.
C. Failure To Comply: Any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall render any ordinance,
ordinance amendment, village board approval or other village action on behalf of the applicant failing
to comply, voidable at the option of a majority of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2007-43, 9-11-2007)
Chapter 14
BIDDING AND CONTRACTING PROCEDURES
1-14-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED:
Any work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment
or special taxation, and all purchases, orders or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or certain
other contractual services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever possible on
competitive bids. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-2: FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE:
All work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation, and all purchases, orders, or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual
services except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall be purchased from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice
inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Village Board of
Trustees then holding office. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-21-2017)
1-14-3: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR BIDS:
A notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper with general circulation within the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 98/649
Village. The Village shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the public
bulletin board in the Village office. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-4: SCOPE OF NOTICE:
The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the work to be performed or
the articles to be purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and shall specify the time
and place for opening bids. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-5: BID DEPOSITS:
When deemed necessary by the Village, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting
bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of the
contract by the Board of Trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit to the Village upon
failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten (10) days after the award.
Such bid deposit may be in the form of a certified check, bond, or letter of credit in an amount as specified
in the advertisement for bids to ensure finalization of the contract and to indemnify the Village against all
loss, damages, and claims that may accrue against the Village as a consequence of the granting of the
contract. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-6: BID OPENING PROCEDURE:
A. Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Village and shall be identified as bids on the envelope.
B. Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice.
C. Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the Village Board of Trustees or by a
Village employee in which event a tabulation of the bids shall be furnished to the Board of Trustees at
its next meeting. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-7: REJECTION OF BIDS:
The Village, through its Corporate Authorities, shall have the authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids
when the public interest will be served thereby. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-8: BIDDERS IN DEFAULT TO VILLAGE:
The Village shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of any taxes,
licenses, or other monies due the Village. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-9: AWARD OF CONTRACT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 99/649
A. Authority In Village: The Village shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this
section.
B. Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder on the basis
of the bid that is in the best interest of the Village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to
price, the Village shall consider:
1. The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required;
2. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time
specified, without delay or interference;
3. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder;
4. The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services;
5. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the
contract or service;
6. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide
the service;
7. The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use
required;
8. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the
contract; (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
9. Compliance with prequalification requirements of the Village or the Village Engineer; (Ord. 2006-28,
7-11-2006)
10. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998; amd. Ord.
2006-28, 7-11-2006)
11. All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in Illinois;
12. Evidence of compliance with:
a. Federal employer tax identification number or social security number (for individuals), and
b. Provision of section 2000(e) of chapter 21, title 42 of the United States Code and Federal
executive order 11246 as amended by executive order 11375 (known as the equal opportunity
employer provisions);
13. Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverage: general liability, workers' compensation,
completed operations, automobile, hazardous occupation, product liability and professional liability;
14. Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act (the "Act"), including wages,
medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those trades as covered in the Act; and
15. Participation in apprenticeship and training programs approved and registered with the United
States Department of Labor's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training for each of the trades of work
contemplated under the awarded contract. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-22-2009)
C. Performance Bonds: The Village shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before
entering into a contract, in such amounts as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 100/649
interest of the Village and to conform to the statutory requirements for such bonds. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-
26-1998)
1-14-10: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE:
All work and purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and services of less than the estimated value of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may be made in the open market, without newspaper
advertisement and without observing the procedures prescribed by this chapter for the award of formal
contracts in such a manner so as to ensure the best interest of the public after solicitation of bids or
proposals by mail, telephone, facsimile transmission, or otherwise. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-21-2017)
1-14-11: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES EXEMPT FROM BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, land planners,
real estate appraisers, and architects, and any other profession whose ethical code prohibits or
discourages involvement in normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by the Village without
observing the bidding procedures prescribed by this chapter for the award of formal contracts.
Regular employment contracts for Municipal service shall likewise be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-12: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials,
equipment or services, the Village shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials, equipment or services regardless of
the amount of the expenditure. A finding of such an emergency shall be made by an affirmative vote of at
least two-thirds (2/3) of the Village Board of Trustees at the time of such emergency contract or no later
than the first regular Village Board meeting thereafter. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-13: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The Village shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans
when the best interests of the Village would be served thereby. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
Chapter 15
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
1-15-1: ADOPTION:
The state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq., is hereby
adopted as required by the act. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 101/649
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection,
nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in
a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice presidential
electors, but does not include activities relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action, relating to collective bargaining, or that are otherwise in furtherance of the
person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an
elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for
placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois
public labor relations act2.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee
that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment,
but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to
officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when
the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate
in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a
condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Minooka, whether on a full time or part time basis or
pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to
the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Minooka.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible
item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking
engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or
employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive compensation for
employment, service credit towards pension benefits, and health insurance benefits paid for by the
employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance,
regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or
any political organization, but does not include activities relating to the support or opposition of any
executive, legislative, or administrative action, relating to collective bargaining, or that are otherwise in
furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 102/649
incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the state board of elections or a
county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code4, but only with regard to those activities that require
filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
B. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or
receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of
value intended as a campaign contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for
elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine
probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against
any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection
with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other
campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action:
1. By an officer or
2. By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business:
1. With the officer or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 103/649
2. With an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated:
1. By the officer or
2. By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the
official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-3: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any
"compensated time", as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village of Minooka in connection with any prohibited political activity.
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform
any prohibited political activity as part of that officer's or employee's duties, as a condition of
employment, or during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in
consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in
consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity.
D. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in
as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a
voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
E. No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or in a
position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in aid programs,
shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an
officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-17,
5-11-2004)
1-15-4: GIFT BAN:
Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family
member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates
this section. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-5: EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 104/649
Section 1-15-4 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
A. Opportunities, benefits, and services available on the same conditions as for the general public.
B. Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the
fair market value.
C. Any contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or activities associated with a fundraising
event in support of a political organization or candidate.
D. Educational materials and missions.
E. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
F. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter,
brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
G. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has
reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position
or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of
the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship,
the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
1. The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift,
including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals;
2. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for
the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
3. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same
time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
H. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single
calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are consumed on the premises from which they
were purchased or prepared or catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
I. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or
employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 105/649
J. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this section, "intragovernmental
gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and
"intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of
another governmental entity.
K. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
L. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total
value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. (Ord.
2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-6: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or
employee, does not violate this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986,
as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-7: ETHICS ADVISOR:
A. The village administrator of the village of Minooka is appointed to serve as ethics advisor of the village.
This duty shall be in addition to the other duties as set forth in section 1-7-11 of this title.
B. The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the village of Minooka
concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this chapter and state ethics
laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the board of trustees.
(Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-8: ETHICS COMMISSION:
A. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ethics commission of the village of Minooka.
The commission shall be comprised of the village president and the two (2) village trustees with the
most years of service as members of the corporate authorities.
B. The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Upon receipt of a signed and notarized complaint alleging a violation of this chapter by any officer or
employee, to review, investigate, conduct hearings and act upon such complaints as provided in this
chapter or other applicable law. The commission shall act only upon the receipt of a complaint and
not upon its own prerogative.
2. To issue subpoenas and compel testimony and the production of documents and other tangible
things in accordance with Illinois law. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the village of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 106/649
Minooka to cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal
to cooperate with requests by the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.
When necessary or required by law, assistance may be requested from other appropriate agencies.
3. To promulgate rules for the conduct of investigatory proceedings, including procedural rules
consistent with the requirements of due process of law.
4. To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional
information and documents from persons who may have violated the provisions of this chapter.
5. The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this
chapter. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-9: COMPLAINTS:
A. Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter must be signed and notarized and shall be filed with the
ethics commission.
B. In the event that the alleged violator is a member of the commission, the alleged violator shall not serve
as a member of the commission for purposes of the pending investigation and hearing. The village
trustee not already a member of the commission with the next most years of service as a member of
the corporate authorities shall then serve as a member of the commission in the place of the
disqualified commissioner.
C. Within fourteen (14) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the commission shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed
against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within fourteen (14)
business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant
shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the hearing to determine the sufficiency of the
complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists.
D. Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the commission shall meet and conduct a
hearing. A quorum shall consist of two (2) commissioners, and official action by the commission shall
require the affirmative vote of two (2) members. The commission shall review the sufficiency of the
complaint and determine whether there is probable cause, based on all of the evidence. The
commission shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence at the hearing.
The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act.
E. The commission shall issue notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the complainant and
the respondent of the commission's ruling within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing.
The particular findings in the case shall be a matter of public information.
1. If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation and there is a determination of probable
cause, then the commission may request in writing that the attorney designated by the corporate
authorities prosecute such actions as a local ordinance violation. The commission shall also transmit
to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in its custody concerning the alleged
violation.
2. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of
probable cause, then the commission shall dismiss the complaint.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 107/649
F. The commission shall complete its investigation, hearing, and ruling within ninety (90) days after receipt
of the complaint.
G. A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed within one year after the alleged
violation. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-10: PENALTIES:
A. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-15-3 of this chapter may be punished by
a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than
three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00). A violation of section 1-15-3 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a
criminal offense by an attorney for the village of Minooka by filing in the circuit court an information,
signed by the complainant, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the
rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant
beyond a reasonable doubt.
B. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-15-4 of this chapter is subject to a fine in
an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). A violation of section 1-15-4 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney for the village of Minooka, signed by the complainant, charging such offense.
Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant by a preponderance of the
evidence.
C. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to
the local enforcement authorities, the commission, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement
official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
D. In addition to the penalties as set forth above, and any other penalty that may apply, whether criminal
or civil, an employee who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge;
provided, however, that no such action shall be taken except after all process due under applicable
federal, state, or local law is taken. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
Chapter 16
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
1-16-1: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED1:
A. There is hereby established a code hearing department. The function is to expedite the prosecution
and correction of ordinance violations in the manner as set forth in this chapter. The provisions as set
forth in this chapter are for the adjudication of village ordinances except for:
1. The standing and parking of vehicles, the condition and use of vehicle equipment, and the display of
wheel tax licenses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 108/649
2. Village, building code or zoning ordinances that establish construction, plumbing, heating, electrical,
fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in
the village or any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of
garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from
private property;
3. Building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1
et seq.; and
4. Any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles, and except for any reportable offense under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-204. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-2: DEFINITIONS2:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or an officer or agent of the village, other than a law
enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
A. Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists;
B. Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation;
C. Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence
introduced at the hearing; and
D. Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a code violation exists. (Ord.
2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-3: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE3:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-4: INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS4:
A. When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation finds a code violation to
exist, they shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates:
1. The name and address of the defendant,
2. The type and nature of the violation,
3. The date and time the violation was observed, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 109/649
4. The names of witnesses to the violation.
B. The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department where a docket number
shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces
provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty (40) days after the violation is reported. However, if the code violation involves a village ordinance
regulating truants, the hearing date shall not be less than seven (7) nor more than forty (40) days after
the violation is reported.
C. One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department
and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the
individual representing the village in the case so that they may prepare evidence of the code violation
for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served
by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the
hearing. If the violation report form requires the respondent to answer within a certain amount of time,
the village must reply to the answer within the same amount of time afforded to the respondent. (Ord.
2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-5: SUBPOENAS5:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of
either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-6: DEFAULTS6:
If on the date set for hearing the defendant or their attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find
the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence
of a code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-7: CONTINUANCES7:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this chapter except in
cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under
this chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-8: REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS8:
The case for the village may be presented by an attorney designated by the village or by any other village
employee, except that the case for the village shall not be presented by an employee of the code hearing
department. The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant, their attorney, or any other
agent or representative of the defendant. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE9:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 110/649
At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant
to the existence or nonexistence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-10: QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS10:
A. Prior to conducting proceedings, hearing officers shall successfully complete a formal training program
that includes the following:
1. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will conduct;
2. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will administer;
3. Observation of administrative hearings; and
4. Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and issuing final orders.
B. In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for
at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-11: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER11:
A. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall
be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision, and order
shall include:
1. The hearing officer's findings of fact;
2. A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and
3. An order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved.
B. A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter shall not exceed the amount as set forth in
section 1-4-1 of this title. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the defendant
within five (5) days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and
summons are served under section 1-16-4 of this chapter. Payment of any penalty or fine and the
disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in this code, unless the corporate
authorities provide otherwise. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-12: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW12:
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of
Grundy County. The provisions of the administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto,
shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision, and order of a
hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 111/649
1-16-13: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER13:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed,
remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under
the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected
in accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be
sought for a final determination of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the
circuit court of Grundy County for purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision, and order.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file
a certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that
recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance with this
chapter and the applicable village ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may
be by any method provided for by 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the
findings, decision, and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the
court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the applicable village ordinance and that the defendant had an
opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial review as provided in this chapter:
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against the defendant for the amount
indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect
and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
2. The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the village to
enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
Chapter 17
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION1
1-17-1: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VIOLATIONS OF TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE STANDING, PARKING, OR CONDITION OF
VEHICLES:
A. There is hereby established a system of administrative adjudication. The function is to provide for the
fair and efficient enforcement of village regulations through the administrative adjudication of violations
of village ordinances in the manner set forth in this chapter. The provisions as set forth in this chapter
are for the administrative adjudication of:
1. The standing and parking of vehicles;
2. The condition and use of vehicle equipment; and
3. The display of wheel tax licenses.
B. The system of administrative adjudication shall only have authority to adjudicate civil offenses carrying
fines not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or requiring the completion of a traffic education
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 112/649
program, or both. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMPLIANCE VIOLATION: A violation of a village regulation governing the condition or use of equipment
on a vehicle or governing the display of a wheel tax license.
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: An administrator who is authorized to:
A. Adopt, distribute and process parking and compliance violation notices and other notices;
B. Collect money paid as fines and penalties for violation of parking and compliance ordinances;
C. Operate an administrative adjudication system; and
D. Make a certified report to the secretary of state under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-3: VIOLATION NOTICE:
A. A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice shall specify:
1. The date, time, and place of violation of a parking, standing, or compliance regulation;
2. The particular regulation violated;
3. Any requirement to complete a traffic education program;
4. The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment or failure to complete a required
traffic education program, or both;
5. The vehicle make and state registration number; and
6. The identification number of the person issuing the notice.
B. The violation notice shall also:
1. State that the completion of any required traffic education program, the payment of any indicated
fine, and the payment of any applicable penalty for late payment or failure to complete a required
traffic education program, or both, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
2. Contain information as to the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its
merits; and
3. Specify the time and manner in which a hearing may be had. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-4: SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 113/649
A. Service of the parking, standing, or compliance violation notice shall be by affixing the original or a
facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully parked vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a
vehicle if they are present.
B. A person authorized by ordinance to issue and serve parking, standing, and compliance violation
notices shall certify as to the correctness of the facts entered on the violation notice by signing their
name to the notice at the time of service or in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device,
by signing a single certificate to be kept by the traffic compliance administrator attesting to the
correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was under their control.
C. The original or a facsimile of the violation notice or, in the case of a notice produced by a computerized
device, a printed record generated by the device showing the facts entered on the notice, shall be
retained by the traffic compliance administrator, and shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of
business.
D. A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance with this
chapter, a copy of the notice, or the computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall
be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The notice, copy, or
computer generated record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-5: HEARING:
A. An opportunity for an administrative hearing shall be granted for the registered owner of the vehicle or
the lessee of a vehicle under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306 cited in the parking, standing, or
compliance violation notice to contest the merits of the alleged violation.
B. Formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing.
C. The hearings shall be recorded.
D. The person conducting the hearing on behalf of the traffic compliance administrator shall be
empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers.
E. Persons appearing at a hearing under this chapter may be represented by counsel at their expense.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-6: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
Service of additional notices, sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the
registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office
approved database, or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306 or 5/11-208.6(p) to the lessee of the cited
vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease or, if any notice to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 114/649
that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post
office approved database. The service shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United
States mail. The notices shall be in the following sequence and shall include, but not be limited to, the
information specified herein:
A. Second Notice: A second notice of parking, standing, or compliance violation shall specify:
1. The date and location of the violation cited in the parking, standing, or compliance violation notice;
2. The particular regulation violated;
3. The vehicle make and state registration number;
4. Any requirement to complete a traffic education program;
5. The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment or failure to complete a traffic
education program, or both;
6. The availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits;
7. The time and manner in which the hearing may be had;
8. That the failure to complete a required traffic education program, to pay the indicated fine and any
applicable penalty, or to appear at a hearing on the merits in the time and manner specified, will
result in a final determination of violation liability for the cited violation in the amount of the fine or
penalty indicated; and
9. That, upon the occurrence of a final determination of violation liability for the failure, and the
exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any
incomplete traffic education program or any unpaid fine or penalty, or both, will constitute a debt due
and owing the village.
B. Final Notice: A notice of final determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability shall
be sent following a final determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability and the
conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under this chapter. The notice shall:
1. State that the incomplete traffic education program or the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, is a debt
due and owing the village; and
2. Contain warnings that failure to complete any required traffic education program or to pay any fine
or penalty due and owing the village, within the time specified may result in the village's filing of a
petition in the circuit court to have the incomplete traffic education program or unpaid fine or penalty,
or both, rendered a judgment as provided by this chapter, or may result in suspension of the
person's driver's license for failure to complete a traffic education program or to pay fines or
penalties, or both, for ten (10) or more parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
306.5. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-7: FINAL DETERMINATIONS OF VIOLATION LIABILITY:
A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to complete the required traffic
education program or to pay the fine or penalty, or both, after a hearing officer's determination of violation
liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures provided by
ordinance. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and
manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of violation liability shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 115/649
become final: a) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or b) upon expiration of
the period for filing the petition without a filing having been made. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-8: NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for failure to complete
a required traffic education program or to pay any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on
ten (10) or more parking violations. The notice shall state that failure to complete a required traffic
education program or to pay the fine or penalty owing, or both, within forty five (45) days of the notice's
date will result in the village notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5. The notice shall also state that
the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a selfaddressed,
stamped envelope to the village along with a request for the photostatic copy. The notice of
impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to
the address recorded with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is returned as
undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database. (Ord.
2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-9: PETITION TO SET ASIDE:
A. A petition to set aside a determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability that may be
filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty. A petition to set aside a determination of liability may
also be filed by a person required to complete a traffic education program. The petition shall be filed
with and ruled upon by the traffic compliance administrator in the manner and within the time specified
by ordinance. The grounds for the petition may be limited to:
1. The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice
was issued;
2. The person having already completed the required traffic education program or paid the fine or
penalty, or both, for the violation in question; and
3. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
B. After the determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability has been set aside upon a
showing of just cause, the registered owner shall be provided with a hearing on the merits for that
violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-10: PROCEDURES FOR NONRESIDENTS:
Procedures by which persons who are not residents of the village may contest the merits of the alleged
violation without attending a hearing. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-11: SCHEDULE OF FINES:
A schedule of civil fines for violations of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulations enacted by
ordinance pursuant to this chapter, and a schedule of penalties for late payment of the fines or failure to
complete required traffic education programs, provided, however, that the total amount of the fine and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 116/649
penalty for any one violation shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), except as provided in
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(c). (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-12: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
Judicial review of final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violations and final
administrative decisions issued after hearings regarding vehicle immobilization and impoundment made
under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the administrative review law. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-
20-2011)
1-17-13: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
A. Any fine, penalty, incomplete traffic education program, or part of any fine or any penalty remaining
unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies and the conclusion of
any judicial review procedures shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law. Completion of any required traffic education program and
payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall
constitute a final disposition of that violation.
B. After the expiration of the period within which judicial review may be sought for a final determination of
parking, standing, or compliance violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court
of Grundy County for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the final determination of violation. Nothing
in this chapter shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple final determinations of parking,
standing, or compliance violations against a person in a proceeding. Upon commencement of the
action, the village shall file a certified copy or record of the final determination of parking, standing, or
compliance violation, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show
that the final determination of violation was issued in accordance with this chapter and the applicable
village ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided
by 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that
the total amount of fines and penalties for final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance
violations does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that
the final determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation was entered in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter and the applicable village ordinance, and that the registered owner or
the lessee, as the case may be, had an opportunity for an administrative hearing and for judicial
review as provided in this chapter, the court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against
the registered owner or the lessee for the amount indicated in the final determination of parking,
standing, or compliance violation, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be
enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-
2011)
Chapter 18
BUILDING CODE ADJUDICATION
1-18-1: ADJUDICATION OF BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
There is hereby established a system of building code adjudication. The function is to expedite the
prosecution and correction of building code violations as set forth in this chapter. The provisions as set
forth in this chapter are for the administrative adjudication of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 117/649
A. Any village, building code or zoning ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating,
electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to
structures in the village; and
B. Any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and
debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-2: DEFINITIONS1:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: A full time state, county or village employee whose duties include the inspection
or examination of structures or property in the village to determine if zoning or other code violations exist.
CODE: Any village, building code or zoning ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating,
electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures
in the village or any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of
garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private
property.
HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or an officer or agent of the village, other than a building
inspector or law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
A. Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists;
B. Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the building owner and all
interested parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;
C. Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence
introduced at the hearing;
D. Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists.
PROPERTY OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a structure. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-3: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE2:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-4: INSTITUTING BUILDING CODE ADJUDICATION PROCEEDINGS3:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 118/649
A. When a building inspector finds a code violation while inspecting a structure, they shall note the
violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the
structure owner, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time the violation was observed, the
names of witnesses to the violation, and the address of the structure where the violation is observed.
B. The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building inspector to the building code adjudication
department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date
noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less
than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported by the building inspector.
C. One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the building code adjudication
department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to
the building inspector so that they may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the
hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail on the
owner of the structure, along with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the
name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made
by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on
the front door of the structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the
hearing is scheduled. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-5: SUBPOENAS4:
At any time prior to the hearing date the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of
the building inspector or the attorney for the village, or the owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas
directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-6: DEFAULTS5:
If on the date set for hearing the owner or his attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the
owner in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a
code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-7: CONTINUANCES6:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this chapter except in
cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-8: REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS7:
The case for the village may be presented by the building inspector, by any other village employee or by
an attorney designated by the village. However, in no event shall the case for the village be presented by
an employee of the building code adjudication department. The case for the dwelling owner may be
presented by the owner, their attorney, or any other agent or representative. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 119/649
1-18-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE8:
At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant
to the existence or nonexistence of a code violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-10: EVICTION; RIGHTS OF THE OCCUPANTS9:
No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding
shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees
to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-11: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS10:
It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this chapter if the owner, their attorney, or any
other agent or representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
A. The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing the violation
has been remedied or removed;
B. The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable
attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue
to cause the violations;
C. An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or their agent to all or a part of
the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-12: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER11:
At the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in
writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order shall
include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon
the findings of fact, and an order, ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case, in the
event a violation is not proved. If a code violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that
are provided in the code for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be
served on the owner within five (5) days after they are issued; service shall be in the same manner as the
report form and summons are served pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-4. Payment of
any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in this code,
unless the corporate authorities adopting this chapter provide otherwise. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-13: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW12:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 120/649
county where the village is located, and the provisions of the administrative review law, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of
the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-14: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER13:
A. Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed
remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under
the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected
in accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be
sought for a final determination of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the
circuit court of Grundy County for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and
order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions
and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village
shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in
accordance with this chapter and the applicable village ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy
of the petition may be by any method provided by 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs
imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order were entered in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and the applicable village ordinance, and that the property owner
had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial review as provided in this chapter:
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against the property owner for the
amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same
effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and
2. The court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are requested by the village to
enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-15: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER AND PROPERTY14:
The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village as the result of a finding of
a code violation under this chapter shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so
that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the
property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings,
decision and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-16: LIABILITY FOR RENT COLLECTED DURING TIME OF VIOLATION15:
A. The owner of a building located in a village in a county having a population in excess of one hundred
thousand (100,000) inhabitants who, directly or indirectly, has collected, or caused to be collected,
rentals from an occupant of that building during a period in which the number of apartments or family
units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that building by an ordinance of the village in
which the building is located, is liable to any such occupant in an amount equal to not more than three
(3) times the amount of any rentals paid by any such occupant, or in their behalf, after January 1,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 121/649
1970, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees. If the occupant is a recipient of public
aid under 305 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-1 et seq., 5/4-1 et seq., or 5/6-1 et seq., in whose behalf
vendor payment of the rental was made by the Illinois department of public aid, the department of
human services (acting as successor to the department of public aid under 20 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 1305/1-1 et seq.), or a local governmental unit, as the case may be, the liability as herein
provided is to the Illinois department of public aid, the department of human services (acting as
successor to the department of public aid under the department of human services act), or the local
governmental unit making the vendor payment of the rental.
B. For the purposes of this section:
FAMILY UNIT: A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The fact that any such family unit is used or intended to be used
with cooking or eating accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building does
not affect liability hereunder.
OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a building.
C. No liability accrues under this section until thirty (30) days after the owner of record of a building has
been notified in writing that such owner is in violation of any such village ordinance. Such notice shall
be personally served upon such owner of record or sent by registered mail to the last known address
of such owner. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-17: MAINTENANCE OF VACANT RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE16:
A. A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its agencies, including, without limitation,
the department of housing and urban development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be
responsible for maintaining the property to prevent and correct village health and safety code
violations.
B. A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined not
less than five hundred one dollars ($501.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CREATED, MEMBERS:
A Plan Commission for the Village is hereby created under the authority of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-12-4. For the purposes of this Code, the Plan Commission shall be known as the Planning and
Zoning Commission. A Board of Appeals for the Village is hereby created under the authority of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-3. For the purposes of this Code, the Board of Appeals shall be known as the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 122/649
Planning and Zoning Commission. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees to create a single commission
to serve the function of a "Plan Commission" and "Board of Appeals", as those functions are defined by
statute. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, to be appointed from
citizens of the Village by the Village President of the Board of Trustees, with the consent and approval of
the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The seven (7) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve respectively the following
terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five
(5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for seven (7) years, the successor to each member so appointed
to serve for a term of five (5) years. In the event vacancies occur, other than by expiration of terms,
appointments shall only be for the remaining term of the position so vacated. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
As soon as possible after their appointment, the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
organize by the election of a chairman and secretary and such other officers as may in their judgment be
necessary. All the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive compensation of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission attended by that
member. If the Planning and Zoning Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or
service, it may do so upon authority from the Board of Trustees and appropriation by the Board of
Trustees therefor. The Village Clerk shall keep the minutes, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, prepare the reports and perform all other administrative matters
involving the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the
Planning and Zoning Commission without additional compensation. (Ord. 1995-19, 6-13-1995)
2-1-4: POWERS:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers, jurisdiction, and authority: (Ord.
1993-12, 8-24-1993)
A. To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees a comprehensive plan of public improvements
looking to the present and future development of the Village, which plan shall be known as the official
plan of the Village. Such plan shall include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys
and public grounds in unsubdivided land situated within the corporate limits of the Village and in
contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond such corporate limits, and not
included in any city, village or incorporated town. Such requirements shall be effective whenever this
unsubdivided land is subdivided after the adoption of such plan. (Ord. 1961-1, 1-17-1961)
B. To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees from time to time such changes in the plan as the
Planning and Zoning Commission may deem necessary and to report and make recommendations to
the Board of Trustees with respect to any other suggested changes about which the Board of Trustees
may desire information; provided, however, that such changes shall not affect the general principles of
the Plan as adopted. (Ord. 1961-1, 1-17-1961; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 123/649
C. To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees, from time to time, plans for specific
improvements pursuant to such official plan.
D. To give aid to the officials of the Village charged with the direction of projects for improvements
embraced within the official plan, to further the making of such projects and generally to promote the
realization of the official plan.
E. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by the statute, as may be conferred by
the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1961-1, 1-17-1961)
F. To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of the text and map
comprising the zoning regulations, and to make reports of its recommendations to the Board of
Trustees not less frequently than annually.
G. To hear and decide on appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Building and Zoning Officer or other authorized official of the Village having jurisdiction under the
Zoning Title (Title 5 of this Code).
H. To receive copies of all applications for proposed variations from this Code, and to hold public hearings
on those proposed variations in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in this Title.
I. To receive all applications for proposed amendments to this Code, and to hold public hearings on those
proposed amendments in the matter and subject to the standard set forth in this Title.
J. To receive all applications for proposed conditional permitted uses, and to hold public hearings on those
conditional permitted uses in the matter and subject to the standards set forth in this Title.
K. To hear and decide upon all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the Zoning
Title, in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2-1-5: MAPS, PLATS OF SUBDIVISION:
No map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the
Village, and in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond such corporate
limits, and not included in any city, village or incorporated town, after the adoption of the official plan, shall
be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shown shall provide for streets, alleys
and public grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable thereto1. (Ord. 1961-1, 1-17-1961)
2-1-6: MEETINGS AND RULES:
All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such
times and places within the Village as the Planning and Zoning Commission may determine. All testimony
by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the Zoning Title shall be given under oath. The chairman, or in
his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to the public. The Planning and Zoning
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 124/649
Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and the concurring vote of four (4) members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Building and Zoning Officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter which
is authorized by the Zoning Title to render a decision.
Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall immediately be filed in the office of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be a public record. In the performance of its duties, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may incur such expenditures as shall be authorized by the Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
Chapter 2
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Minooka EMA to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or
manmade disaster, in accordance with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act1.
The EMA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the
Coordinator. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-2: COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator of the Village EMA shall be appointed by the Village President and shall serve until
removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation
of the EMA, subject to the direction and control of the Village President as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the Coordinator, the Village
President or any person designated by him, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is
made as provided in this Chapter. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Village EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the Village as shall be prescribed in and by the
State EMA plan and program prepared by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may
be promulgated by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as
may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or
quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the State EMA Act. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the Village EMA organization may be designated as members of a mobile support
team created by the Director of the State EMA as provided by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 125/649
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Coordinator of the Village EMA
organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by
the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights
and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State reasonable compensation as
provided by law. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of EMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other villages or political subdivisions
of the State, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village Board of
Trustees and by the State Director of EMA. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the
United States or the occurrence within the State of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or
other hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Village EMA to
cooperate fully with the State EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as
provided by law. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called for training by the State
Director of EMA, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the
position held; members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for such training time
such compensation as may be established by the President. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the State to
the Village for expenses incident to training members of the EMA prescribed by the State Director of
EMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of EMA, as provided by law,
and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to EMA activities as provided by law. (1977
Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Board of Trustees, on recommendation of the Village Coordinator of EMA, may authorize any
purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively any disaster
resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and
safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from
manmade or natural disaster.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 126/649
In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator of EMA is authorized, on behalf of
the Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized by the State EMA Act,
provided that if the Village Board of Trustees meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village EMA organization shall, before entering
upon his duties subscribe the following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
"I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions
and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Minooka EMA organization, I will not advocate nor become a member
of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States
or of this State by force or violence."
(1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-11: OFFICE:
The Village President is authorized to designate space in a Village building, or elsewhere, as may be
provided for by the Village President for the Village EMA as its office. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
Chapter 3
RECREATION BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-27, 7-26-2016)
Chapter 4
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD
2-4-1: FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created and established a police pension fund in and for the village of Minooka, Grundy
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 127/649
County, Kendall County and Will County, Illinois, in accordance with 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101
et seq. (article 3 of the Illinois pension code). (Ord. 2001-17, 9-25-2001)
2-4-2: BOARD CREATED; DUTIES:
A. For the purpose of this chapter the term "police" and "Board" or "Board of Trustees" are defined,
respectively, as full-time police officers or full-time police officers entitled to participate in the benefits
of said pension fund as provided by said article 3 of said Illinois pension code and the board of
trustees of said pension fund.
B. The rights, powers, duties and functions of said board and the members thereof, as such, and the
rights and benefits of the various beneficiaries of the pension fund shall be and are hereby declared to
be in accordance with the law and particularly of article 3 of the Illinois pension code and all
amendments thereof. (Ord. 2001-17, 9-25-2001)
2-4-3: APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION:
Such board shall be appointed and elected as therein provided; shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties that shall be required of them by law. All monies and securities belonging to said fund shall be
held by the municipal treasurer subject to the order of the board of trustees of the pension fund. An
annual list of beneficiaries and report of funds shall be made as required by law. Members of said board
of trustees of the pension fund shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2001-17, 9-25-2001)
Chapter 5
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
2-5-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a board of local improvements in and for the village. (Ord. 2003-01, 1-14-2003)
2-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of local improvements shall have all powers and duties conferred and imposed by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-1 et seq., as supplemented by 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/1 et seq. (Ord.
2003-01, 1-14-2003)
2-5-3: MEMBERSHIP:
The board of local improvements shall consist of the village president and two (2) trustees. The two (2)
trustee members shall be two (2) trustees who serve as members of the public works committee pursuant
to an annual appointment by the village president, with the advice and consent of the village board, at the
same time that committee appointments are made or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practical. In the
event that the two (2) trustee members are not appointed when committee appointments are annually
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 128/649
made, the two (2) trustee members appointed for the previous year shall remain as members of the board
of local improvements until an appointment of their successors is made. (Ord. 2003-01, 1-14-2003)
Title 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
3-1-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or
establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject
to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being
engaged in the business or occupation or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or performs or
attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the Village. (1997 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made, in writing, to the Village
Clerk on forms providing such information as is required by such officer, in the absence of provisions to
the contrary. (1997 Code)
3-1-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of the Village require an
inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the Village Clerk shall refer such
application to the proper officer for making such inspection or investigation. (1997 Code)
3-1-4: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any thing or
act if the premises and buildings to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of
the Village. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of
any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance of the Village1. (1997 Code)
3-1-5: PAYMENT OF FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in
advance at the time application therefor is made to the Village Clerk. (1997 Code)
3-1-6: VEHICLE TAGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 129/649
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis of a license fee, the Village Clerk shall furnish each
licensee with a tag or sticker which shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle while it is
in use. (1997 Code)
3-1-7: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the Village to keep his license posted
in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all times. (1997 Code)
3-1-8: INSPECTIONS:
A. Right Of Entry: Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a
licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance or are reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with any Code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the
duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the
purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the Village who is authorized or directed
to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested upon proper presentation
of identification and legal authorization as required by law.
B. Submittal Of Samples: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
secure conformance with any Code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee
of the Village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis
upon request upon proper presentation of identification and legal authorization as required by law.
C. Failure To Comply; Revocation Of License: In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
Village President may, on first cause, revoke the license2 of any licensed proprietor of any licensed
business in the Village who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make
such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection or take an adequate sample of the said
commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in
making such inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written
demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the Village,
stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or
obtain the sample. (1997 Code)
3-1-9: NUISANCES3:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1997
Code)
3-1-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act, other than license for the sale
at retail of alcoholic beverages, may be changed; provided, ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the
Village Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the building, zoning and
frontage consent requirements of the ordinances of the Village are complied with. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 130/649
3-1-11: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
A. All annual licenses shall terminate on April 30 where no provision to the contrary is made.
B. The Village Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the Village a statement of the time of expiration of the
license held by the licensee, if an annual, three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expirations.
Provided, that a failure to send out such notice or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not
excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license or a renewal thereof nor shall it be a
defense in an action from operation without a license. (1988 Code § 10.106)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the Village President and Village Board during
the life of such license or permit for the violation by the licensee or permittee of any provision relating to
the license or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may
be in addition to any fine imposed. The Village President and Village Board shall be authorized to
summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any
business license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
A. Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the Village officials have so acted, the Village President shall call a
hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked.
B. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing
setting forth specifically the grounds for the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice
shall be sent to the licensee or permittee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the
date for the hearing.
C. Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall
have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The Village President shall preside
and shall render the decision and recommendation.
D. Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the Village,
unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Village President and the Village Board after notice
and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of this Section for any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license or
permit.
2. Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions or State law relating to the license
or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit or the premises occupied.
3. Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
4. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the Village.
5. Refusal to permit any inspection or sampling or any interference with a duly authorized Village
officer or employee while in the performance of his duties in making such inspections, as provided in
the Village Code. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 131/649
3-1-13: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the Village to issue a license or permit or by the revocation of
a license or permit shall have the right to appeal the Village's decision to the Village Board. Such
appeal shall be requested by submitting a written request to the Village President within five (5) days
of the action of the Village which is appealed.
B. The Village Board shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the
applicant shall be entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The Board shall act on the appeal
within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the action of the Village or shall direct the
issuance of a license or permit which the Village had denied or the reissuance of a license or permit
which the Village has revoked. (1997 Code)
3-1-14: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provisions of this Title shall be subject to penalty as
provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1988 Code § 10.114; 1997 Code)
Footnote 1: See Title 5 of this Code.
Footnote 2: See Section 3-1-12 of this Chapter for revocation procedures.
Footnote 3: See Title 7, Chapter 1 of this Code for nuisance provisions.
Chapter 2
SOLICITORS
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the
meanings herein ascribed thereto:
CONVICTED: Shall mean and include a disposition of court supervision, probation, adjudication, or
conditional discharge.
HAWKER: Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise
or other commodities and cries his wares or exhibits them for sale.
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for retail sale who does not
maintain in an established office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center or residence
from which such business is conducted. However, this does not apply to any person who delivers tangible
personal property who is fulfilling an order for such property which was solicited or placed by mail or other
means. This does not apply to any person holding a valid license, issued by a county or municipality, to
engage in retail sales.
PEDDLER: Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange any goods, wares,
merchandise or other commodities while traveling from residence to residence on, along or upon the
streets and sidewalks of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 132/649
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter
provided, and which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in
soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons,
contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: The word "soliciting" shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities and
persons:
A. Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of
any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind
or character; or
C. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type
or kind of publications; or
D. Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support
or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; or
E. Seeking to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party,
issue or candidate, whether accepting donations of money or not, or distributing handbills or fliers
advertising any event or service; or
F. Seeking to advertise, promote, sell and/or explain any product, service, organization or cause; or
G. Any person who is a hawker, peddler, transient merchant, or itinerant vendor.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods, wares or
merchandise and who, for the purpose of conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle,
structure of any kind, or vacant lot. However, this does not apply to any person selling goods, wares or
merchandise which are raised, produced or manufactured by him, to any person selling vegetables, fruit
or perishable farm products at an established city or village market, to any person operating a store or
refreshment stand at a resort, to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property owned
by him or upon which he resides, to any person operating a stand or booth at a state or county fair, or to
any person operating a stand or booth at a trade show, exposition, convention or similar event. This does
not apply to any person holding a valid license, issued by a county or municipality, to engage in retail
sales. (Ord., 5-5-1970; amd. Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every person desiring to engage in, operate as, or conduct the business of a hawker, peddler, transient
merchant or itinerant vendor as herein defined, within the village, is hereby required to obtain a certificate
of registration as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 133/649
3-2-3: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
A. Application: The application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by and
filed with the village clerk. Each applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application processing fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) and state in full the information requested on the application under oath: (Ord.
2016-24, 7-26-2016)
1. Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also
business address if other than residence address; also social security number;
2. Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than present address;
3. Proof that applicant is over the age of eighteen (18);
4. Physical description of the applicant;
5. Name and address of the person whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length
of time of such employment or representation;
6. Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will
engage in;
7. Period of time for which the certificate is applied for;
8. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this chapter, if
any;
9. A list of all certificates of registration or licenses to conduct business as a hawker, peddler, transient
merchant or itinerant vendor obtained by the applicant in Illinois in the twelve (12) months preceding
the date of filing of the application;
10. A statement as to whether a certificate of registration or license issued to the applicant under this
chapter or any other Illinois municipality regulating soliciting has been revoked in the twelve (12)
months preceding the date of filing of the application;
11. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of any other Illinois municipality regulating soliciting, in
the twelve (12) months preceding the date of filing of the application;
12. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of: a) a felony
or b) a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or false statements, under the laws of the state of Illinois
or any other state or federal law of the United States in the five (5) years preceding the date of filing
of the application;
13. A statement as to whether the applicant is required to register as a sex offender under the Illinois
sex offender registration act; and
14. Also such additional information as the chief of police or his designee may deem necessary to
process the application.
The chief of police may require the applicant to submit to fingerprinting by the police department in
connection with the application.
The chief of police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application
received and acted upon together with all other information and date pertaining thereto and all
certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the denial of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 134/649
applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every
certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the
application upon which it was issued.
B. Persons Ineligible For Certificate Of Registration: No certificate of registration shall be issued to any
person who has made a false material statement in the application, or:
1. Has been convicted of the commission of: a) a felony, or b) a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or
false statements, under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state, or under the laws of the
United States, within five (5) years of the date of the application; or
2. Has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the ordinances of any
other municipality regulating soliciting within one year of the date of the application; or
3. Has had his certificate of registration issued under this chapter revoked as provided in this chapter
within one year of the date of the application; or
4. Is required to register as a sex offender under the Illinois sex offender registration act, 730 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 150/3, under the laws of any other state, or under the laws of the United States.
(Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
C. Fees:
1. The fee for a transient merchant or itinerant vendor certificate of registration shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per year, nonrefundable, and shall expire on December 31 of the year it was
issued.
2. The fee for a hawker or peddler certificate of registration shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for thirty (30)
days, or two hundred dollars ($200.00) for one year, nonrefundable, and the certificate of
registration shall state the expiration date thereof. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-26-2016)
D. Issuance And Display Of Certificate Of Registration: Within ten (10) business days of filing the
application, after consideration, investigation and review of the application, each hawker, peddler,
transient merchant or itinerant vendor who is found to be fully qualified, upon payment of the
appropriate fee and deposit, shall be issued a certificate of registration, signed by the village clerk
bearing the seal of the village. The certificate of registration shall at all times while soliciting within the
village be carried upon the person and worn in such a way as to be conspicuous, and exhibit the same
to any police officer or other person requesting to see the same. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-4: REVOCATION AND APPEAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
A. Any certificate of registration issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the chief of police or his
designee if the holder of the certificate of registration is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes
disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately
upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police or his designee to the
holder of the certificate of registration in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his residence
address as set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of
registration shall become null and void.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 135/649
B. Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a certificate of registration under the provisions of
this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village board within twenty one (21) days after the
date of denial of the application or revocation of the certificate of registration. The appeal must be in
writing, and shall contain a specific request for or waiver of a hearing.
C. If a hearing is requested, the hearing before the village board shall take place within thirty (30) days of
the written appeal. At the hearing, the village board shall not be bound by the rules of evidence in the
courts of law, but shall, in ascertaining the conditions and practices involved in the decision appealed,
take into account all reliable, probative and substantial evidence. The village board shall issue a
written decision within fourteen (14) days of the hearing.
D. Where a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit all supporting documentation with the
written appeal. The village board shall issue a written decision within twenty one (21) days of the filing
of the written appeal. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-5: VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the governing body of this village that the occupant or occupants
of the residences in this village shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be or shall not be
invited to their respective residences between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of
any weekday or Saturday. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-6: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to
soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply with the following directions:
Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to
solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in the manner following:
A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size, shall be exhibited upon
or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing
the applicable words, as follows:
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
or
NO HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS OR ITINERANT VENDORS
The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3"). For the purpose of uniformity the village clerk shall
provide the cards to persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the
occupant of the residence of the information contained thereon. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-7: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 136/649
It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the municipality upon which a
"residence" as herein defined is located to first examine the notice provided for in section 3-2-6 of this
chapter, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained in the notice. If the notice states
"NO SOLICITORS INVITED", then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice states "NO HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS OR ITINERANT VENDORS", then the solicitor who is a hawker, peddler, transient
merchant or itinerant vendor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-
2007)
3-2-8: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any
premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated
to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the
residence in accordance with the provisions of section 3-2-6 of this chapter. (Ord., 5-5-1970)
3-2-9: HOURS OF SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered
under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a
residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, prior to nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of any weekday, or Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or
on a state or national holiday. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-10: SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE OCCUPANT OF ANY VEHICLE:
A. No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any
vehicle except by a soliciting agency who shall be:
1. Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization as provided by "an act to regulate
solicitation and collection of funds for charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and
making an appropriation therefor"1, approved July 26, 1963, as amended; and
2. Engaged in a statewide fundraising activity; and
3. Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is causally related to an
act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent; and
4. Authorized by village officials pursuant to an application for a certificate of registration. (Ord. 2003-
18, 4-22-2003)
B. Other restrictions on soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 137/649
1. Solicitation is allowed only at locations approved and/or designated by the village board and shall
not interfere with traffic flow or the operation of official traffic control devices; and (Ord. 2016-24, 7-
26-2016)
2. Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be eighteen (18) years of age or more and
wearing a high visibility vest; and (Ord. 2003-18, 4-22-2003)
3. Solicitation is allowed on Saturday and Sunday between sunrise and sunset; and (Ord. 2011-08, 3-
22-2011)
4. The soliciting agency must provide proof of a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) general liability
insurance policy naming the village as an additional insured; and
5. The soliciting agency must sign a hold harmless agreement provided by the village; and
6. The village reserves the right to accept or reject any application for certificate of registration, and the
soliciting agency must comply with all other policies and provisions the village may require. (Ord.
2003-18, 4-22-2003)
3-2-11: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to revocation of his certificate of registration, if
applicable, be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-
2011)
Chapter 3
ITINERANT AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-18, 6-10-2008)
Chapter 4
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS: Any alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol nor
to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or less of alcohol by volume, nor shall the
provisions of this chapter apply to flavoring extracts, concentrates, syrups or medicinal, mechanical,
scientific, culinary or toilet preparations, or food products unfit for beverage purposes. But the provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed to exclude or not apply to alcoholic liquor used in the manufacture,
preparation or compounding of such products. None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to wine
intended for use and used by any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 138/649
BANQUET FACILITIES: A room or rooms in a building specifically set aside for private parties scheduled
in advance. Food and drinks are not normally served in these rooms on a regular basis.
BAR: A counter over and upon which alcoholic beverages are prepared from the area where consumers
of alcoholic beverages sit or stand to receive and/or consume such beverages.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or club holding a license under the provisions of
this chapter.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: A person or persons acting, singing, playing an instrument, disc jockey, or
otherwise performing in person, whether the same be for compensation or not.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place
where meals are served, and where meals are actually served, without sleeping accommodations. Such
space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining equipment, capacity and having
employed therein a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its
guests.
SELL: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration and
includes all sales made by any person whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SELL OR SALE AT RETAIL: Selling or offering for sale alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
SERVICE BAR: Counter over or upon which alcoholic beverages are prepared to be served to customers
not seated at or in the bar area.
TAVERN: An establishment where alcoholic liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables
containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits. (Ord. 2001-
18, 9-25-2001; amd. Ord. 2006-33, 8-22-2006)
3-4-2: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. The president of the board of trustees shall be the local liquor control commissioner for the village, and
he shall annually appoint two (2) members of the village board of trustees as the liquor control
commission to assist him in the exercise of the powers and performance of duties herein provided for
the local liquor control commissioner. The liquor control commission herein created shall have power
to grant and revoke for cause all local licenses; to enter or authorize any law enforcing officer to enter
at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder, to determine whether any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated; to receive complaint from any citizen within the village that any provisions
of this chapter have been or are being violated; and to act upon such complaint in the manner
hereinafter provided; and to receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the village
treasurer.
B. The local liquor control commission shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined under
oath any applicant for a local license, or for any renewal thereof, or any licensees upon whom notice of
revocation has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any such applicants or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof
for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas. (Ord.
2001-18, 9-25-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 139/649
3-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall be engaged in the business of selling alcoholic liquors at retail within the limits of the
village without having first procured a license therefor. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless
formally revoked as herein provided, and shall not be transferable.
B. No license of any kind shall be issued by the local liquor control commission to:
1. A person under the age of twenty one (21).
2. A person who is not a resident of the village unless such person shall appoint a registered agent for
the purpose of receiving a summons, mail and notices; provided, that such registered agent shall be
a resident of the village and shall be a person who would be eligible to receive a license hereunder.
3. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. (Ord.
2001-18, 9-25-2001)
4. A person who is not a legal resident of the United States. (Ord. 2005-08, 3-8-2005)
5. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
6. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame.
7. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency
and morality.
8. A person whose license issued under the laws of the state or this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
9. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be
eligible for such license upon a first application.
10. A copartnership unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a
license.
11. A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning
in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible
to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village.
12. A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under the Illinois business corporation act1 to transact business in Illinois.
13. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee.
14. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor subsequent to the effective date hereof or has
forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 140/649
15. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not
have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
16. Any law enforcing public official, any mayor, alderman or member of a city council or commission,
any president of the village board of trustees, any member of the village board of trustees or any
president or member of a county board, and no such official shall be interested in any way either
directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
17. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
18. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a)
(3) through (a)(11) of section 5/28-1, or as proscribed by section 28-1.1 or section 5/28-3 of the
criminal code, as heretofore or hereafter amended2 or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of
the aforesaid statutory provisions.
19. A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government for the current tax period.
20. A copartnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been
issued by the federal government for the current tax period or if any of the partners have been
issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the
current tax period.
21. A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof or any stockholder owning in the aggregate
more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming
device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
22. Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been
issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
C. No license shall be issued for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, at retail, any intoxicating liquor
in any dwelling, house, flat or apartment building. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
D. A licensee is further subject to the following restrictions:
1. It is unlawful for any person having a retailer's license or any agent of such licensee to accept,
receive, or borrow money or anything of value, or accept or receive credit (other than merchandising
credit in the ordinary course of business for a period not to exceed 30 days) directly or indirectly
from any manufacturer, importing distributor, or distributor of alcoholic liquor.
2. No licensee shall deny or permit his agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of any licensed premises.
3. No licensee shall sell liquor to any persons on credit, or in payment for services rendered, but this
does not apply to clubs and hotels and liquor purchased for consumption off the premises.
4. No licensee shall fill or refill any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind
or quality of liquor. No liquor shall be sold except in original packages. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-8-2002)
3-4-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. An applicant for license shall submit to the local liquor control commission an application in writing
under oath, stating:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 141/649
1. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a
copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in case of a corporation, the
date of incorporation, the purpose for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the
officers and directors and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one
person or his nominees, the name and address of such person.
2. The citizenship of the applicant, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
3. The location and description of the premises which is to be operated under such license.
4. The character of business of the applicant and, in case of a corporation, the object for which it was
formed.
5. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character or, in case of a
corporation, the date on which it was chartered.
6. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a
license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter.
7. A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises
other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application.
8. That applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois, of the United States or the
provisions of this code in the conduct of his place of business.
9. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has
been revoked and the reasons therefor.
B. All applications for license shall be accompanied by a certified check, cashier's check, United States
postal money order or cash in the full amount of the license fee required to be paid, which fee shall be
returned to such applicant if such application is denied. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-6: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the village shall pay an annual license fee.
Such licenses shall be divided into the following classes:
A. Class A - Restaurant, Permitting Bar, Carryouts, And Live Entertainment: Class A licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises in conjunction
with the operation of a "restaurant", as herein defined. Sales at or over a bar, service bar and/or at
tables. Including the sale, at retail, of alcoholic beverages in their original containers, with seals
unbroken, for consumption elsewhere than upon the premises (carryouts) are permitted. Live
entertainment is permitted.
B. Class A1 - Restaurant, Permitting Bar, And Carryouts, Live Entertainment Prohibited: Class A1
licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises
in conjunction with the operation of a "restaurant", as herein defined. Sales at or over a bar, service
bar and/or tables. Including the sale, at retail, of alcoholic beverages in their original containers, with
seals unbroken, for consumption elsewhere than upon the premises (carryouts) are permitted. Live
entertainment is expressly prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 142/649
C. Class A2 - Restaurant, Prohibiting Bars, Carryouts And Live Entertainment: Class A2 licenses shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises in conjunction with a
"restaurant" as herein defined. The sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises
(carryouts) is expressly prohibited. Live entertainment is expressly prohibited. A service bar(s) is
permitted. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
D. Class A3 - Restaurant, Permitting Bar And Live Entertainment, Prohibiting Carryouts: Class A3
licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises in
conjunction with the operation of a "restaurant" as herein defined. Sales at or over a bar, service bar
and/or tables is permitted. Live entertainment is permitted. The sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
off the premises (carryouts) is expressly prohibited. (Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004)
E. Class A4 - Restaurant, Wine And Beer Only, Prohibiting Bars, And Permitting Carryouts And Live
Entertainment: Class A4 licenses shall authorize the sale of wine and beer only for consumption upon
the specified premises in conjunction with the operation of a "restaurant" as herein defined. A service
bar is permitted. Including the sale, at retail, of wine only in its original container, with seals unbroken,
for consumption elsewhere than upon the premises (carryouts) is permitted. Live entertainment is
permitted. The following restrictions shall apply to class A4 licenses:
1. All wine shall be dispensed in returnable or disposable bottles or cups, or sold in its original
container, with seals broken and cap and/or cork removed, for consumption on the premises.
2. The retail sale or distribution of wine and/or beer through a drive-through is strictly prohibited.
3. All entertainment must be confined solely within the fully enclosed building of the licensed premises.
4. Sound from the entertainment must not be audible outside the enclosed building of the licensed
premises. (Ord. 2010-08, 1-26-2010)
F. Class B - Tavern, Banquet Facilities, Permitting Bar And Live Entertainment: Class B licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises at or over a
bar(s), service bar(s) and at tables for businesses operating both as a public "tavern" and "banquet
facilities", as herein defined, for private parties scheduled in advance including, but not limited to,
wedding receptions, political and charitable fundraisers, club gatherings, bowling and other sport
banquets, anniversary parties, company parties and similar events. The following restrictions apply to
class B licenses:
1. All entertainment must be confined solely within the fully enclosed building of the licensed premises.
2. Sound from the entertainment must not be audible outside the enclosed building of the licensed
premises.
3. Except for arrival and departure, the public is required to stay within the enclosed building on the
licensed premises. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001; amd. Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004; Ord. 2006-33, 8-22-
2006)
4. For licensed premises with banquet facilities that exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet in size the following parking regulations shall apply. Public customer parking for the licensed
facility is strictly controlled by the licensee and limited exclusively to a private parking lot owned or
operated by the licensee. No roadside, curbside or neighborhood parking is permitted. (Ord. 2010-
13, 3-23-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 143/649
G. Class B1 - Banquet Facilities, Permitting Bar And Live Entertainment: Class B1 licenses shall authorize
the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises at or over bar(s), a
service bar(s) and/or at tables for businesses operating as a banquet facility, as herein defined, only
for private parties scheduled in advance including, but not limited to, wedding receptions, political and
charity fundraisers, club gatherings, bowling and other sport banquets, anniversary parties, company
parties and similar events. The following restrictions apply to class B1 licenses:
1. All entertainment must be confined solely within the fully enclosed building of the licensed premises.
2. Sound from the entertainment must not be audible outside the enclosed building of the licensed
premises.
3. For other than operation as a banquet facility and except for arrival and departure, the public is
required to stay within the enclosed building on the licensed premises.
4. Public customer parking for the licensed facility is strictly controlled by the licensee and limited
exclusively to a private parking lot owned or operated by the licensee. No roadside, curbside or
neighborhood parking is permitted.
H. Class C License - Tavern, Permitting Bar And Carryouts, Live Entertainment Prohibited: Class C
licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon specified premises at or
over bar(s), service bar(s) and/or at tables. Including the sale, at retail, of alcoholic beverages in their
original containers, with seals unbroken, for the consumption elsewhere than upon the premises
(carryouts). Live entertainment is expressly prohibited.
I. Class D License - Package Liquor Store (Carryouts): Class D licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in their original package, with seals unbroken, for consumption at places other than
upon the licensed premises. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001; amd. Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004; Ord. 2006-33,
8-22-2006)
J. Class D1 License - Beer And Wine Carryouts: Class D1 licenses shall only authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine in their original package, with seals unbroken, for consumption at places other than
upon the licensed premises. The following restrictions apply to class D1 licenses:
The licensed premises shall have a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total square feet of
sales area devoted to the sale and display of beer and wine.
The licensee shall submit a floor plan indicating the total square feet of the sales area and the total
square feet of the sales area devoted to the sale and display of beer and wine. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-10-
2007)
K. Class E License - Outing And Temporary Permits: Class E licenses shall authorize the temporary sale
of alcoholic liquor at the place and for the date(s) specified in the application for public outings or
gatherings. However, no single outing or temporary permit shall exceed three (3) consecutive days.
L. Class F License - Outdoor Amusement Licenses: Class F licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer
and wine only on the premises designated in the license and at concession stands. This license shall
be available only to concessionaires at properly zoned outdoor amusement areas. This license shall
permit entertainment on the premises, but shall be restricted as follows:
1. There shall be no tailgating or possession of any kind of alcoholic liquor in the parking lots or any
location other than as expressly approved herein. "Tailgating" shall mean persons driving to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 144/649
facility and commencing to consume food and/or beverages brought with them.
2. There shall be no dispensing of alcohol in their original containers, nor in bottles or cans of any kind
whatsoever. All drink containers must be either plastic or paper and must be made of either
recyclable and/or biodegradable products.
3. The maximum size drink to be dispensed for beer shall be twenty four (24) ounces, for wine shall be
eight (8) ounces.
4. The Minooka police department as agents for the local liquor commissioner reserve the right to
prohibit the sale of or to stop all sales of alcohol or to restrict the number of drinks sold to any one
individual, when the public health, welfare and safety so require.
5. All the concession stands, including portable stands, shall be subject to review and approval by the
building inspector and the village police department, and no liquor license shall be issued without
such approval. Also, such concession stands shall be subject to continuing inspection and if such
structures are not in compliance with all village codes, the liquor license shall be suspended by
appropriate proceedings until such time as such structures are brought into conformance. (Ord.
2001-18, 9-25-2001; amd. Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004; Ord. 2006-33, 8-22-2006)
M. Class G License - Outdoor Food And Liquor Consumption: Class G licenses shall authorize the holder
of a class A, A1, A2, A3, A4, B, B1, or C liquor license pursuant to this chapter to apply for a license
for the purpose of outdoor food and liquor consumption. "Outdoor food and liquor consumption" shall
mean an open outdoor area with or without a roof where food and/or alcoholic beverages are served
and/or consumed. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, conduct, operate, or allow
outdoor food and liquor consumption without first obtaining a license in compliance with this chapter.
The following restrictions shall apply to class G licenses: (Ord. 2014-18, 5-27-2014)
1. The licensed outdoor area floor space shall be no greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet
and shall not be expanded beyond the area approved in the class G license.
2. There shall be no dispensing of alcohol in glass bottles or glass containers of any kind whatsoever.
All drink containers must be either plastic or paper and must be made of either recyclable and/or
biodegradable products.
3. Floors shall be of a hard surface; i.e., concrete, asphalt or brick material.
4. No live entertainment permitted outside the enclosed building of the licensed premises.
5. While emergency exits are required, any part of the licensed outdoor area not abutted by a building
shall be enclosed by a fence, with an enclosed area that prohibits unrestricted access from a public
way.
6. The entrance to the licensed outdoor area shall be through the indoor licensed premises.
7. Noise emitting from the licensed outdoor area shall not unreasonably disturb the area in which it is
located.
8. The licensed outdoor area shall be particularly described and approved as to location and
construction and adjacent to and operated as part of the premises licensed to sell such alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the adjoining premises.
9. Food must be available from the kitchen facility of the indoor licensed facility during the hours of
operation of the licensed outdoor area. (Ord. 2005-37, 8-9-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-33, 8-22-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 145/649
N. Class G1 License - Outdoor Food And Liquor Consumption, Outdoor Live Entertainment Permitted:
Class G1 licenses shall authorize the holder of a class A, A1, A2, A3, A4, B, B1, or C liquor license
pursuant to this chapter to apply for a license for the purpose of outdoor food and liquor consumption.
"Outdoor food and liquor consumption" shall mean an open outdoor area with or without a roof where
food and/or alcoholic beverages are served and/or consumed. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep, maintain, conduct, operate, or allow outdoor food and liquor consumption without first obtaining
a license in compliance with this chapter. The following restrictions shall apply to class G1 licenses:
(Ord. 2014-18, 5-27-2014)
1. The licensed outdoor area floor space shall be no greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet
and shall not be expanded beyond the area approved in the class G1 license.
2. There shall be no dispensing of alcohol in glass bottles or glass containers of any kind whatsoever.
All drink containers must be either plastic or paper and must be made of either recyclable and/or
biodegradable products.
3. Floors shall be of a hard surface; i.e., concrete, asphalt or brick material.
4. Live entertainment is permitted outside the enclosed building of the licensed premises, subject to
the following:
a. There shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250') between the licensed establishment and
R (residential) districts. For the purpose of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion where
live entertainment is conducted to the nearest property line of a lot in an R (residential) district
occupied by a dwelling unit.
b. The maximum noise levels are as follows:
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE EFFECTIVE SOURCE NOISE LEVELS1
Commercial
Receiving Property
Residential
Receiving Property
Source Property Daytime/Nighttime Daytime Nighttime
Business/commercial 65 60 50
Note:
1. When measured in dBA at or within the real property line of the receiving property. For purposes of this
subsection, "decibel (dB)" means a unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound,
"A-weighting" means the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency
sensitivity, and "daytime" means between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. Monday through Friday,
and between 8:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. When the measurement is
A-weighted, the designation is "dBA". Measurements shall be taken within the property line of the affected
person as close as practicable to the sound source to obtain a representative measurement. For the
purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of sound, the sound level meter calibrated in decibels
shall be employed. Sounds which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter shall be
measured with the octave band analyzer and the impact noise analyzer.
(Ord. 2008-22, 6-24-2008)
c. The hours for live entertainment shall be not later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through
Wednesday and not later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Thursday, Friday and Saturday. (Ord.
2009-20, 5-12-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 146/649
5. While emergency exits are required, any part of the licensed outdoor area not abutted by a building
shall be enclosed by a fence, with an enclosed area that prohibits unrestricted access from a public
way.
6. The entrance to the licensed outdoor area shall be through the indoor licensed premises.
7. Noise emitting from the licensed outdoor area shall not unreasonably disturb the area in which it is
located.
8. The licensed outdoor area shall be particularly described and approved as to location and
construction and adjacent to and operated as part of the premises licensed to sell such alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the adjoining premises.
9. Food must be available from the kitchen facility of the indoor licensed facility during the hours of
operation of the licensed outdoor area.
10. Smoking shall be prohibited in the licensed outdoor area. (Ord. 2008-22, 6-24-2008)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-09 - NUMBER OF LICENSES. Go
to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-10 - NUMBER OF LICENSES.
Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-12 - A3 LIQUOR LICENSES .
Go to new ordinance.
3-4-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES; FEES:
A. There shall be issued, in the Village, not more than the following number of licenses:
Class
Number Fees
A 3 $1,200.00
A1 2 1,000.00
A2 3 900.00
A3 3 1,000.00
A4 0 1,000.00
B 1 1,200.00
B1 0 800.00
C 0 900.00
D 3 750.00
D1 6 750.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 147/649
E No limitation, but its issuance is entirely within the reasonable discretion of the
Village President and consent of the Board
$25.00
per day
F 1 $1,000.00
G 2 500.00
G1 4 500.00
(Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001; amd. Ord. 2002-07, 3-12-2002; Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004; Ord. 2005-02, 1-25-
2005; Ord. 2005-09, 3-8-2005; Ord. 2005-37, 8-9-2005; Ord. 2005-38, 8-23-2005; Ord. 2005-42, 9-27-
2005; Ord. 2005-51, 10-25-2005; Ord. 2005-52, 10-25-2005; Ord. 2006-31, 7-25-2006; Ord. 2006-33, 8-
22-2006; Ord. 2006-51, 12-19-2006; Ord. 2007-15, 3-13-2007; Ord. 2007-17, 4-10-2007; Ord. 2007-23, 5-
8-2007; Ord. 2007-33, 6-26-2007; Ord. 2007-59, 12-19-2007; Ord. 2008-09, 3-11-2008; Ord. 2008-22, 6-
24-2008; Ord. 2008-30, 11-12-2008; Ord. 2009-14, 3-24-2009; Ord. 2009-32, 10-27-2009; Ord. 2010-11,
2-23-2010; Ord. 2010-12, 2-23-2010; Ord. 2010-16, 4-27-2010; Ord. 2010-24, 9-21-2010; Ord. 2010-25,
9-21-2010; Ord. 2011-13, 6-21-2011; Ord. 2012-05, 2-24-2012; Ord. 2012-26, 10-23-2012; Ord. 2013-06,
3-26-2013; Ord. 2013-07, 3-26-2013; Ord. 2013-12, 4-23-2013; Ord. 2013-17, 5-28-2013; Ord. 2013-19,
5-28-2013; Ord. 2014-18, 5-27-2014; Ord. 2015-20, 6-23-2015; Ord. 2015-21, 6-23-2015; Ord. 2015-33,
12-15-2015; Ord. 2016-05, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2016-06, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2016-18, 5-24-2016; Ord. 2016-30,
8-23-2016; Ord. 2017-19, 9-26-2017; Ord. 2017-20, 9-26-2017; Ord. 2017-34, 12-19-2017; Ord. 2018-14,
5-22-2018; Ord. 2018-18, 6-26-2018; Ord. 2018-27, 10-23-2018; Ord. 2018-28, 10-23-2018; Ord. 2018-
29, 10-23-2018)
B. In the event that the number of outstanding licenses is not at the maximum allowable for Classes A
through D, such request will be acted upon by the Liquor Commission pursuant to the provisions in
sections 3-4-4 and 3-4-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-8: TERM OF LICENSE, FEE ADJUSTMENTS, REBATES AND DISPOSITION:
A. Term Of License: No license, except class E, shall be issued under this chapter for a period of less
than one calendar year unless the same is issued pursuant to application made subsequent to the first
day of any fiscal year, in which event, the license shall be issued for the remaining period of the year,
and no license shall be issued for a period of more than one year. Except for class G licenses, all
licenses issued hereunder shall be valid from May 1 to April 30 of each year. (Ord. 2006-51, 12-19-
2006)
B. Fee Adjustments, Credits And Rebates: The fee for all licenses other than class E, outing permits, shall
be the full annual fee set forth herein in the case of all renewals of existing licenses and in the case of
all new licenses applied for during the first quarter of any fiscal year, three-fourths (3/4) of the annual
fee set forth for new licenses applied for during the second quarter of any fiscal year, one-half (1/2) of
the annual fee set forth for new licenses applied for during the third quarter of any fiscal year and onefourth
(1/4) of the annual fee set forth for new licenses applied for during the last quarter of any fiscal
year. In the event any licensee shall voluntarily surrender a liquor license prior to the expiration of its
term, and a subsequent liquor license of any class shall be issued to any other person for the same
premises during the same fiscal year, the village shall give a credit upon the required second license
fee in the amount of one-fourth (1/4) of the annual fee paid by the former licensee if the first license is
surrendered in the third quarter of such fiscal year, one-half (1/2) of the annual fee paid by the former
licensee if the first license is surrendered in the second quarter of the fiscal year and three-fourths (3/4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 148/649
of the annual fee paid by the former licensee if the first license is surrendered in the first quarter of the
fiscal year. There shall be no rebate of any license fees, and no credit shall be given in the event a first
license for any given premises is revoked during any portion of any fiscal year.
C. Payment Of Fees; Disposition: All license fees shall be paid to the local liquor control commissioner at
the time the application is made and shall be forthwith turned over to the village treasurer. In the event
the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted,
then the fee shall be deposited in a general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been
designated by the village board by proper action. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-9: BOND; INSURANCE:
A. Bond: Each applicant desiring a license under this chapter, except those applying for a class E license,
shall execute a penal bond payable to the village in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful compliance with and performance of all of
the provisions of the laws of the state relating to the sale of alcoholic liquor and with all of the
provisions of the ordinances of the village regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor, and shall be subject to
the approval of the president of the board. Upon approval thereof, the bond shall be filed with the
village clerk. A breach of any of the conditions of the bond shall work a forfeiture of the penalty thereof,
which amount shall be recoverable in an action of debt. Said bond shall further be conditioned for the
payment of all fines, costs, penalties and forfeitures assessed against said licensee during the
continuance of the license under the terms of this chapter and any and all other ordinances pertaining
to the sale of alcoholic liquor now in force or hereafter adopted, on account of any act done in violation
thereof during the term for which the license is granted. Nevertheless, any person who has become a
surety upon a bond herein required may release himself from such liability in the following manner,
such surety, at least ten (10) days before a regular meeting of the village board, shall give notice in
writing over his signature to the village clerk of his intention to withdraw himself as a result from such
bond. The village clerk shall forthwith notify the principal on said bond who shall thereafter file with the
president of the board as hereinabove provided. If no new bond, with sufficient sureties, approved by
the president of the village board, has been filed by the licensee within ten (10) days after notification
from the clerk of the withdrawal of the former surety, the license heretofore granted to said licensee
shall be revoked by the president of the village. No surety shall be released from any liability on a
bond arising prior to the giving of a new bond or the revocation of any license.
B. Insurance: No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant shall furnish evidence
satisfactory to the liquor control commissioner that such applicant is covered by a policy of dramshop
insurance issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the
state of Illinois insuring such applicant against liability which such applicant may incur under the
provision of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-10: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
When the president of the village shall recommend the approval of any application and bond as herein
provided, the applicant shall be issued a license, upon the payment in advance of the required fee, which
license shall be in writing over the name and under the seal of the village, and executed by the president
of the village and attested by the village clerk. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-11: RECORD OF LICENSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 149/649
The president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by him and
shall furnish the clerk of the village, the treasurer of the village, and the chief of police each with a copy
thereof upon the issuance of any new license, and shall notify each of the said officers, in writing, upon
the issuance of any new licenses or revocation of any old licenses. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-12: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and
provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the president from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within
the village. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-13: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village president may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days3 or revoke for cause4 any license for
any violation of any provision pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, as provided and in the manner
provided in the state statutes, as heretofore or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
Whenever any license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the
same premises for which the license was revoked for a period of one year.
An established place of business is a prerequisite to the issuance of a license. Revocation of a license
when a licensee ceases to operate the business before the license expires is within the authority of the
commissioner on the grounds of nonuse. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-8-2002)
3-4-14: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person shall sell alcoholic liquors in the village unless he holds a valid license, and such licensees
shall sell alcoholic liquors only during the following hours:
Class A, B, C: From ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sundays and from six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on all other days of the week.
Class D: From seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sundays and from six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on all other days of the week.
Class D1: From seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sundays and from six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on all other days of the week.
Class E: Requested at time license is applied for, but not outside the hours of operations for classes A
through D.
Class F: To be determined by the liquor commission with the consent of the village board. (Ord. 2001-18,
9-25-2001)
Class G: The same hours which the kitchen of the indoor licensed premises is open, but not later than ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and not later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Friday and
Saturday. (Ord. 2005-37, 8-9-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 150/649
Class G1: The same hours which the kitchen of the indoor licensed premises is open, but not later than
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and not later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Friday
and Saturday. (Ord. 2008-22, 6-24-2008)
3-4-15: LICENSED PREMISES, TRANSFER:
Licenses issued under this chapter shall apply only to the premises described in the application and in the
license issued thereon, and only one location shall be described in each license. After a license has been
granted for a particular premises, the local liquor control commission, upon proper showing, may endorse
upon said license permission to abandon the premises therein described and remove therefrom to other
premises approved by it. But in order to obtain such approval, the licensee shall file with the local liquor
control commission a request in writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to
which removal is to be made comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-18,
9-25-2001)
3-4-16: POSTING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license to be hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-17: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED; MINORS:
A. Sales Prohibited, Identification:
1. No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee
shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or to
any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane,
mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or
otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or
service. For the purpose of preventing violation of this subsection, any licensee or his agent or
employees may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce
adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he is over the age of twenty one (21) years.
2. Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document issued by a federal,
state, county or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof including, but not limited to,
a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal selective
service act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. Proof that the
defendant, licensee or his employees or agent demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon
such written evidence in any transaction provided by this subsection is competent evidence and
may be considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of any license based thereon.
3. Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years any
false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or
who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years evidence of age
and identification of any other person is guilty of a violation of this chapter. Any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years who presents or offers to any licensee, his agent or employee any
written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually
his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 151/649
attempting to procure, the sale of any alcoholic beverage or who has in his possession any false or
fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity is guilty of a violation of this
chapter. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who has any alcoholic beverage in his
possession on any street or highway or in any public place open to the public is guilty of a violation
of this chapter. Whoever violates provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
B. Purchase And Consumption By Minors:
1. Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age
shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor in his possession. If a licensee or his
agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that the sale or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such
sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification containing proof of age
issued by a public officer in the performance of his duties. No person shall transfer, alter or deface
such an identification card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false identification
card or obtain an identification card by means of false information. It shall be unlawful for a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years to purchase, offer to purchase, possess, consume, solicit, or
in any manner obtain or attempt to obtain, unlawfully, any alcoholic or intoxicating liquor. Whoever
violates provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
2. Possession and dispensing or consumption by a minor of alcoholic liquor in a performance of
religious service or ceremony or the consumption by a minor under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent or parents of such minor in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this
subsection B. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-18: PROHIBITIONS APPLYING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall wait on, trade, or act as agent or employee to sell
any alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption off of the premises. No person under the age of twenty one
(21) years shall attend any bar or draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor in any retail premises licensed
under this Act. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-8-2002)
3-4-19: VIEW OF PREMISES:
In the premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed, no
screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such
licensed premises, nor inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalks at all times. No booth, screen, partition or other
obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such
licensed premises which shall prevent the full view of the entire interior of the premises from the street,
road or sidewalk. Said premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of the interior of such
premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the
premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours, by natural light or artificial white light, so
that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed
premises required by this section shall be wilfully obscured or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured or in
any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-20: LIQUOR PROHIBITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 152/649
A. Drinking Alcoholic Liquor In Public Place: It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic liquor in
or on any street, alley or other public place in the Village or to drink alcoholic liquor in or about any
motor vehicle in or on any street, alley or other public place in the Village, except as so licensed by the
Village.
B. Transporting Alcoholic Liquor: It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have
any alcoholic liquor upon his person on any street, alley or other public place within the Village except
in an unopened original package or container.
C. Possession Of Alcoholic Liquor In Motor Vehicle: No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any
alcoholic liquor within the passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with
the seal unbroken.
D. Intoxication: It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in or on any street,
alley or other public place in the Village. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
E. BYOA Prohibited: No business establishment within the Village shall allow patrons to bring their own
alcoholic beverages onto the business's premises for the purpose of consumption. Further, no person
or entity that holds any liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter shall allow any patron to bring
their own alcoholic beverages onto the licensed premises for the purpose of consumption thereon.
(Ord. 2018-09, 4-24-2018)
3-4-21: DISORDERLY CONDUCT ON PREMISES:
No person licensed under this chapter shall permit any disorderly conduct or disturbance of the peace on
the premises. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-22: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE:
Licensee, and his or its agents, officers and employees, shall at all times be personally responsible for the
proper operation of the business, including compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
observation of all laws and regulations applicable thereto. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-23: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
A. Premises:
1. All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for such sale
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the
ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.
2. Every person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, at retail, who shall sell any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises of such licensee shall keep and maintain the licensed premises
equipped with running hot and cold water and adequate sanitary washing facilities for the cleansing
of glasses and service utensils and shall provide adequate toilet facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 153/649
3. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner can require, at the time the application is made, a
statement from the Will or Grundy County Health Department on the adequacy of the sanitation
facilities.
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor any
person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it
shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such diseases to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
(Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-24: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to revocation of his license as above provided, if
applicable, be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-
2011)
Chapter 5
AUTOMATIC FOOD, BEVERAGE AND AMUSEMENT
DEVICES1
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any mechanical device accepting coin or coins permitting the
player/players to make use of and enjoy the effects of such machine as a result of the deposit of coins or
other action therein.
AUTOMATIC FOOD AND BEVERAGE DEVICE: Any device which dispenses food, beverages or food
products as a result of the deposit of a coin or token.
AUTOMATIC MUSICAL DEVICE: Any phonograph, piano player, music box, jukebox or other instrument
or device capable of producing or reproducing any vocal or instrumental sounds, other than a motion
picture sound machine, which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token.
COMPLIANCE CHECK: An inspection conducted with the intention of enforcing age of use laws and
otherwise testing compliance with all requirements of the Illinois Video Gaming Act2 and this Code.
Compliance checks shall be conducted by having designated persons under the age of twenty one (21)
years of age attempt to use video gaming terminals within the Village.
TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company that is
licensed under the Video Gaming Act and that owns, services, and maintains video gaming terminals for
placement in licensed establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal
establishments, or licensed veterans establishments.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not limited to, video poker, line up,
and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in
which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 154/649
include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord.
1978-11, 1978; amd. Ord. 1978-13, 1978; Ord. 1978-14, 1978; Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012; Ord. 2017-11,
5-2-2017)
3-5-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. No person shall keep or permit to be kept for gain or profit from operation within the Village any
automatic food or beverage device, any automatic amusement device or automatic musical instrument
without first having obtained a license as provided in section 3-5-3 of this chapter, except a charitable,
religious or other nonprofit organization sponsored by or participated in by a local chapter of such
organization, as approved by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1978-11, 1978; amd. Ord. 1978-13,
1978; Ord. 1978-14, 1978; Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012)
B. No person shall keep or permit to be kept for gain or profit from operation within the Village any video
gaming terminal without first having obtained a license as provided in section 3-5-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012)
3-5-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
An application shall be made to the Village Clerk. The applicant shall set forth a description of the device
to be kept, installed or used on the licensed premises. (Ord. 1978-11, 1978; amd. Ord. 1978-13, 1978;
Ord. 1978-14, 1978)
3-5-4: LICENSE FEES AND TERM:
A. Fees: The annual fees for each device or instrument kept, installed or used on the licensed premises
each year are as follows:
Automatic amusement device $25.00
Automatic food or beverage device 12.50
Automatic musical device 50.00
Video gaming terminal 25.001
Note:
1. Fee shall be charged to the terminal operator.
B. Term: The license term shall be May 1 through April 30 of each year. (Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012)
3-5-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 155/649
A. Display: Every licensee shall cause his license to be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
B. Transfer Of License: No license issued to any person shall be transferable. (Ord. 1978-11, 1978; amd.
Ord. 1978-13, 1978; Ord. 1978-14, 1978)
C. Automatic Musical Devices Special Regulations:
1. No license issued under this chapter shall permit the operation of any automatic musical device at
any place or in any manner which will disturb the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed
premises.
2. No immoral or indecent selections shall be played on any such instrument.
3. It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any coin operated musical device, licensed under
this chapter, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sundays, nor shall remain in operation between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any other day. (Ord. 1978-14,
1978)
3-5-6: PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE PROHIBITED FROM USING
VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
A. No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall use or attempt to use any video gaming terminal
licensed under this chapter, except that a person under the age of twenty one (21) who is designated
by a peace officer to assist said officer in conducting a compliance check shall not be guilty of violating
this section if said person uses or attempts to use a video gaming terminal while actively participating
in such compliance check.
B. No licensee shall knowingly cause or permit any person under twenty one (21) years of age to use any
video gaming terminal. In the event that any licensee, or agent thereof, has reason to believe that a
person using or attempting to use any video gaming terminal licensed under this chapter is under
twenty one (21) years of age, said licensee or agent thereof shall demand presentation of some form
of positive identification containing proof of age issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties. Any failure on the part of any licensee, or agent thereof, to inquire as to the age of any
person suspected to be under the age of twenty one (21) shall be deemed to be a knowing violation of
this section. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-7: COMPLIANCE CHECKS AUTHORIZED:
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the power, authority, and duty to conduct random and
unannounced compliance checks of all places wherein video gaming terminals licensed under this
chapter are located for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the State of Illinois and of the
Village of Minooka regarding the same are being complied with in such place. The scope of such
compliance checks shall include, but shall not be limited to, testing compliance with the State and
Village's respective prohibitions against persons under the age of twenty one (21) using video gaming
terminals. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-8: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 156/649
A. Any minor that violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with subsection 3-5-6A of this chapter
shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense.
B. Any licensee who knowingly permits a person under the age of twenty one (21) years to use a video
gaming terminal, or who fails to demand proof of age from a person suspected of being under the age
of twenty one (21) in violation of subsection 3-5-6B of this chapter shall, in addition to the suspension
or revocation of their liquor license and all other available remedies, be sentenced as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. For the purposes of this section, every act or omission of
any nature constituting a violation of this section by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or
employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee, and such licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the
licensee personally.
C. Any person who is found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter or of the Illinois Video Gaming
Act3 related to the licensure and/or operation of video gaming terminals, other than those associated
with the use of video gaming terminals by minors (<21), shall be sentenced and fined as set forth in
section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Such violations include, but are not limited to, violations of
the Act's requirements regarding: 1) maintenance of a valid liquor license, 2) hours of operation, and
3) the location of each video gaming terminal.
D. The Village shall report any and all violations of any provision of this chapter regarding the licensure
and operation of video gaming terminals to the Illinois Gaming Board. As part of such report the
Village may, depending upon the gravity and/or recurrence of such violation recommend to said board
that the licensee's video gaming license be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-9: SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
In the event that any person is found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter related to the
licensure and/or operation of video gaming terminals or of any provision of the Illinois Video Gaming Act4,
such violation shall be deemed to be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said person's liquor
license as set out in section 3-4-13 of this title. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-10: NONRETALIATION:
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee,
applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer reported
violations of any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
Chapter 6
BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS1
3-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeonhole table open to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 157/649
public without having first obtained a license therefor as is provided in this Section. All applications for
such license shall be made, in writing, to the Village Clerk and shall state thereon the intended location of
the place of business and the number of tables to be used therein. (Ord. 1978-12, 1978)
3-6-2: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
The annual fee for any such license shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each table. The license term
shall be May 1 through April 30 of each year. All persons applying for a license at any time except on May
1 in each year shall pay the prorata amount each month, or fraction thereof, as the unexpired fiscal year
bears to twelve (12) months. Every licensee shall cause his license to be displayed in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 1978-12, 1978)
3-6-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No pool room, billiard hall, bagatelle or pigeonhole table shall remain in operation between the hours of
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on Sundays, nor shall remain in operation between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any other day. (Ord. 1978-12, 1978)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2.
Chapter 7
CONTRACTORS
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the business of constructing, altering or repairing buildings or
other structures or sidewalk or street pavements including, but not limited to, general building contractors;
cement or concrete contractors; masonry contractors; carpentry contractors; acoustical contractors;
electrical contractors; dry wall contractors; excavating contractors; fencing contractors; flooring
contractors; garage contractors; glazing contractors; heating, air conditioning and refrigeration
contractors; painting contractors; plastering contractors; plumbing contractors; porch, deck contractors;
roofing contractors; sewer and drain layers; sheet metal contractors; tuckpointing and cleaning
contractors; window contractors; wrecking contractors; blacktop sealer contractors; landscape
contractors; swimming pool contractors; insulation contractors; waterproofing contractors; siding
contractors; soffit and fascia contractors; gutter contractors; sign contractors; and all other contractors.
A. Any person who engages in the construction, repair or alteration of any building or structure within
the Village of Minooka, for which a building permit is required, is presumed to be a contractor and
must be licensed hereunder unless such presumption is rebutted.
B. A homeowner engaged in constructing, altering or repairing his personal residence or lot shall not
be considered a contractor for purposes of this Chapter, but must provide proof of homeowners
liability insurance prior to receiving a building permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 158/649
GENERAL CONTRACTOR: A contractor who uses one or more trades or subcontractors to perform the
required construction to complete any project for which a building permit is required.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, trust or other legal entity.
SUBCONTRACTOR: A contractor who performs only that type of work that is classified as a trade (e.g.,
plumbing, electrical, etc.). (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall act or perform any services as a contractor or subcontractor within the Village without first
having obtained a contractor's license therefor as herein provided. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
All applications for contractor's license required in Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter shall be made, in writing,
to the Village Building Department, upon forms furnished by the Village. Each application shall state the
name and business address of the applicant, whether it is a contractor's or subcontractor's license
application and if the latter, the trade or trades involved, the number of the applicant's employees who
would be operating under such license and a statement that the applicant is familiar with all pertinent
Village ordinances, codes and regulations including building codes and agrees to fully comply with same.
(Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-4: LICENSE FEES AND BONDS:
A. License Fees: The fees for a contractor's license, as required in Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter, are as
follows:
1. General contractor license fee: one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year; and
2. Subcontractor and all other contractor's license fees: fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
B. Bonds: Each applicant for a license, as required in Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter, shall, before receiving
such a license, deposit with the Village Building Department a license and permit bond issued by a
company approved and authorized to issue bonds by the State in a form suitable to the Village in the
following penal sums:
1. Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a general contractor; or
2. Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for a subcontractor. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall act as a contractor or subcontractor within the Village, nor shall be licensed, unless said
contractor or subcontractor deposits with the Village Building Department, a certificate(s) of insurance
issued to said contractor or subcontractor by a company approved and authorized to issue such
insurance by the State for the full period of the license period in the following types and amounts:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 159/649
A. General Contractor:
General liability $ 500,000.00
Auto liability 500,000.00
Excess liability 1,000,000.00
Employers liability 500,000.00
Workers' compensation
B. Subcontractor:
General liability $ 500,000.00
Auto liability 500,000.00
Employers liability 500,000.00
Workers' compensation
The certificate(s) of insurance shall provide that the insurance is not cancelable during the policy period
without ninety (90) days' prior written notice to the Village. (Ord. 1997-10, 7-8-1997)
3-7-6: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The Village Clerk shall issue licenses upon proper application and compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter, and payment of the fees set forth in Section 3-7-4 of this Chapter. All licenses shall be valid
through the current fiscal year of issue (i.e., May 1 through April 30), however, a license issued to a firsttime
licensee after January 1 shall be valid through April 30 of the following fiscal year, unless said license
is otherwise revoked as prescribed in this Chapter. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-7: SCOPE OF GENERAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
Any person licensed as a general contractor shall not be required to secure an additional license for the
performance of carpentry, masonry, cement or concrete contracting. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-8: GENERAL DUTIES OF LICENSEES:
A. All contractors licensed under Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter shall comply with the provisions of all
applicable Village codes and ordinances and, in addition thereto, at least once each week or more
often as directed by the Village Building Inspector shall remove or cause to be removed from the site
of contractor's activities all trash, refuse and waste materials. Contractors shall at all times keep the
site of activities in an orderly condition, free from standing water, unguarded dangerous implements or
conditions and health and safety hazards, and contractors shall not obstruct traffic on streets or
sidewalks or permit dirt or waste materials to fall or be carried onto such public ways. (Ord. 1996-19,
7-9-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 160/649
B. All contractors licensed under Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter shall pay within thirty (30) days from receipt
of an invoice from the Village all fees, expenses and costs incurred by the Village, including fees,
expenses and costs incurred for the Village's professional staff as a result of or in conjunction with the
contractor's projects in the Village. The Village's professional staff includes, but is not limited to, its
attorneys, engineers, land planners, traffic and transportation consultants, building commissioner, etc.
All fees, costs and expenses owed by the respective contractor licensed under Section 3-7-2 of this
Chapter, and unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of invoice are subject to the accrual of interest
in an amount of 1.5% per month. All contractors licensed under Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter who are
in arrears to the Village beyond thirty (30) days for the payment of fees, expenses and costs for any
pending matter within the Village are also subject to revocation of their license pursuant to Section 3-
7-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1999-02, 2-23-1999)
3-7-9: LICENSE REVOCATION; REINSTATEMENT:
Any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the Village Board for any
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; such revocation shall be in addition to any fine or penalty
imposed. No person whose license has been revoked as herein provided shall be eligible for a new
license for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. All appeals from the action of the Village
Board to revoke a contractor's license shall be filed within ten (10) days of such action with the Board of
Trustees of the Village who shall conduct a hearing on such revocation.
The Village Clerk may refuse to issue a license in the event that any of the provisions of this Chapter
which are condition precedent to the issuance of the license have not been met. Any appeals from an
action of the Village Clerk to refuse to issue a contractor's license should be filed within ten (10) days of
such refusal with the Board of Trustees of the Village who shall conduct a hearing on such refusal to issue
a license. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-10: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies available to the Village at law or equity, any contractor/subcontractor who
violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined as set out in Section 1-
4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
or noncompliance occurs or continues. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996; amd. 1997 Code)
Chapter 8
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
3-8-1: TAX IMPOSED:
The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the provisions of sections 5-25
and 5-30 of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, PA 92-0526 is hereby increased from five
percent (5%) to six percent (6%), for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers, effective
July 1, 2003. (Ord. 2003-11, 3-11-2003)
3-8-2: REMITTANCE OF TAX:
On or before July 31, 2003, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter, the tax imposed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 161/649
under this chapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required to the Illinois department of revenue pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations
created by the department to implement the act. (Ord. 2003-11, 3-11-2003)
3-8-3: TAX EXEMPTION:
To the extent that the municipality's territory includes part of another unit of local government or school
district, the village of Minooka may, by separate ordinance, exempt all of the amount of the tax authorized
by this chapter paid by the other unit of local government or school district. Any such exemption shall be
paid by the municipality directly to the other unit of local government or school district qualifying for the
rebate as determined by the ordinance. (Ord. 2002-22, 8-13-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
Chapter 9
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses to protect the community from the
many types of criminal activity frequently associated with such uses. The Village recognizes that such
regulation cannot in effect prohibit such uses. This Chapter has balanced the competing interests of the
community in reducing criminal activity and protecting property values versus the protective rights of the
owners, operators, employees and patrons of sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Section, the definitions set forth in Title 5 of this Code are made a part hereof.
Additionally, the following words and terms as used in this Chapter shall have the meaning ascribed
thereto:
APPLICANT: The applicant for a license shall be the intended operator of the business.
CONDUCT ANY BUSINESS: Any person who does any one or more of the following shall be deemed to
be conducting business in a sexually oriented business:
A. Operates a cash register, cash drawer, or other depository on the enterprise premises where cash
funds or records or credit card or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation
of the establishment or the activities conducted therein are kept;
B. Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other
services offered on the premises;
C. Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services
offered on the premises;
D. Acts as door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into the premises; or
E. Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the
enterprise premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 162/649
CUSTOMER: Any person who:
A. Is allowed to enter a licensed business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other
form of consideration or gratuity; or
B. Enters a licensed business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any merchandise,
goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or
C. Is a member of and on the premises of a licensed business operating as a private club.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a licensed business or
who works in or about a licensed business and who receives compensation for such service or work from
the operator or owner of the licensed business or from the customers therein.
LICENSED BUSINESS: Any sexually oriented business licensed under this Chapter.
OPERATOR: The manager or other natural person principally in charge of a licensed business.
OWNER: The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all
officers, directors, and persons holding ten percent (10%) or more of the outstanding shares if a
corporation. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No person shall own, operate or conduct any business in a sexually oriented business located within
the City unless there is a license for the business.
B. A license may be issued only for one "sexually oriented business" located at a fixed and certain place.
Any person who desires to operate more than one sexually oriented business must have a license for
each.
C. It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employee or operator to knowingly work in or about, or to
knowingly perform any service directly related to the operation of any unlicensed sexually oriented
business.
D. No person shall own, operate or conduct any sexually oriented business unless the license is posted at
or near the principal public entrance to the business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to
patrons who enter the premises.
E. Every license issued pursuant to this Chapter will terminate on the last day of December following its
issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following
year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the Village President or the
Village President's designee. The application for renewal must be filed not later than thirty (30) days
before the license expires. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-4: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
A. Applications for a license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the Village President or the
Village President's designee by the intended operator of the sexually oriented business. Applications
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 163/649
must be submitted during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by the Village.
The intended operator shall be required to give the following information on the application form:
1. a. The name, street address (and mailing address if different), age, driver's license number of the
intended operator, and any and all aliases;
b. The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the owner(s);
2. The name under which the business is to be operated and a general description of the services to
be provided;
3. The telephone number of the business;
4. The address and legal description of the parcel of land on which the business is to be located;
5. The date on which the owner(s) acquired the business for which the license is sought, and the date
on which the business began or is to begin operations as an enterprise at the location for which the
license is sought; and
6. A list of all employees or contractors involved in providing the services to be provided by the
business;
7. Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, city or state under a sexually
oriented business license or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a
license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under
which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation;
8. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony within the last ten (10) years or any criminal
offense involving controlled substances, moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or other crime of a
sexual nature.
B. The application shall be accompanied by the following:
1. Payment in full of a fee of:
a. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for an original application; or
b. One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a renewal application, as applicable, which fee shall not be
refundable under any circumstances;
2. A certified copy of the assumed name certificate if the business is to be operated under an assumed
name;
3. If the business is an Illinois corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with
all amendments thereto;
4. If the business is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact
business in this State, together with all amendments thereto;
5. If the business is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Illinois, a certified copy of the
certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto;
6. If the business is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership
and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto;
7. Any subsections B2 through B6 of this Section shall not be required for a renewal application if the
applicant states that the documents previously furnished with the original application or previous
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 164/649
renewals thereof remain correct and current;
8. If the premises are leased or being purchased under contract, a copy of such lease or contract shall
accompany the application.
C. The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
1. The applicant has a personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the
information contained therein is true and correct; and
2. The applicant has read the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of any application, either original or renewal, the Village President or
the Village President's designee shall grant or deny the requested license and give written notice to
the applicant as to the decision.
B. The Village President or the Village President's designee shall issue the license to the applicant unless
one or more of the following conditions exist:
1. The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application;
2. The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application;
3. The applicant's business is not in compliance with Title 5 of this Code;
4. The application or the business does not meet any other requirement of this Chapter;
5. The applicant has not fully complied with all State, Federal and local laws or regulations affecting
the conduct of its business; or
6. The applicant or owner has had a license revoked for the same business or same type of business;
7. The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age;
8. The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years or any criminal offense
involving controlled substances, moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual
nature. In the case of a corporation, partnership, or joint venture, any officer, director, stockholder
controlling more than twenty five percent (25%) of the corporate stock, partner or joint venturer shall
be deemed to be an applicant;
9. The applicant is delinquent on any debt owed to the Village;
10. The applicant has permitted criminal activity to occur on the premises without taking corrective
action or contacting law enforcement officials.
C. In the event that the Village President or the Village President's designee determines that an applicant
is not eligible for a license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial
within twenty (20) days of the receipt of its application. An applicant may appeal such denial by filing a
written request for a hearing with the Village President within five (5) days after the applicant is given
notice of such denial. The decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An
appeal shall not stay the decision on the issuance of a license. The applicant's written request for a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 165/649
hearing shall set forth the grounds on which the denial is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted
by the Village President. At the hearing the Village President shall receive oral and written testimony
regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under applicable rules of evidence as set forth
in Illinois State statutes and Supreme Court Rules.
D. The Village President shall conduct the hearing within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the applicant's
written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The Village
President shall render a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within five (5)
business days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the Village President shall
be final.
E. Failure of the Village President to give timely notice of action on an application, or failure of the Village
President to timely conduct or give notice of the Village President's decision on an appeal within the
limitations of time specified above shall entitle the applicant to the issuance of temporary license upon
written demand therefor filed by the applicant with the Village President. Such a temporary license
shall only be valid until the third day after the Village President gives notice of action on the application
or gives notice of this decision on the appeal. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-6: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
A license issued under this Chapter is personal to the owner and operator of a sexually oriented business
and may not be transferred or otherwise conveyed to a third party. Any transfer or conveyance of the
business shall require the transferee to apply and otherwise qualify for the issuance of a new license. The
transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license.
(Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. The Village President or the Village President's designee shall have the authority to revoke or suspend
a license for any one or more of the following reasons:
1. The owner, operator or employee of the licensed business knowingly allowed a person under
eighteen (18) years of age to enter the business;
2. The owner or operator of the licensed business does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter
or is in violation of any other applicable Federal, State or local laws or regulations;
3. The owner or operator of the licensed business gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the original or renewal application form;
4. The business has been closed for business for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days, unless such
closure is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with
due diligence, given all attendant circumstances, to reopen the business;
5. The operator or owner becomes ineligible to obtain or hold a license;
6. Any cost, bill or fee required to be paid by this Chapter or any other Village ordinance is not paid;
7. Any alcoholic beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the sexually oriented business;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 166/649
8. The owner or operator has permitted criminal activity to occur on the premises without taking
corrective action or contacting law enforcement officials;
9. The owner or operator has engaged in any other act or omission which demonstrates the owner or
operator's inability to operate the sexually oriented business in accordance with applicable law.
B. Prior to revocation or suspension of a license, the Village President or the Village President's designee
shall investigate whether probable cause for revocation or suspension may exist and if so, shall notify
the licensee in writing of reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension and grant such licensee
the opportunity to appear before the Village President or the Village President's designee at a time and
place specified within such notice. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days after the
notice is received by the licensee. Hearings shall be conducted under applicable rules of evidence as
set forth in Illinois State statutes and Supreme Court Rules. Such rules shall be consistent with the
nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine
witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. If, after the hearing, the Village President or the
Village President's designee finds that the license should be revoked or suspended, the Village
President or the Village President's designee shall issue a written order revoking or suspending such
license which shall be effective on the third day after notice thereof is given to the owner or operator.
(Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-8: HOURS OF OPERATION; INSPECTIONS:
A. No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturdays or between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays.
B. All sexually oriented businesses shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by the Village or
such other persons as the Village President may designate. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-9: MINORS, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED:
A. No Minors Allowed On Premises: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed on
or enter the premises of a sexually oriented business. A sign indicating the prohibition against the
entry of minors shall be posted in a conspicuous place at all public entrances to the sexually oriented
business.
B. No Alcoholic Beverages: The consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the
licensed business is prohibited. No sexually oriented business shall be located on the premises for
which a license to sell alcoholic beverages has been issued.
C. Certain Conduct Prohibited: No owner, operator, employee of an operator or customer shall on the
premises, engage in or permit the occurrence of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, or other contact stimulation of the genitalia, or engage in or permit the occurrence of any act
constituting the offense of obscenity under the Illinois Criminal Code. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-10: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE FOLLOWING REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 167/649
Any owner or operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for five (5) years
from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be issued
as a sexually oriented business for two (2) years from the date of revocation of the license. (Ord. 1999-04,
3-9-1999)
3-9-11: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR:
A. The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the name, and aliases used by the
employee, home address, age, birthdate, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers,
social security number, date of employment and termination and duties of each employee and such
other information as may be required by the Village President. The above information on each
employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three (3) years following
termination.
B. The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection by police upon
demand of the Village at all reasonable times.
C. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the
employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same
manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
D. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises and
any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-12: OTHER LICENSE PROVISIONS:
A. A license is valid only at the location for which it is issued.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a license.
C. A license may be cancelled upon written request of the owner or operator and surrender of the license
itself to the Village President. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
Chapter 10
MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC USE TAX
3-10-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be known as the MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC USE TAX and is imposed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 168/649
in addition to all other taxes imposed by the village of Minooka, the state of Illinois, or any other municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative
appointed by order of the court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining
within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution
facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative, operating within the state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other
affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this
state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or
qualified to do business in the state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption,
and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2
of the Illinois municipal code1, directly in generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes within the corporate limits of the village of Minooka,
electricity acquired in purchase at retail.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Illinois. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-3: TAX IMPOSED:
A. A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
1. The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the municipality at the following rates, calculated on a
monthly basis for each purchaser:
a. For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.553 cents per kilowatt hour;
b. For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.363 cents per kilowatt hour;
c. For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.327 cents per kilowatt hour;
d. For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.318 cents per kilowatt hour;
e. For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.308 cents per kilowatt hour;
f. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.290 cents per kilowatt hour;
g. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.286 cents per kilowatt
hour;
h. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.281 cents per kilowatt
hour;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 169/649
i. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.277 cents per kilowatt
hour;
j. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month; 0.272
cents per kilowatt hour.
2. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village in the
state of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the state. (Ord. 2002-45, 11-12-2002)
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent
that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or
the constitution of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
C. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers
beginning with the first bill issued on or after December 1, 2002; and with respect to the use or
consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the public utilities act2, or the first
bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. (Ord.
2002-20, 8-13-2002; amd. Ord. 2002-45, 11-12-2002)
3-10-4: EXCEPTIONS:
None of the taxes authorized by this chapter may be imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or
transmitting gas, water, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter for those transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the
"municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code; nor
shall any tax authorized by this chapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any
privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in the
business of the same class in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or
exercising the same privilege within the municipality. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-5: ADDITIONAL TAXES:
Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its business. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-
2002)
3-10-6: COLLECTION:
The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a
place of business in this state who delivers the electricity to the purchaser. Any tax required to be
collected by this chapter, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the
person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for
such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and
provided further that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 170/649
the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns,
remitting the tax and supplying data to the municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity
fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to
the municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file
returns pursuant to this chapter shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of
the tax collected pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-7: REPORTING:
A. On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a return to the village for the
preceding month stating:
1. His name.
2. His principal place of business.
3. His gross receipts and/or kilowatt hour usage during the month upon the basis of which the tax is
imposed.
4. Amount of tax.
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
B. The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the
village of Minooka the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the
taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously
billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings,
and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-8: MISTAKE OR ERROR; CREDIT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this
chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-9: RECOVERY LIMIT:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter shall be commenced
more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-10: VIOLATION OR FRAUD:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 171/649
other provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in addition shall
be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
Chapter 11
COMPREHENSIVE REGULATION OF TOBACCO
PRODUCTS
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the
meanings herein ascribed thereto:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: Any product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that
provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving,
inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include cigarettes,
smokeless tobacco, other tobacco products, or any product approved by the United States food and drug
administration as a nontobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, which is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.
COMPLIANCE CHECK: An inspection conducted with the intention of assessing retail sales of tobacco,
alternative nicotine, or vapor products to minors and enforcing age of sales laws. Compliance checks are
conducted by having designated persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age attempt to purchase
tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products from vendors.
LICENSE: A license issued by the village of Minooka for the retail sale of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or
vapor products.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or club holding a license for the retail sale of
tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products under the provisions of this chapter.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint venture or any
employee or agent thereof.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but
not limited to, any right of way, mall or shopping center, park, playground, and any other property owned
by the village, any school district, or any park district.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS: Open displays of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products, and point
of sale tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor promotional products that the public has access to without
intervention of a store employee.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
VAPOR PRODUCT: Any noncombustible product that employs a heating element, power source,
electronic circuit, or other electronic chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can
be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or any other form. Vapor product includes any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 172/649
electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, as
well as any vapor cartridge or other container that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not
include any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States food and drug administration
under chapter V of the food, drug, and cosmetic act.
VENDING MACHINES: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device which, upon insertion of
money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products. (Ord.
2016-15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall be engaged in the business of selling or offer for sale at retail, give away, deliver or to
keep with the intention of selling at retail, tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products within the limits
of the village without having first procured a valid tobacco retailer's license from the village for each
location in which tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products are sold. All such licenses must be
renewed annually. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code. (Ord. 2016-
15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-3: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless
formally revoked as herein provided, and shall not be transferable, except a new license will be issued
to a tobacco retailer who changes location. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
B. A licensee is further subject to the following restrictions:
1. Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco, Alternative Nicotine, Or Vapor Products: It shall be unlawful to
engage, employ or permit any minor to sell tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products. The
provisions of this section do not prohibit the employment of minors on premises where tobacco,
alternative nicotine, or vapor products are sold or distributed, and do not prohibit the incidental
handling of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products by employees who are minors, such as
in stocking shelves or taking deliveries.
2. Distribution Of Tobacco: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person, business, or retailer to
distribute, give away, or deliver tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products free of charge, or to
deliver any coupon or rebate for tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products to any person on
any right of way, park, playground or other property owned by the village, any school district, any
park district or any public library. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
3. Sale Without Warning: It is unlawful to sell cigarettes out of the manufacturer's package with
required health warnings.
4. Individual Sales: It is unlawful to sell cigarettes individually or in packages of fewer than twenty (20)
cigarettes per package. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. An applicant for license shall submit to the village president an application in writing under oath stating:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 173/649
1. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a
copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation,
the date of incorporation, the purpose for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the
officers and directors and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one
person or his nominees, the name and address of such person.
2. The citizenship of the applicant, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
3. The location and description of the premises which is to be operated under such license.
4. The character of business of the applicant and, in case of a corporation, the object for which it was
formed.
5. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character or, in case of a
corporation, the date on which it was chartered.
6. The applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois, of the United States or the
provisions of this code in the conduct of his place of business.
7. Whether a previous tobacco license by any state or subdivision thereof has been suspended or
revoked.
8. The applicant understands that every act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of any
provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any
licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee
personally.
B. All applications for license shall be accompanied by a certified check, cashier's check, United States
postal money order or cash in the full amount of the license fee required to be paid. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-
10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-5: LICENSE FEE:
A. Annual License Fee: The fee for a one year tobacco retailer's license is seventy five dollars ($75.00)
for each tobacco retail location.
B. Term Of License: No license shall be issued under this chapter for a period of less than one calendar
year unless the same is issued pursuant to application made subsequent to the first day of any fiscal
year, in which event, the license shall be issued for the remaining period of the year, and no license
shall be issued for a period of more than one year. All licenses issued hereunder shall be valid from
May 1 to April 30 of each year.
C. Fee Adjustments, Credits And Rebates: The fee for all licenses for all renewals of existing licenses and
for all new licenses applied for during the first quarter of any fiscal year shall be the full annual fee as
set forth herein, the fee for all licenses applied for during the second quarter of any fiscal year shall be
three-fourths (3/4) of the annual fee as set forth herein, the fee for all licenses applied for during the
third quarter of any fiscal year shall be one-half (1/2) of the annual fee as set forth herein, and the fee
for all licenses applied for during the last quarter of any fiscal year shall be one-fourth (1/4) of the
annual fee as set forth herein. In the event any licensee shall voluntarily surrender a license prior to
the expiration of its term, and a subsequent license shall be issued to any other person for the same
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 174/649
premises during the same fiscal year, the village shall give a credit upon the required second license
fee in the amount of one-fourth (1/4) of the annual fee paid by the former licensee if the first license is
surrendered in the third quarter of such fiscal year, one-half (1/2) of the annual fee paid by the former
licensee if the first license is surrendered in the second quarter of the fiscal year and three-fourths (3/4)
of the annual fee paid by the former licensee if the first license is surrendered in the first quarter of the
fiscal year. There shall be no other rebate of any license fees, and no credit shall be given in the event
a license for any given premises is suspended or revoked during any portion of any fiscal year.
D. Payment Of Fees; Disposition: All license fees shall be paid to the village clerk at the time the
application is made and shall be forthwith turned over to the village treasurer. In the event the license
applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee
shall be deposited in a general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by
the village board by proper action. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
E. Failure To Obtain License, Suspended Or Revoked License: In addition to all other remedies, any
person engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale at retail, giving away, delivering to or
keeping with the intention of selling at retail, tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products within the
limits of the village with a suspended or revoked license or without having first procured a valid
tobacco retailer's license from the village for each location in which tobacco, alternative nicotine, or
vapor products are sold shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
Said violator shall pay the fine amount in full before the village president will consider the approval of
any application for a tobacco retailer's license. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
When the president of the village shall recommend the approval of any application as herein provided, the
applicant shall be issued a license, upon the payment in advance of the required fee, which license shall
be in writing over the name and under the seal of the village, and executed by the president of the village
and attested by the village clerk. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-7: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by him and
shall furnish the clerk of the village, the treasurer of the village, and the chief of police each with a copy
thereof upon the issuance of any new license, and shall notify each of the said officers, in writing, upon
the issuance of any new licenses or suspension or revocation of any old licenses. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-
2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-8: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and
provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right.
(Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-9: LICENSED PREMISES, TRANSFER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 175/649
Licenses issued under this chapter shall apply only to the premises described in the application and in the
license issued thereon, and only one location shall be described in each license. After a license has been
granted for a particular premises, the village president, upon proper showing, may endorse upon said
license permission to abandon the premises therein described and remove therefrom to other premises
approved by it. However, in order to obtain such approval, the licensee shall file with the village president
a request in writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to which removal is to
be made comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-
2004)
3-11-10: POSTING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license to be hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-11: WARNING SIGNS:
Signs informing the public of the age of sale restrictions shall be posted by every licensee at or near every
display of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products which offers said products for sale. Each sign
shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE, OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO PERSONS
UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
The text of such signs must be in red letters on a white background, and said letters must be at least one
inch (1") high. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-12: VENDOR ASSISTED SALES AND VENDING MACHINES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, person, business, or retailer to sell, permit to be sold, or offer for
sale any tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products by means of self-service displays or any other
means other than vendor assisted sales.
B. Tobacco vending machines or any other devices for the sale or distribution of tobacco, alternative
nicotine, or vapor products are prohibited. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-13: PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco, alternative nicotine,
or vapor products within one hundred feet (100') of any school, childcare facility or other building used for
educational or recreational purposes by persons under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-
2016)
3-11-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of any provisions of this chapter by any officer,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 176/649
director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had
been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-15: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee and they are hereby authorized and empowered
to conduct annual, random, unannounced inspections and compliance checks of all places wherein such
tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products are sold, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws
of the state and of the village in relation to the same, are being complied with at such place. (Ord. 2016-
15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-16: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The village president shall be charged with the administration of this chapter. The village president, village
attorney and the police department shall have the authority to enforce this chapter. Each day any violation
of any provision of this chapter or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-17: PROHIBITED SALES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco, alternative
nicotine, or vapor products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. If any person contemplating the sale or furnishing of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products
believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of said smoking materials is prohibited
because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification containing proof of age issued by a public
officer in the performance of his official duties. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-18: PENALTY:
In addition to the suspension and/or revocation of a license and all other remedies, any person who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, other
than subsection 3-11-5E, "Failure To Obtain License, Suspended Or Revoked License", and section 3-11-
21, "Purchase And Possession By Minors Prohibited", of this chapter, shall be sentenced as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
3-11-19: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Procedure: For the first violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, a licensee shall be issued a
written warning and notified in writing of the penalties levied for further violations. A second or
subsequent violation within a one year period by a licensee shall result in a hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 177/649
B. Notice Of Hearing: No such license shall be suspended or revoked except after a public hearing by the
village president with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day
notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service.
C. Decision: The village president shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after
such hearing that the licensee should be fined and/or that the license should be revoked or
suspended, state the reason for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the
fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order
within the seven (7) days upon the licensee. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
1. In the case of a second violation within a one year period, the licensee may be fined in an amount
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the tobacco license may be suspended for not
more than ninety (90) consecutive days. The retailer must then remove all tobacco, alternative
nicotine, and vapor merchandise from all areas accessible to the public while the license is
suspended and shall not sell any tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products.
2. In the case of a third violation within a one year period, the licensee may be fined in an amount not
more than the amount permitted by section 1-4-1 of this code and the tobacco license shall be
suspended for not more than twelve (12) months. The retailer must then remove all tobacco,
alternative nicotine, and vapor merchandise from all areas accessible to the public while the license
is suspended and shall not sell any tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products.
3. In the case of a fourth or subsequent violation within a one year period, the licensee may be fined in
an amount not more than the amount permitted by section 1-4-1 of this code and the tobacco
license shall be revoked. Upon the revocation of a tobacco license, all tobacco, alternative nicotine,
and vapor merchandise must be removed from all areas accessible to the public and the tobacco
retailer shall not sell any tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
The licensee shall pay said fines to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the fines.
Failure to pay said fines within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be
cause for license suspension or revocation or the levy of additional fines.
D. Costs: Any licensee determined by the village president to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing before the village president on such violation.
The village president shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but
not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of
preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village
or such lesser sum as the village president may allow. The licensee shall pay said costs to the village
within thirty (30) days of notification of the fines and costs by the village president. Failure to pay said
costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license
suspension or revocation or the levy of additional fines. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
E. Use Of Premises After License Revocation: When any license shall have been revoked for any cause,
no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct
of the business of selling tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products, as defined in section 3-11-1
of this chapter, in the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
3-11-20: NONRETALIATION:
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 178/649
applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant or customer reported violations
of any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-11-21: PURCHASE AND POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products. It shall
be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered
identification, for the purpose of purchasing tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco, alternative nicotine, or vapor products,
except that the possession of any of the aforementioned smoking materials by a minor under the direct
supervision of the parent or guardian of such minor in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home
shall not be prohibited. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016)
C. In addition to all other remedies, any minor that violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord.
2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Chapter 12
RAFFLES
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the
meanings herein ascribed thereto:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together
to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the
public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in
useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare
favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to
both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as
to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the
conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their
respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for
prizes, license fees, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 179/649
personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation.
ONLINE: Connected to, served by, or available through an electronic information service or the internet,
through a computer or telecommunications system; or done while connected to such a system, e.g.,
online shopping.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the "criminal code of 1961", conducted by an
organization licensed under this chapter, in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated
by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which
chances is to be designated the winning chance;
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an
element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the
lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purposes of religious
worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are
individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which
is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as
to confer a public benefit. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-2: LICENSE:
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall conduct raffles or chances without having first procured a
valid raffle license issued by the village president. The license shall be issued to the operator of said
raffle. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code or Illinois statutes. This
chapter applies to raffles: a) if the applicant sells raffle chances online, or b) if the aggregate retail value of
all prizes or merchandise is more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-3: APPLICATION:
A. An applicant for a raffle license shall submit to the village president an application in writing under oath
at least thirty (30) days prior to the first day intended for sale of the raffle chances.
B. Applications for licenses under this chapter must contain, but are not limited to, the following
information:
1. Name, age, address, date of birth, social security number, and contact number of the applicant in
the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof; and in the case of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the purpose for which it was
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors and if a majority in interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name and address of such
person.
2. Purpose of raffle.
3. Area within the village in which raffle chances will be issued or sold.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 180/649
4. The maximum number of days during which raffle chances will be issued or sold.
5. Time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold.
6. Sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization,
signed by the presiding officer and secretary of the organization.
7. Date, time and location at which winning chances will be determined.
8. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be awarded by a licensee in a single
raffle.
9. The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded by a licensee in a single raffle.
10. The maximum price to be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold and the number of
chances to be issued or sold for each raffle.
11. The name(s), address(es), date(s) of birth, social security number(s) and contact number(s) of the
operator(s) of the raffle and raffle manager(s).
12. The last date and location which the applicant has applied for a raffle license.
13. Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony.
14. Whether or not the applicant will sell raffle chances online, and, if so, the name(s) and address(es)
of the individual, partnership, or corporation licensing the software.
15. Background checks on the operator(s) of the raffle and raffle manager(s). (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-
2007)
3-12-4: VALIDITY OF LICENSE:
Each such license shall be valid for one raffle, and may be suspended or revoked by the corporate
authorities in the event of violation of the terms of this chapter or any applicable state or federal law. (Ord.
2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-5: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A. The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A1, A2, or A3 of this section has a
proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A1, A2, or A3 of this section is an officer,
director or employee, whether compensated or not; or
6. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A1, A2, or A3 of this section is to
participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 181/649
15/0.01 et seq. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-6: NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS:
Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide nonprofit religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal,
educational or veterans' organizations which operate without profit to their members and which have been
in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license
and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying
out their objectives, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the village determines is organized for
the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals
suffering extreme financial hardships as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord. 2007-
32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-7: LIMITATIONS:
A. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not
exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
B. The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
C. The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
D. The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold is limited to three hundred
sixty five (365) days.
E. Licenses issued shall be valid for one raffle to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed
three hundred sixty five (365) days and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter
or 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 et seq.
F. Any raffle where the winning number is drawn or generated in the village of Minooka will be deemed to
be conducted in the village thereby requiring a license to be issued by the village.
G. The license shall authorize the sale of raffle chances only within village limits.
H. Any license issued under the terms of this chapter shall be nontransferable.
I. No person or organization shall be issued more than one license in any three (3) month period.
J. Tickets may be purchased online.
K. Credit cards, cash, or checks may be used to purchase raffle chances. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 182/649
3-12-8: FEES:
The fee for such a license to conduct a raffle shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 2007-32,
6-26-2007)
3-12-9: APPROVAL:
The village president shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application for a raffle license, evaluate
and either approve or disapprove of said application. The village president may appoint persons to assist
in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided, including, but not limited
to, village staff and the chief of police. The approval of a raffle license shall be in writing, signed by the
village president. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-10: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
A. The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
1. Proceeds: The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of
the organization permitted to conduct that game.
2. Participation In Management: No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. The designated raffle manager shall
be a bona fide officer of the sponsoring organization.
3. Remuneration: No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle.
4. Premises: A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in
a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this chapter.
5. Locations: Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified and winning chances
may be determined only at those locations specified.
6. Age Of Participants: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
operation or conduct of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his/her
parent or guardian.
B. If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a raffle are determined, the lessor
shall not be criminally liable if the person who uses the premises for the determining of winning
chances does not hold a license issued by the village under the provisions of this chapter or applicable
state law. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-11: RECORDS:
A. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep such records and shall also keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at
which chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or
occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 183/649
the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of
net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
B. Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the
organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state of Illinois,
and shall be placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles.
The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles
shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
C. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to
its membership, and to the village, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
D. Records required by this section shall be preserved three (3) years, and organizations shall make
available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and
places. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-12: MANAGER'S BOND:
All operations of and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager
designated by the organization. The manager or operator of the raffle must be a bona fide member of the
organization holding the license for such a raffle and may not receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in a sum
equal to the greater of one hundred ten percent (110%) of: a) the anticipated gross receipts to be received
by the organization or b) the estimate aggregate value of all prizes for the raffle, in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his/her honesty in the performance of his/her duties. Terms of the bond
shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license
issued to an organization under this chapter, provided that a license containing such waiver provision
shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-13: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION:
Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the village at any time it appears
that the proposed or actual operation of the raffle will be or is such as to constitute a public nuisance or to
endanger the public peace, health, safety or welfare. Any license granted under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked in whole or in part at any time that the raffle is conducted contrary to the license or
to any state law or village ordinance, or when such raffle or portion thereof is conducted so as to
constitute a public nuisance or to disturb the peace, health, safety or welfare. Suspension or revocation
shall become effective immediately. It shall be a violation for any person to operate, engage or participate
in, except as a patron, any raffle in which a license has been suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-
2007)
3-12-14: PUNISHMENT:
Any license issued under this chapter shall be revoked or suspended if the licensee violates any terms of
the license or any other provisions of this chapter or applicable state law. Any person who violates any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 184/649
provision of this chapter shall be prosecuted in Will/Kendall/Grundy Counties and shall be guilty of a class
C misdemeanor, punished by a fine of not more than the amount as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code,
and/or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days. Each day that a violation hereof exists shall be
considered a separate offense. Each raffle held in violation hereof shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
Chapter 13
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION
3-13-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
A. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference
and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective
after the effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be
applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However,
any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the
village. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-19-2007)
3-13-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and
privacy protection standards of the cable and video customer protection law with respect to complaints
received from residents within the village. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-19-2007)
3-13-3: PENALTIES:
Cable or video providers, in addition to the penalties provided in the law, shall be subject to fine not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for any
material breach of the cable and video customer protection law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a
material breach per customer.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service
quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law.
B. The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the
law and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the
specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that
a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 185/649
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-19-2007)
3-13-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby sets forth the following schedule of customer credits for violations:
A. Failure to provide notice of customer service standards upon initiation of service: Twenty five dollars
($25.00).
B. Failure to install service within seven (7) days: Waiver of fifty percent (50%) of the installation fee or the
monthly fee for the lowest cost basic service, whichever is greater. Failure to install service within
fourteen (14) days: Waiver of one hundred percent (100%) of the installation fee or the monthly fee for
the lowest cost basic service, whichever is greater.
C. Failure to remedy service interruptions or poor video or audio service quality within forty eight (48)
hours: Pro rata credit of total regular monthly charges equal to the number of days of the service
interruption.
D. Failure to keep an appointment or to notify the customer prior to the close of business on the business
day prior to the scheduled appointment: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
E. Violation of privacy protections: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
F. Failure to comply with scrambling requirements: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per month.
G. Violation of customer service and billing standards: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per occurrence.
H. Violation of the bundling rules: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per month.
The credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation, as set forth in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-
501(s). The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no
obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-19-2007)
Chapter 14
CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG
ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 186/649
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits,
property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the
village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per
view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not
limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but
not limited to, service order and service termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to
recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation
arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived
from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the
total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network
to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the
holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with
other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records
that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues
received by the holder of the state issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 187/649
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable
service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or
video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages,
white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by
the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules,
regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to
collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser
certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city,
state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold
through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the
extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of
evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and the interaction of
subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection
or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at
least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile
service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of,
and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the
village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 188/649
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross
revenues, or the fee paid to the village by an incumbent cable operator providing cable service,
whichever is less.
C. Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on
which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The
holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30)
days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice
sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45)
days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers
that have an existing franchise agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees
under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to section 3-14-2 of this
chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%)
of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable
operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village. For purposes of this
subsection, the percentage of gross revenues that all incumbent cable operators pay shall be equal to
the annual sum of the payments that incumbent cable operators in the service area are obligated to
pay by franchises and agreements or by contracts with the village or designee for public, education
and government access, including the total of any lump sum payments required to be made over the
term of each franchise or agreement divided by the number of years of the applicable term, divided by
the annual sum of such incumbent cable operator(s)'s gross revenues during the immediately prior
calendar year. The sum of payments includes any payments that an incumbent cable operator is
required to pay pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c)(3).
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by
the village to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall
commence on the date set forth in subsection 3-14-2D of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 189/649
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five
(45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would
have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the
remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the
fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted
accounting principles. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the
holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications
tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable
service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall
comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable under the requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the
village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq.
No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after
the village's submission of an invoice for the sum. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq.
(Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 190/649
Chapter 15
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the
meanings herein ascribed thereto:
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor and materials;
or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold or where services are offered.
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a person to register with the village and obtain a
certificate of registration as a prerequisite to "doing", "conducting", "engaging in", "maintaining",
"operating", "carrying on" or "managing" a business, such terms, or one or more of such terms, shall
include any person who holds himself forth as being engaged in the business, or who solicits patronage
therefor, either actively or passively, or who performs or attempts to perform any part of such business in
the village, and the omission of one or more of these terms shall not be deemed to exclude the activities
described by the other terms where such activities are in fact carried on by such person. (Ord. 2009-31,
10-27-2009)
3-15-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every person, public or private corporation, limited liability company, firm, partnership, sole proprietorship,
association, organization, or any other group acting as a unit "doing", "conducting", "engaging in",
"maintaining", "operating", "carrying on" or "managing" a business, whether a license is required or not,
must register the business with the village and obtain a certificate of registration. Any new business shall,
within thirty (30) days prior to conducting business, register with the village and obtain a certificate of
registration.
The following persons are exempt from the registration requirements of this chapter:
A. Activities typically conducted by youth under eighteen (18) years of age and/or youth organizations,
including, but not limited to, fundraising for nonprofit organizations (e.g., schools and youth clubs),
lawn mowing, snow shoveling, and babysitting; and
B. Registered not for profit organizations engaged in fundraising activities. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Each registration application shall be made, in writing, to the village clerk on a form provided for that
purpose, accompanied by the applicable registration fee, and shall contain:
A. The name, residence address, and telephone number of the business owner, manager, and/or
operator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 191/649
B. The name of the owner of the property, and if the owner is a different person than the registrant, then
state the residence address and telephone number of the property owner.
C. The location or proposed location of the business.
D. A description of the type of business and business hours.
E. Key holder name and telephone number.
F. The name, address and telephone number of a person or persons who can be contacted during a
response from police, paramedics, the Fire Department, or other emergency responders.
G. An after hours (emergency) contact name and telephone number.
H. Alarm type, alarm company name and alarm company telephone number.
I. Type and location of any toxic, flammable or hazardous materials stored or used at said location.
J. Location of Knox box.
K. Fire protection district that covers business.
L. Any other relevant information about the registrant or the business for police, paramedics, the Fire
Department or other emergency responders.
M. The fee to be paid. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-4: FEE:
A. All registrations required by this chapter shall be for a full year, and the term of each shall commence
on May 1, or thereafter if it is first granted on a date thereafter, whichever may be the case, and shall
expire the following April 30, unless otherwise specified or previously revoked, and the full fee shall be
paid at the time of application in the case of all renewals.
B. In the case of first registrations for which application is made in the first quarter of the term, the full fee
shall be paid; for those made in the second quarter of the term, three-fourths (3/4) of the fee shall be
paid; for those made in the third quarter of the term, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be paid; and for
those made in the last quarter of the term, one-fourth (1/4) of the fee shall be paid.
C. The fee shall be paid to the Village within thirty (30) days from May 1, or thirty (30) days prior to
conducting business. The fees are nonrefundable. Upon registration, the certificate of registration shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 192/649
be valid until April 30.
D. The annual renewal registration fee shall be twenty four dollars ($24.00). An annual reminder letter
shall be sent by the Village Clerk prior to the April 30 expiration date regarding the requirement to
renew the registration and of the fee. However, it is the obligation of each business to renew its
registration and failure to receive an expiration notification is not a defense for operating without a
certificate of registration. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-24-2018)
3-15-5: APPLICATION SUBMISSION:
The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of all registered businesses. Upon receipt of a completed
registration form, the Village Clerk shall provide one copy to the applicable fire protection district and one
copy to the Police Department. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-6: INSPECTION:
As part of the registration process, including any renewal thereof, the Village may conduct an inspection
of the business premises and make a determination as to whether the business premises complies with
the provisions of all applicable Building Codes, zoning ordinances and other regulations in force from time
to time in the Village. Following the inspection, the Village shall provide the registrant with a written report
listing any Code violations and establishing a timetable for compliance and correction of each violation. If
the timetable established for correction of Code violations has expired without the corrections as
determined by the Village during a follow up inspection, fines may be imposed or other action taken as set
forth in the applicable Building Code, zoning ordinance or other provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2009-31,
10-27-2009)
3-15-7: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF REGISTRATION:
No registrant may assign, sell or transfer the certificate of registration to any other person, even if such
other person intends to conduct the same business as the registrant at the location used by the registrant.
Such other person must apply and pay the fee for a new certificate of registration in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Each certificate of registration is valid only for the person and business location
in the registration application. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-8: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION TO BE POSTED:
Every certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous place, and no
certificate of registration shall be permitted to remain posted after the period of such certificate of
registration has expired. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
violation. For failure to register and/or pay the registration fee, the Village shall send notice of the violation
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivery and shall inform the person in violation that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 193/649
they have fourteen (14) days in which to come into compliance; if the violation is not cured within fourteen
(14) days after such notice is sent, then the fine shall be the amount of the fee due and owing plus one
hundred dollars ($100.00), and each day after that in which the violation continues there shall be a fine of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day; these fines are in addition to any other penalty allowed by Federal,
State, County or local law, or otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
Chapter 16
HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified have the meanings
ascribed to them:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters,
sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in a
hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and
accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room or rooms,
regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive
days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure,
public or private corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part
owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in
money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-
26-2010)
3-16-2: TAX IMPOSED; EXEMPTION:
A. There is hereby imposed and shall immediately accrue and be collected a tax upon all persons
engaged in the rental or leasing of any rooms in a hotel in the village at the rate of five percent (5%) of
the gross rental or leasing charge.
B. The tax imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the renting or leasing of any hotel rooms to
permanent residents. If hotel rooms are provided for both permanent residents and other guests, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 194/649
rent obtained from the permanent residents shall not be included in the computation of the tax due.
(Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-3: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAX:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the lessee or tenant of any
such hotel room. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes, and it shall be the
duty of every owner, manager or operator of hotels to secure said tax from the lessee or tenant of said
hotel and pay over to the village said tax as otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The tax herein shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager or operator from the lessee or tenant when
collecting the price, charge or rent to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice,
receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable upon which the hotel tax
shall be stated, charged and shown separately. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-5: FILING OF RETURN:
Every owner, manager or operator of a hotel shall file a sworn tax return on a quarterly basis with the
village on forms prescribed by the village showing tax receipts received with respect to hotel rooms rented
or leased during the preceding quarterly period. At the time of filing of said tax return, the owner, manager
or operator of a hotel shall remit to the village all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
(Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-6: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
A. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of two percent (2%) per month on
the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail
to pay, collect, or remit any tax as provided in this chapter, upon the request of the village, the village
counsel shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. If the village administrator shall find that any person has wilfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by
this chapter, said administrator shall cause a written notice to be sent to the last known place of
business of such licensee informing him that his village license will be suspended or revoked within
ten (10) days of the date of the notice unless the tax is paid in full. If the taxpayer feels he has reason
to protest such action, he shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the president and board of
trustees, such hearing to be applied for, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of such
license revocation or suspension. The village board shall set a hearing date and time within thirty (30)
days from the date of receiving the request for hearing, and notify said aggrieved licensee of such
hearing time and date. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the
owner, manager or operator of a hotel from his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor for
prosecution of such offense. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-7: RECORDS KEPT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 195/649
Every owner, manager or operator of hotels in the village shall keep books and records showing the
prices, rents or charges made or charged and occupancies taxable under this chapter. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-
26-2010)
3-16-8: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX:
The proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter shall be paid into the treasury of
the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of the village to be used for the
purpose of promoting tourism and conventions within the village or to otherwise attract nonresident
overnight visitors to the village or for any other lawful purpose. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be fined no more than as set forth
in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Every day upon which such violation shall occur and upon
which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
Chapter 17
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
3-17-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Utility Tax" and is imposed in addition to
all other taxes imposed by the Village, the State of Illinois, or any other Municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: Means the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas
for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and
property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that "gross
receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in
section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois Municipal Code.
PERSONS: Means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company,
joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company, Municipal corporation, the State or any of its political
subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-3: TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 196/649
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
A. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the Village, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-4: TRANSACTIONS IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to
the extent to which such business may not, under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under the
provisions of this chapter for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-5: TAX NOT LIMITED BY OTHER PAYMENTS:
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this
Municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment
used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross
receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the 1st day of July,
2018. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-7: DATE OF RETURN:
On or before the last day of August, 2018, each taxpayer shall make a return to the Village Treasurer for
the month of July, 2018, stating:
A. His/her name;
B. His/her principal place of business;
C. His/her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
D. Amount of tax;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 197/649
E. Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate Authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Village
Treasurer for a corresponding one-month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the
Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the
taxpayer may, if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts
previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such
billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-8: ERRONEOUS PAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this
chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim
therefore shall be so credited. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-9: LIMITATIONS ON RECOVERY:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter shall be commenced
more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-10: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any
other provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - FATS, OILS, AND GREASES .
Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION
4-1-1: BUILDING OFFICER AND INSPECTOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 198/649
A. Office Created: The office of the building officer and inspector for the village is hereby created.
B. Appointment: The building officer and inspector shall be appointed by the village president and board
of trustees.
C. Duties: Duties of the building officer and inspector shall include administration and enforcement of the
building code for the village. He shall have the authority to issue building permits, certificates of
occupancy and stop work orders.
D. Action On Applications: The building officer and inspector shall not issue any permits or certificates of
occupancy provided for in this chapter without first having received the applicable fees for that permit
or certificate. In the event an applicant for a permit or certificate, as provided for in this chapter, is in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions regarding the payment of
fees, with regard to any property in the village, then the building officer and inspector may withhold
issuance of that permit or certificate until the applicant complies with the applicable provisions of this
chapter. The violations of this chapter, as described above, may relate to the property for which the
permit or certificate is being requested, or may relate to any other property located in the village. (Ord.
2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-1-2: APPLICANT AGREEMENT:
A. If in the event the village board of trustees have approved part or all of the improvements required of
the developer of a subdivision, and the improvement bond has been released on those approved
improvements, a building permit may be issued only if the following requirements are met:
1. The building permit applicant shall sign an agreement, that if during construction on that specified
lot, the improvements to the subdivision are damaged by construction on that lot, no building
occupancy permit will be issued by the building officer and inspector until all damaged
improvements are repaired by the owner of the lot or building permit, to the satisfaction of the
building officer and inspector.
B. In the event unseasonable weather prohibits the installation of sidewalks or other public improvements
as may be required by title 5 of this code for the premises immediately adjacent to any premises for
which an occupancy permit has been requested, such occupancy permit will not be issued unless the
provisions of this subsection have been complied with. The owners of such premises requesting the
issuance of an occupancy permit shall execute and deliver to the village the following:
1. An agreement executed by all of the owners of the premises for which the occupancy permit is to be
issued. The agreement shall be in such form as may be approved by the village attorney, and shall
set forth the agreement of the owners to complete the installation of the sidewalks or other public
improvements by a date certain following the issuance of the occupancy permit. The agreement
shall authorize the village to inspect the sidewalks or public improvements upon completion. In the
event of deficiencies, or in the event such sidewalks or public improvements are not completed by
the date certain, the village shall be authorized to expend the funds held as bond, described
hereafter, to correct any deficiencies or complete the sidewalks and public improvements. The
agreement shall further specify that the village officers, employees and its agents shall be
authorized to come upon the premises of the owners as may be reasonably necessary to perform
any work under the agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 199/649
2. Cash bond in an amount equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the cost of completion of the
sidewalks or public improvements to be completed by owner shall be acquired by said owner. The
cost shall be as estimated by the village superintendent of public works, or by the village engineer.
Such bond shall be held without interest, and shall be returned to the owners upon satisfactory
completion of the sidewalks and public improvements as described above. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-
2010)
4-1-3: BUILDING PERMITS, FEES:
The building officer and inspector of the village, in administering the building regulations of the village,
shall charge and collect the fees with respect to applications for, the issuance of permits for, and the
inspection and supervision of, the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and other structures, in
enforcing the building regulations, as follows:
A.
Residential Construction (Single-Family Dwellings):
1.New construction:
a. Cost per square foot of living area $ 0.70
b. Plan review 100.00
c. Engineering 150.00
d. Public works inspection 220.00
2.For additions, repairs, remodeling or attached garages:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
100.00
plus
per
f. Additional plumbing (3 openings) 40.00
g. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
3.Detached garages:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
plus
per
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 200/649
100.00
f. Additional plumbing (3 openings) 40.00
g. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
4.Swimming pools:
a. Aboveground pools 100.00
b. Inground pools 150.00
5.Alterations or remodeling which do not alter
building structure or add additional area to the
building, based on cost:
a. Less than $2,000.00 35.00
b. Each additional $1,000.00 5.00
c. Plumbing inspection (3 openings) 40.00
d. Each additional opening 10.00
6.Inground sprinkler systems:
a. Permit 50.00
7.Modifications requiring a permit:
a. Fences 50.00
b. Patios 50.00
c. Decks 50.00
d. Sheds 50.00
e. Electrical service 50.00
f. Concrete flatwork 50.00
g. Window replacement with structural
change
50.00
8.Plumbing:
a. Per inspection 35.00
9.Demolition:
a. Permit 100.00
B.
Residential Construction (Two-Family Detached, Single-Family Semidetached And Single-
Family Attached): Note: These dwellings are commonly known as condominiums, duplexes
and townhomes.
1.New construction:
a. Cost per square foot of living area $ 0.70
b. Plan review 100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 201/649
c. Engineering 150.00
d. Public works inspection 220.00
2.For additions, repairs, remodeling or
attached garages:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
100.00
plus
per
f. Additional plumbing (3 openings) 40.00
g. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
3.Detached garages:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
100.00
plus
per
f. Additional plumbing (3 openings) 40.00
g. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
4.Swimming pools:
a. Aboveground pools 100.00
b. Inground pools 150.00
5.Alterations or remodeling which do not alter
building structure or add additional area to the
building, based on cost:
a. Less than $2,000.00 35.00
b. Each additional $1,000.00 5.00
c. Plumbing inspection (3 openings) 40.00
d. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
6.Inground sprinkler systems:
a. Permit 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 202/649
7.Modifications requiring a permit:
a. Fences 50.00
b. Patios 50.00
c. Decks 50.00
d. Sheds 50.00
e. Electrical service 50.00
f. Concrete flatwork 50.00
g. Window replacement with structural
change
50.00
8.Plumbing:
a. Per inspection 35.00
9.Demolition:
a. Permit 100.00
C.
Residential Construction (Multiple-Family Dwellings, Not Including Single-Family Attached
Dwellings Or Single-Family Semidetached Dwellings): Note: Multiple-family dwellings are
commonly known as apartments.
1.New construction:
a. Cost per square foot of living area $ 0.70
b. Plan review 100.00
c. Engineering 150.00
d. Public works inspection 220.00
2.For additions, repairs, remodeling or
attached garages:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
100.00
plus
per
f. Additional plumbing (3 openings) 40.00
g. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
3.Detached garages:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 203/649
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
100.00
plus
per
f. Additional plumbing (3 openings) 40.00
g. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
4.Swimming pools:
a. Aboveground pools 100.00
b. Inground pools 150.00
5.Alterations or remodeling which do not alter
building structure or add additional area to the
building, based on cost:
a. Less than $2,000.00 35.00
b. Each additional $1,000.00 5.00
c. Plumbing inspection (3 openings) 40.00
d. Each additional opening 10.00
6.Inground sprinkler systems:
a. Permit 50.00
7.Fire sprinkler systems:
a. Permit 100.00
8.Modifications requiring a permit:
a. Fences 50.00
b. Patios 50.00
c. Decks 50.00
d. Sheds 50.00
e. Electrical service 50.00
f. Concrete flatwork 50.00
g. Window replacement with structural
change
50.00
9.Plumbing:
a. Per inspection 35.00
10.Demolition up to 50,000 square feet:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 204/649
a. Permit 200.00
D.
Commercial (Includes Business, Industrial, Storage And Institutional Buildings):
1.New construction:
a. Minimum permit fee exclusive of
plumbing
$300.00
b. Plan review $500.00 or fees incurred if completed by third party
consultant
c. Cost per square foot $ 0.25
d. Plumbing inspections for 5 openings
or less
100.00
e. Each additional opening in excess
of 5
10.00
f. Public works inspection 220.00
g. Fire sprinkler system 100.00
2.For additions or incidental accessory buildings:
a. Minimum permit fee exclusive of
plumbing
100.00
b. Cost per square foot 0.40
c. Plumbing inspections (3 openings) 60.00
d. Each additional opening 10.00
3.Alterations or remodeling which do not alter
building structure or add additional area to the
building, based on cost:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
100.00
plus
per
f. Additional plumbing (3 openings) 60.00
g. More than 3 openings 10.00 each
4.Signs:
a. Sign valuation:
(1) Under $100.00 35.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 205/649
(2) $100.00 to $500.00 40.00
(3) Over $500.00 50.00
2.50
100.00
plus
per
b. Portable signs 25.00
c. Temporary signs (not for profit
organizations)
25.00
5.Fences:
a. Valuation to $2,500.00 35.00
b. Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 50.00
c. Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 75.00
d. Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00 125.00
e. Valuation over $10,000.00 125.00
1.00
100.00
plus
per
6.Plumbing:
a. Per inspection 55.00
7.Demolition up to 50,000 square feet:
a. Permit 200.00
E.
Governmental, Religious, Educational Or Charitable Purposes: Whenever the construction,
addition or alteration is being made for governmental, religious, educational or charitable
purposes, the permit fee shall be as listed below:
1.Permit fee, exclusive of plumbing $ 25.00
2.Cost per square foot n/c
3.Plumbing inspections for 5 fixtures or
less
75.00
4.Each additional fixture or opening in
excess of 5 shall be assessed, per fixture
5.00
5.Fire sprinkler system 50.00
F.
Reinspections:
1.Reinspections 40.00 each
(Ord. 2013-21, 6-25-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 206/649
Chapter 2
CODES
4-2-1: BUILDING CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the international building code/2009, and as thereafter amended and on file with the
village clerk as the building code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or
structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the international building code has been on file in the village hall
for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and
inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the international building code, which shall
be available for inspection.
C. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the building code. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
101.1 Title: Insert village of Minooka.
103.1 Department Of Building Safety: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall serve as the code official for the village of Minooka. The
building officer and inspector shall serve under the administrative direction of the village
administrator or a duly authorized designee.
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit: Delete the following:
Numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, and 12.
105.8 Condition Of Permit: Shall read as follows:
Upon completion of the foundation walls and any structural elements which are a necessary part of
the construction of the foundation walls, or are necessary for the completion of the foundation walls,
and before proceeding with further construction, he or she shall file with the department, a survey,
prepared and signed by a registered Illinois land surveyor, showing the location of the structure
perpendicularly to lot lines and the elevation of the top of the foundation walls at all four (4) corners
for which a foundation permit has been issued.
107.2.1 Information On Construction Documents: Shall be added as follows:
Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn on 36" x 24" paper and have any
architectural stamp on all pages. One complete electronic version (PDF format) of the final
construction "as built" dimensions as approved by the building officer and inspector shall be
submitted to the village of Minooka prior to the issuance of the final occupancy. Deviations from the
size requirement may be approved by the building officer and inspector.
109.6 Refunds: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
114.1 Unlawful Acts: Shall read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 207/649
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move,
remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the international
building code or amendments to the international building code as herein provided, or cause same
to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the international building code or
amendments to the international building code as herein provided. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
114.2 Notice Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person
responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition
or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the international building code
or amendments to the international building code as herein provided, or in violation of a permit
certificate issued under the provisions of the international building code. Such order shall direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. Administrative
notices are attempts to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for
jurisdictional purposes.
114.3 Prosecution Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building officer and inspector is authorized
to request the legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the international building code
or amendments to the international building code as herein provided or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereto.
114.4 Violation Penalties: Shall read as follows:
Any person who violates a provision of the international building code or amendments to the
international building code as herein provided or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the building officer and inspector, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of the international building code, shall be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
115.1 Authority: Shall read as follows:
Whenever the building officer and inspector finds any work regulated by the international building
code, amendments to the international building code as herein provided, or village ordinances being
performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of the international building code,
amendments to the international building code as herein provided, village ordinances, or dangerous
or unsafe, the building officer and inspector is authorized to issue a stop work order.
115.2 Issuance: Shall read as follows:
The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to
the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited
work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
115.3 Unlawful Continuance: Shall read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to penalties as prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 208/649
116.1 Conditions: Shall read as follows:
Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient
because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that
involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe
condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building officer
and inspector deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure that is not
secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
116.2 Record: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report
shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
116.3 Notice: Shall read as follows:
If an unsafe condition is found, the building officer and inspector shall serve on the owner, agent or
person in control of the structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and
specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that
requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the
person thus notified to declare immediately to the building officer and inspector acceptance or
rejection of the terms of the order.
116.4 Method Of Service: Shall read as follows:
Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is: a) delivered to the owner
personally; b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address
with the return receipt requested; or c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law. If
the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of
such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the
structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.
116.5 Restoration: Shall read as follows:
The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building officer and inspector is
permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alteration or additions are
made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs,
alterations, additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of section 105.2.2
and chapter 34 of the international building code.
706.1.1 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: Shall read as follows:
For any multi-family unit (5 or more attached units) building permit issued after December 31, 2010,
the multi-family unit shall be constructed with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with
NFPA 13.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 209/649
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
903.1.1 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: Shall read as follows:
For any commercial unit building permit issued after December 31, 2010, the commercial building
shall be constructed with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13 or a third
party approved automatic alternative fire suppressant system.
Exception: A commercial building constructed in the M1 manufacturing district or M2 manufacturing
district that does not have more than 12,000 square feet of floor area, classified as:
a) An accessory building, or
b) Group S1 (storage) or group S2 (storage) as defined in section 311 of the international building
code/2009,
and the "Code For Safety For Life From Fire In Buildings And Structures" as published by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 101), 2000 edition, international building code/2009,
international residential code/2009, or international fire code/2003, does not otherwise require an
automatic fire sprinkler system or a third party approved automatic alternative fire suppressant
system.
(Ord. 2013-33, 12-17-2013)
1015.2.3 Roof Vent Increase: Shall be added as follows:
In buildings which are one story in height, equipped with automatic heat and smoke roof vents
complying with section 903.3.1.1, the maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m)
for occupancies in group F-1 or S.
1612.3 Establishment Of Flood Hazard Areas: Insert village of Minooka.
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-2: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the international residential code/2009, and as thereafter amended and on file with the
village clerk, as the residential code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building
or structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the international residential code has been on file in the village hall
for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and
inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the international residential code, which
shall be available for inspection.
C. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the residential code. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 210/649
indicated provisions of such code.
R101.1 Title: Insert village of Minooka.
R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit: Delete the following:
Numbers 1, 2, 5, and 10.
Add the following:
11. Windows without structural alteration of the opening.
12. Residential reroofing.
R105.3 Application For Permit: Add the following:
8. Where applicable, describe the land in which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address, and signed sealed copy of plat of survey.
R105.10 Condition Of Permit: Shall be added as follows:
Upon completion of the foundation walls and any structural elements which are a necessary part of
the construction of the foundation walls, or are necessary for the completion of the foundation walls,
and before proceeding with further construction, he or she shall file with the department, a survey,
prepared and signed by a registered Illinois land surveyor, showing the location of the structure
perpendicularly to lot lines and the elevation of the top of the foundation walls at all four (4) corners
for which a foundation permit has been issued.
R108.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance: Shall be added as follows:
Persons who commence or complete work without obtaining the required building permit, in addition
to any other fines or penalties, shall be required to pay a penalty prior to issuance of the building
permit. The penalty for commencing or completing work without obtaining the required building
permit shall be the cost of the standard building permit fee, with a maximum penalty as set forth in
section 1-4-1 of the village code.
R113.1 Unlawful Acts: Shall read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move,
remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the international
residential code or amendments to the international residential code as set forth in this chapter, or
cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the international
residential code or amendments to the international residential code as set forth in this chapter.
R113.2 Notice Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person
responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition
or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the international residential
code or amendments to the international residential code as set forth in this chapter, or in violation
of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of the international residential code or amendments to the international
residential code as set forth in this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal
action or condition and the abatement of the violation. Administrative notices are attempts to secure
voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
R113.3 Prosecution Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 211/649
If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time prescribed by such notice, the building
officer and inspector is authorized to request the legal counsel of the village institute the appropriate
legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the
provisions of the international residential code or amendments to the international residential code
as set forth in this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
R113.4 Violation Penalties: Shall read as follows:
Any person who violates a provision of the international residential code or amendments to the
international residential code as set forth in this chapter or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the building officer and inspector, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of the international residential code or amendments to the
international residential code as set forth in this chapter, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed
by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
R114.1 Notice To Owner: Shall read as follows:
Upon notice from the building officer and inspector that work on any building or structure is being
prosecuted contrary to the provisions of the international residential code or amendments to the
international residential code as set forth in this chapter or in an unsafe and dangerous manner,
such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work and
shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume.
R114.2 Unlawful Continuance: Shall read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1
of the village code.
Chapter 2 Definitions: Add the following:
Bedrooms: A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separated from other rooms by a
door. A bedroom will have windows, closet and is physically separate from other rooms.
Large Room Addition: A building addition that increases the existing gross floor area as defined in
chapter 10 of the 2009 international building code of the principal structure by 50% or more.
Partial Razing: New Construction: When 50% or more of a dwelling unit is razed, for which a razing
permit is required, the owner shall be required to obtain a new construction permit for any
replacement work done and shall cause the entire building to conform to the requirements set forth
in this code.
R302.3 Fire Sprinkler Systems: Shall read as follows:
For any multi-family unit (2, 3, or 4 attached units) building permit issued after December 31, 2010,
the multi-family unit shall be constructed with either a minimum four (4) hour rated firewall between
dwelling units, or a fully automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13D.
R309.3 Floor Surface: Shall be added as follows:
If a door opening occurs between garages and dwelling, provide 6 inch curb at the service door, or
construct garage floor six inches (6") lower than adjoining floor. If a stairwell occurs in garage a six
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 212/649
inch (6") gas curb shall be provided around stairwell. The foundation wall can serve as the gas curb
provided the highest elevation of the garage floor is six inches (6") below the top of foundation.
R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
R319.1 Address Numbers: Shall read as follows:
Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for all buildings in such a position as to be plainly
visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall be of a
contrasting color to the building's exterior. Address numbers shall be arabic numerals only and shall
be a minimum of 5" high. All multi-tenant commercial buildings and multi-family residential dwelling
units shall have additional address numbering placed on the rear door, if appropriate, with the same
requirements noted above. Exception: detached residential garages.
R402.1 Wood Foundations: Shall be deleted in its entirety. Also, delete all references to wood
foundations.
R606.1.1 Professional Registration Not Required: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
R802.3.2 Ceiling Joists Lapped: Delete all references to butted joists.
R903.6 Gutters And Downspouts: Shall be added as follows:
All structures shall be provided with gutters and downspouts unless omission is specifically
permitted by the building officer and inspector.
R907.2.10.5 Single And Multiple Station Carbon Monoxide Detectors: Shall read as follows:
All carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of manufacturer's
installation instructions and the household fire-warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
R907.2.10.5.1 Carbon Monoxide Detectors And Notification: Shall read as follows:
Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in the following location:
Within fifteen (15) feet of each bedroom or sleeping room.
R907.2.10.5.2 Power Source: Shall read as follows:
In new construction, required carbon monoxide detectors shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring where such wiring is served from the commercial source and shall be equipped with
a battery backup. Carbon monoxide detectors shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring
shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for over-current
protection.
P2501.1.1 Illinois State Plumbing Code: Shall be added as follows:
All plumbing work shall conform to the Illinois state plumbing code/2004 unless the provisions as set
forth in this chapter 25 are more restrictive.
E3401.1.1 National Electric Code: Shall be added as follows:
All electrical work shall conform to the national electric code/2008 unless the provisions as set forth
in this chapter 34 are more restrictive.
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-3: FUEL GAS CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 213/649
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the international fuel gas code/2009, and as thereafter amended and on file with the
village clerk, as the fuel gas code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or
structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the international fuel gas code has been on file in the village hall
for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and
inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the international fuel gas code, which shall
be available for inspection.
C. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the fuel gas code. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
101.1 Title: Insert village of Minooka.
106.6.2 Fee Schedule: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
106.6.3 Fee Refunds: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
108.1 Unlawful Acts: Shall read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove,
demolish or utilize an installation, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of
the provisions of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as
set forth in this chapter.
108.2 Notice Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall serve a notice of violation or order to the person responsible
for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of work in violation of
the provisions of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as
set forth in this chapter, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved construction documents
thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the international
fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter. Such
order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the
violation. Administrative notices are attempts to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of
prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
108.3 Prosecution Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building officer and inspector may request
the legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of the international fuel gas code or
amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereto.
108.4 Violation Penalties: Shall read as follows:
Persons who shall violate a provision of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the
international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building officer and inspector, or of a permit or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 214/649
certificate issued under the provisions of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the
international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or civil
infraction and punished as prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
108.5 Stop Work Orders: Shall read as follows:
Upon notice from the building officer and inspector that work is being done contrary to the provisions
of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in
this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the building officer and inspector shall not be required to give
a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be punished as prescribed by law and as
provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code.
108.6 Abatement Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the building officer and inspector
from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction, restrain, correct or abate a
violation, prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the installations on or about any premises.
108.7 Unsafe Installations: Shall read as follows:
An installation that is unsafe, constitutes a fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human
life, as regulated by the international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code
as set forth in this chapter, is hereby declared an unsafe installation. Use of an installation regulated
by the international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in
this chapter constituting a hazard to health, safety or welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Such
unsafe installations are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
108.7.1 Authority To Condemn Installations: Shall read as follows:
Whenever the building officer and inspector determines that any installation, or portion thereof,
regulated by the international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as set
forth in this chapter has become hazardous to life, health or property, the building officer and
inspector shall order in writing that such installations either be removed or restored to a safe
condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice. A
person shall not use or maintain a defective installation after receiving such notice. When such
installation is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in section 108.2 of the international
fuel gas code as amended shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property, such
disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice.
108.7.2 Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall have the authority to require disconnection of utility service
to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case of emergency where
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building officer and inspector
shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible, the owner and occupant of the building,
structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 215/649
prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be
notified in writing, as soon as practicable thereafter.
108.7.3 Connection After Order To Disconnect: Shall read as follows:
A person shall not make energy source connections to installations regulated by the international
fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter which
have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building officer and inspector, or the
use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building officer and inspector until the
building officer and inspector authorizes the reconnection and use of such installations. When an
installation is maintained in violation of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the
international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter, and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to
the provisions of this section, the building officer and inspector is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate the violation.
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-4: MECHANICAL CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the international mechanical code/2009, and as thereafter amended and on file with
the village clerk, as the mechanical code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any
building or structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the mechanical code has been on file in the village hall for more
than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the mechanical code, which shall be available for
inspection.
C. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the mechanical code. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
101.1 Title: Insert village of Minooka.
106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
106.5.3 Fee Schedule: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
108.1 Unlawful Acts: Shall read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove,
demolish or utilize a mechanical system, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of
any of the provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the international
mechanical code as set forth in this chapter.
108.2 Notice Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall serve a notice of violation or order to the person responsible
for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of mechanical work
in violation of the provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the international
mechanical code as set forth in this chapter, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved
construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 216/649
provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical code
as set forth in this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation. Administrative notices are attempts to secure voluntary
compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
108.3 Prosecution Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building officer and inspector is authorized
to request the legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of the international mechanical
code or amendments to the international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter or of the order
or direction made pursuant thereto.
108.4 Violation Penalties: Shall read as follows:
Persons who shall violate a provision of the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building officer and inspector, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or civil
infraction and punished as prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
108.5 Stop Work Orders: Shall read as follows:
Upon notice from the building officer and inspector that mechanical work is being done contrary to
the provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical
code as set forth in this chapter, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately
cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the
owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which
work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building officer and inspector shall
not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue
any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be punished as
prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code.
108.6 Abatement Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal counsel of the village
from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the mechanical systems on or about any premises.
108.7 Unsafe Mechanical Systems: Shall read as follows:
A mechanical system that is unsafe, constitutes a fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to
human life, as regulated by the international mechanical code or amendments to the international
mechanical code as set forth in this chapter, is hereby declared an unsafe mechanical system. Use
of a mechanical system regulated by the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter, constituting a hazard to health, safety or
welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, fire hazard, disaster, damage or
abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Such unsafe equipment and appliances are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 217/649
108.7.1 Authority To Condemn Mechanical Systems: Shall read as follows:
Whenever the building officer and inspector determines that any mechanical system, or portion
thereof, regulated by the international mechanical code or amendments to the international
mechanical code as set forth in this chapter has become hazardous to life, health or property, the
building officer and inspector shall order in writing that such systems either be removed or restored
to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written
notice. A person shall not use or maintain a defective mechanical system after receiving such
notice. When such mechanical system is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in section
108.2 of the international mechanical code as amended shall be given. In cases of immediate
danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice.
108.7.2 Authority To Order Disconnection Of Energy Sources: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall have the authority to require disconnection of energy
sources supplied to a building, structure or mechanical system regulated by the international
mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter,
when it is determined that the mechanical system or any portion thereof has become hazardous or
unsafe. Written notice of such order to disconnect service and the causes therefor shall be given
within 2 hours to the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises, provided, however,
that in cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately
without such notice. Where energy sources are provided by a public utility, the building officer and
inspector shall immediately notify the serving utility in writing of the issuance of such order to
disconnect.
108.7.3 Connection After Order To Disconnect: Shall read as follows:
A person shall not make energy source connections to mechanical systems regulated by the
international mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical code as set forth in
this chapter which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building officer and
inspector, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building officer and
inspector until the building officer and inspector authorizes the reconnection and use of such
mechanical systems. When a mechanical system is maintained in violation of the international
mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter,
and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building officer and
inspector shall institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-5: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the international energy conservation code/2015, published by the International Code
Council, and as thereafter amended and on file with the village clerk, as the energy conservation code
for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or structure which does not comply
with the regulations except as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2016-08, 2-23-2016)
B. Minimum Requirements: This code shall be the minimum requirements for commercial buildings,
applying to the construction of, renovations to, and additions to all commercial buildings, and the
minimum and maximum requirements for residential buildings, applying to the construction of all
residential buildings.
C. Application: This code shall apply to any new building or structure for which a building permit
application is received. In the case of any addition, alteration, renovation, or repair to an existing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 218/649
commercial structure, this code applies only to the portions of that structure that are being added,
altered, renovated, or repaired. Further, additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs to an existing
building, building system, or portion thereof shall conform to the provisions of this code as they relate
to new construction without requiring the unaltered portion of the existing building or building system to
comply with this code.
D. Copies On File: At least one copy of the international energy conservation code has been on file in the
village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building
officer and inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the international energy
conservation code, which shall be available for inspection.
E. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the international energy conservation code. These provisions supersede the
requirements of the indicated provisions of such code.
101.1 Title: Insert village of Minooka.
103.3.3 Phased Approval: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
107.5 Refunds: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
108.1 Authority: Shall read as follows:
Whenever the building officer and inspector finds any work regulated by the international energy
conservation code or amendments to the international energy conservation code as set forth in
this chapter dangerous or unsafe, the building officer and inspector is authorized to issue a stop
work order.
108.2 Issuance: Shall read as follows:
The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or
to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the
cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and
the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
108.3 Emergencies: Shall read as follows:
Where an emergency exists, the building officer and inspector shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work.
108.4 Failure To Comply: Shall read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
punished as prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 219/649
109.1 Board Of Appeals: Shall read as follows:
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals. The building official shall be an ex officio member of said board but
shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall consist of the
planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules of
procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing.
109.3 Qualifications: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
F. Noncompliance: The following need not comply with this code, provided that the energy use of the
building is not increased:
1. Storm windows installed over existing fenestration.
2. Glass only replacements in an existing sash and frame.
3. Existing ceiling, wall, or floor cavities exposed during construction, provided that these cavities are
filled with insulation.
4. Construction where the existing roof, wall, or floor is not exposed.
5. Reroofing for roofs where neither the sheathing nor the insulation is exposed. Roofs without
insulation in the cavity and where the sheathing or insulation is exposed during reroofing shall be
insulated either above or below the sheathing.
6. Replacement of existing doors that separate conditioned space from the exterior shall not require
the installation of a vestibule or revolving door, provided, however, that an existing vestibule that
separates a conditioned space from the exterior shall not be removed.
7. Alterations that replace less than fifty percent (50%) of the luminaires in a space, provided that such
alterations do not increase the installed interior lighting power.
8. Alterations that replace only the bulb and ballast within the existing luminaires in a space provided
that the alteration does not increase the installed interior lighting power.
G. Exemptions: The following buildings shall be exempt from this code:
1. Buildings otherwise exempt from the provisions of a locally adopted building code and buildings that
do not contain a conditioned space.
2. Buildings that do not use either electricity or fossil fuel for comfort conditioning. For purposes of
determining whether this exemption applies, a building will be presumed to be heated by electricity,
even in the absence of equipment used for electric comfort heating, whenever the building is
provided with electrical service in excess of one hundred (100) amps, unless this code enforcement
official determines that this electrical service is necessary for purposes other than providing electric
comfort heating.
3. Historic buildings. This exemption shall apply to those buildings that are listed on the national
register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places, and to those buildings that have
been designated as historically significant by a local governing body that is authorized to make such
designations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 220/649
4. Other buildings specified as exempt by this code. (Ord. 2013-10, 4-23-2013)
4-2-6: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the international property maintenance code/2009, and as thereafter amended and on
file with the village clerk, as the property maintenance code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect
or improve any building or structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter
provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the international property maintenance code has been on file in
the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The
building officer and inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the international
property maintenance code, which shall be available for inspection.
C. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the international property maintenance code. These provisions supersede the
requirements of the indicated provisions of such code.
101.1 Title: Insert village of Minooka.
103.5 Fee Schedule: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
106.1 Unlawful Acts: Shall read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of the international property maintenance code or amendments to the international
property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter.
106.2 Notice Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with
section 107 of the international property maintenance code. Administrative notices are attempts to
secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
106.3 Prosecution Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with section
107 of the international property maintenance code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil
infraction and punished as prescribed by law and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code,
and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied
with, the building officer and inspector shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of the international property maintenance
code or amendments to the international property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter or of
the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the village on such premises shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
106.4 Violation Penalties: Shall read as follows:
Any person who shall violate a provision of the international property maintenance code or
amendments to the international property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter, or fail to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 221/649
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be punished as prescribed by law
and as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
106.5 Abatement Of Violation: Shall read as follows:
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the building officer and inspector
from requesting the legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law
or in equity to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building,
structure or premises.
108.1 General: Shall read as follows:
When a structure or equipment is found by the building officer and inspector to be unsafe, or when a
structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of the international property maintenance code or
amendments to the international property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter.
108.1.1 Unsafe Structures: Shall read as follows:
An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the
public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn
occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so
damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable
foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
108.1.2 Unsafe Equipment: Shall read as follows:
Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical
wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health,
property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
108.1.3 Structure Unfit For Human Occupancy: Shall read as follows:
A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the building officer and inspector finds that such
structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks
maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks
ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by the
international property maintenance code or amendments to the international property maintenance
code as set forth in this chapter, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public.
108.1.4 Unlawful Structure: Shall read as follows:
An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than
permitted under the international property maintenance code or amendments to the international
property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary
to law.
108.2 Closing Of Vacant Structures: Shall read as follows:
If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of
structural collapse, the building officer and inspector is authorized to post a placard of condemnation
on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the building
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 222/649
officer and inspector shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available
public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
108.2.1 Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service
to the building, structure or system regulated by the international property maintenance code or
amendments to the international property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter and the
referenced codes and standards set forth in section 102.7 in case of emergency where necessary to
eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property when such utility connection has been made
without approval. The building officer and inspector shall notify the serving utility, and whenever
possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to
disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of
the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practicable thereafter.
108.3 Notice: Shall read as follows:
Whenever the building officer and inspector has condemned a structure or equipment under the
provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment in accordance with section 107.3 of the international property maintenance
code. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The
notice shall be in the form prescribed in section 107.2 of the international property maintenance
code.
108.4 Placarding: Shall read as follows:
Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time
given, the building officer and inspector shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a
placard bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
108.4.1 Placard Removal: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or
defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the building officer
and inspector shall be punished as prescribed by law, the international property maintenance code
or amendments to the international property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter, and as
provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code.
108.5 Prohibited Occupancy: Shall read as follows:
Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the building officer and inspector shall be
vacated as ordered by the building officer and inspector. Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the
premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall
be liable for the penalties provided by the international property maintenance code or amendments
to the international property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter, and as provided in
section 1-4-1 of the village code.
108.6 Abatement Methods: Shall read as follows:
The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the
building officer and inspector shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 223/649
either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action.
109.1 Imminent Danger: Shall read as follows:
When, in the opinion of the building officer and inspector, there is imminent danger of failure or
collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure
has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or
potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or
operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building officer and inspector is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The
building officer and inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice
reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Building Officer and Inspector". It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for
the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.
109.2 Temporary Safeguards: Shall read as follows:
Notwithstanding other provisions of the international property maintenance code, whenever, in the
opinion of the building officer and inspector, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition,
the building officer and inspector shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding
up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building officer
and inspector deems necessary to meet such emergency.
109.3 Closing Streets: Shall read as follows:
When necessary for public safety, the building officer and inspector shall temporarily close
structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public
ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
109.3 Emergency Repairs: Shall read as follows:
For the purpose of this section, the building officer and inspector shall employ the necessary labor
and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
109.3 Hearing: Shall read as follows:
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any
affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board as set forth in the
international property maintenance code be afforded a hearing as described in the international
property maintenance code.
109.4 Costs Of Emergency Repairs: Shall read as follows:
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work may be paid by the village. The legal counsel
of the village may institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe
structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs if paid by the village.
110.1 General: Shall read as follows:
The building officer and inspector shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the building officer and inspector's judgment after review is so deteriorated or
dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit
for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 224/649
to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where
there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two (2)
years, the building officer and inspector shall order the owner to demolish and remove such
structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend
beyond one year, unless approved by the building officer and inspector.
110.2 Notices And Orders: Shall read as follows:
All notices and orders shall comply with section 107 of the international property maintenance code.
110.3 Failure To Comply: Shall read as follows:
If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the
building officer and inspector shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either
through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost
of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
110.4 Salvage Materials: Shall read as follows:
When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other
designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of
such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person
who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such surplus does not remain to be turned
over, the report shall so state.
302.4 Weeds: Insert twelve (12) inches.
304.14 Insect Screens: Insert May 1st to October 31st.
602.3 Heat Supply: Insert October 31st to May 1st.
602.4 Occupiable Work Space: Insert May 1st to October 31st.
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-7: EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the international existing building code/2009, and as thereafter amended and on file
with the village clerk, as the existing building code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or
improve any building or structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter
provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the international existing building code has been on file in the
village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building
officer and inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the international existing
building code, which shall be available for inspection.
C. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the international existing building code. These provisions supersede the
requirements of the indicated provisions of such code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 225/649
101.1 Title: Insert village of Minooka.
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-8: ELECTRIC CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the national electric code/2008, and as thereafter amended and on file with the village
clerk, as the electric code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or
structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the national electric code has been on file in the village hall for
more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and
inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the national electric code, which shall be
available for inspection.
C. Special Provisions: Reserved. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-9: ACCESSIBILITY CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the Illinois state accessibility code/1997, and as thereafter amended and on file with
the village clerk, as the accessibility code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any
building or structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the Illinois state accessibility code has been on file in the village
hall for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer
and inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the Illinois state accessibility code,
which shall be available for inspection.
C. Special Provisions: Reserved. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-10: PLUMBING CODE:
A. Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, that certain building
code known as the Illinois state plumbing code1 and as thereafter amended and on file with the village
clerk, as the existing plumbing code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building
or structure which does not comply with the regulations except as hereinafter provided.
B. Copies On File: At least one copy of the Illinois state plumbing code has been on file in the village hall
for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and
inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the Illinois state plumbing code, which
shall be available for inspection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 226/649
C. Special Provisions: The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the following
designated sections of the Illinois state plumbing code. These provisions supersede the requirements
of the indicated provisions of such code.
750.1000 Civil Penalties For Unlicensed Plumbers: Shall read as follows:
a) A person who practices, offers to practice, or holds himself or herself out to practice as a
plumber without being licensed under the provisions of the Illinois plumbing code or amendments
to the Illinois plumbing code as set forth in this section may be subject to an order of correction to
a telecommunications carrier for improper advertising under 225 ILCS 320/5(b.10) and shall be
issued a civil penalty under the following criteria:
1) First offense
A) Where no violations of the Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing
code as set forth in this section are found, the person:
i) Shall pay a civil penalty of $1000;
ii) May be referred to the state's attorney, village attorney or attorney general for
prosecution.
B) Where violations of the Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code
as set forth in this section are found, the person:
i) Shall pay a civil penalty of $3000. The penalty may be reduced to $1000 upon the
condition that the unlicensed person pays for a licensed plumber to correct the violations of
the Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code as set forth in this
section. The licensed plumber correcting the violations must be acceptable to the other
party to the original contract or agreement;
ii) May be referred to the state's attorney, village attorney or attorney general for
prosecution.
2) Second offense
A) Where no violations of the Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing
code as set forth in this section are found, the person:
i) Shall pay a civil penalty of $3000;
ii) May be referred to the state's attorney, village attorney or attorney general for
prosecution.
B) Where violations of the Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code
as set forth in this section are found, the person:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 227/649
i) Shall pay a civil penalty of $5000. The penalty may be reduced to $3000 upon the
condition that the unlicensed person pays for a licensed plumber to correct the violations of
the Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code as set forth in this
section. The licensed plumber correcting the violations must be acceptable to the other
party to the original contract or agreement;
ii) May be referred to the state's attorney, village attorney or attorney general for
prosecution.
3) Third and subsequent offenses
A) The person shall pay a civil penalty of $5000;
B) The person shall be referred to the state's attorney, village attorney or attorney general for
prosecution.
b) A licensed plumber, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, who directs, authorized or
allows a person to practice, offer to practice, attempt to practice, or hold himself or herself out to
practice as a plumber without being licensed under the provisions of the Illinois plumbing license
law2:
1) First offense
A) Shall pay a civil penalty of $5000;
B) Shall be required to pay for a licensed plumber to correct the violations of the Illinois
plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code as set forth in this section. The
licensed plumber correcting the violations must be acceptable to the other party to the
original contract or agreement;
C) Shall have his or her plumbing license suspended;
D) May be referred to the state's attorney, village attorney or attorney general for prosecution.
2) Second offense
A) Shall pay a civil penalty of $5000;
B) Shall be required to pay for a licensed plumber to correct the violations of the Illinois
plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code as set forth in this section. The
licensed plumber correcting the violations must be acceptable to the other party to the
original contract or agreement;
C) Shall have his or her plumbing license revoked;
D) Shall be referred to the state's attorney, village attorney or attorney general for
prosecution.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 228/649
D. Violation Penalties:
1. Any person who advertises plumbing services:
a. Who fails to display the license number required by 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/5(a) in all
manners required by that subsection,
b. Who fails to provide a publisher with the correct number under 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
320/5(b), or
c. Who provides a publisher with a false license number or a license number of a person other than
the person designated under subsection (a), or any person who allows his or her license number
to be displayed or used in order to allow any other person to circumvent any provisions of this
section,
is guilty of a class A misdemeanor with a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which shall be
subject to the enforcement provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/29. Each day that a
person fails to display the required license under 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/5(a) and each
day that an advertisement runs or each day that a person allows his or her license to be displayed
or used in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
320/5(b.5)
2. In addition to, and not in lieu of, the penalties and remedies provided for in this section and 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/29, any person licensed under 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
320/0.01 et seq. who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to suspension or
revocation of his or her license under 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/19. 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 320/5(b.5)
3. In addition to, and not in lieu of, the penalties and remedies provided for in this section and 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/19, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/20, and 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 320/29, and after notice and an opportunity for hearing as provided for in this section and
225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/19, an order of correction may be issued to the
telecommunications carrier furnishing service to any telephone number contained in a printed
advertisement for plumbing services that is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section.
The order of correction shall be limited to the telephone number contained in the unlawful
advertisement. The order of correction shall notify the telecommunications carrier to disconnect the
telephone service furnished to any telephone number contained in the unlawful advertisement and
that subsequent calls to that number shall not be referred by the telecommunications carrier to any
new telephone number obtained by or any existing number registered to the person. 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 320/5(b.10)
4. Except as otherwise provided in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/5(b.5), any person violating any
provision of this section or of a rule or regulation or a Plumbing Code promulgated thereunder
including the Minimum Code of Plumbing Standards promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor and a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense; and a second
or subsequent violation shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor with a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. The State's Attorney of the County
in which the violation occurred, the Village Attorney or the Attorney General shall bring such actions.
The court may enjoin the use of plumbing installed in violation of this section or of a rule or
regulation promulgated thereunder until it has been corrected to comply with the minimum standards
for plumbing promulgated under 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/35. 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 320/29
5. If it is established that the defendant contrary to this section has been or is engaging in or about to
engage in plumbing without having been issued a license or has been or is engaged in or is about to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 229/649
engage in plumbing after his or her license has been suspended or revoked or after his license has
not been renewed, the court may enter a judgment perpetually enjoining the defendant from further
engaging in plumbing contrary to this section. In case of violation of any injunction entered under
this section, the court may summarily try and punish the offender for contempt of court. Such
injunction proceedings shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, all penalties and other remedies in
this section. 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/29 (Ord. 2014-29, 10-28-2014)
4-2-11: FIRE CODE:
A. The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code, including appendix B, C, D, F, H, I, K, L, and M as
published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as the Village of Minooka ("Village")
Fire Code ("code"), which shall regulate and govern the safeguarding of life and property from the
hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances,
materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of
existing or proposed new buildings or premises. The code shall also regulate and govern the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor.
B. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code on file in the
Village of Minooka are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes as are hereafter set forth.
C. Nothing in this code shall affect single and multifamily dwellings, attached or detached, that do not
exceed three (3) stories in height.
D. The following additions, insertions, deletions, and changes shall be effective and applicable to the 2015
International Fire Code as adopted herein:
101.1 Title.
Insert: Village of Minooka.
103.1 General
Delete this section
103.2 Appointment.
Delete text and replace with the following:
The Village of Minooka appoints the Minooka Fire Protection District Fire Chief as its fire code
official. The Village building and zoning officer shall be the Village's liaison with the fire code official
and shall retain those responsibilities under this Code not herein delegated to the fire code official;
however, the building and zoning officer may request the advice and recommendation of the fire
code official in the performance of his or her duties and contract, with approval of the Village Board,
with third party consultants for plan review and recommendation in the execution of any other duties
requiring specific expertise in fire protection.
The building and zoning officer may recommend policies and procedures to the Village board that
he or she deems appropriate to carry out the enforcement of this Code, and may request the advice
of the fire code official in recommending any such policies or procedures.
103.3 Deputies
Delete text and replace with the following:
The fire code official may, at his or her discretion, assign duties of the fire code official under this
Code to his or her subordinates, as appropriate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 230/649
104.1 General
Delete text and replace with the following:
Except where the Village has contracted with and relied upon a third party for services related to the
interpretation and enforcement of this Code, the fire code official's interpretation of this Code and to
recommend policies, procedures, rules and regulations shall be taken under consideration by the
Village in order to clarify application of its provisions.
104.2 Application and permits.
Replace "fire code official" with "building and zoning officer."
104.5 Notice and orders
Delete text and replace with the following:
Should the fire code official find a violation of this code during an inspection required under this
code, he or she shall issue a notice of violation to the premises owner, with a warning to correct the
violation within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice of violation. After thirty (30) days have
elapsed from the date the notice of violation and warning were issued, the fire code official shall
reinspect the premises. If the violation has been found corrected upon reinspection, no further action
will be taken. If the violation has not been corrected by the reinspection date, the fire code official
shall notify the building and zoning officer within two business days after the reinspection.
Upon notice from the fire code official of the uncorrected violation, the building and zoning officer
shall verify the violation has not been corrected. If the violation has not been corrected, the building
and zoning officer is authorized to issue a violation notice and report form in the name of the Village.
Violations shall be adjudicated pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 18 of the Village Code for Building Code
Adjudication. The building and zoning officer may reinspect the premises prior to hearing under Title
1, Chapter 18 of the Village Code, upon request from the owner or occupant of the premises.
104.6.4 Administrative.
Delete this section.
104.7 - 104.9.2
Replace "fire code official" with "building and zoning officer."
Section 105: Permits
Replace "fire code official" with "building and zoning officer."
105.4.2.1 Fire Protection Shop Drawings
Add the following:
For each hydraulically calculated automatic fire sprinkler system area identified, on submitted shop
drawings, provide a copy of the hydraulic name plate.
105.4.2.3 Plan Review and Site Inspection Fee Schedule
Add as additional sections for local jurisdiction
Each applicant shall submit three (3) printed sets and an electronic copy of sprinkler, fire alarm, and
construction documents essential for third party review. All fees to be directly paid to the third party
review firm.
106.1 Inspection authority.
Add after "fire code official" "and building and zoning officer." Replace "is" with "are."
106.2 Inspections.
Add after "fire code official" "and building and zoning officer." Replace "is" with "are."
108.1 Board of appeals established.
Delete this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 231/649
109.3 Notice of violation.
Add "or building code officer" after "fire code official."
109.3.1 Service.
Delete this paragraph and insert the following:
Notices of violation shall be served as provided in Title 1, Chapter 18 of the Village Code for the
Village's Building Code Adjudication.
109.3.3 Prosecution of violations.
Replace "fire code official with "building and zoning officer."
109.4.1 Abatement of Violation.
Replace "fire code official" with "Village."
Section 111: Stop Work Order
Replace "fire code official" with "building and zoning officer."
111.4 Failure to Comply
Replace that part beginning with "Shall be liable...." with the following:
shall be punished as provided in Section 4-2-12 of the Village Code.
Add as an additional section:
Section 301.3 Protection of Occupants/Public
Whenever and wherever, within the jurisdiction of the Village of Minooka a condition is found in any
building, lot or premises, that in the joint opinion of the building and zoning officer and fire code
official is ambiguous but still remains as part of the provisions of this Chapter, but that requires
correction or removal for the protection of the occupants or the public, the building and zoning officer
and fire code official, shall order such conditions corrected or removed and the owner or occupant of
such buildings, lots, or premises shall comply with such order. The building and zoning officer and
fire code official will refer to the most applicable building and fire code sections of the current code.
Add as an additional section:
316.7 Truss construction emblems
The owner of any commercial or industrial structure, or any multiunit residential structure of three (3)
units or more, that uses light-frame truss-type construction shall allow the marking of the structure
with a truss construction emblem so as to provide warning to persons conducting fire control and
other emergency operations of the existence of light-frame truss-type construction in the structure.
The truss construction emblem shall be provided by the fire code official and shall be permanently
affixed to the building as directed by the fire code official.
503.1.4 Fire Apparatus Access and Review
Add as additional paragraph to the section:
All fire apparatus access road and fire lanes shall be reviewed and recommendations made by the
fire code official and approved by the village engineer.
503.2.1 Dimensions
Add as an additional sentence to the paragraph
Unless otherwise increased by the fire code official due to apparatus size and access concerns, for
any new construction and with the village consent and approval.
503.2.3 Surfaces
Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to Village Engineering Standards.
Add as an additional sentence to the paragraph:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 232/649
It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the surface of the fire access road/lanes at
all times, including the maintenance of a clear path for fire apparatus staging and/or parking.
503.2.9 Private Drive Identification
Add as an additional paragraph:
It is the responsibility of residents or in the case of Homeowners Association to provide approved
address markings at the intersection of a private drive and the public right of way so that the fire
district and police department can identify the addresses down extended private lanes. In the event
there are multiple buildings or residences that branch from the private drive, the address must be
placed on the building or residence which is visible upon approach.
506.1 Where required.
Add as additional paragraphs:
All access roads protected by an automatic gate shall be provided with an access system approved
by the fire code official allowing the fire district rapid access to the property in the event of a fire,
alarm, or other emergency.
All buildings/units with automatic fire alarm systems, automatic fire suppression systems, and/or
medical alert systems shall have installed a key lock box in a location(s) approved by the fire code
official, for access during an activation of an alarm and/or emergency.
507.2.3 Dimension of Water Supply Mains
Add as an additional paragraph
Water mains supplying water to required hydrant system shall not be less than eight (8) inches in
diameter.
(Ord. 2018-06, 1-23-2018)
507.5.1 - Where required (Fire Hydrants).
Add as an additional paragraph:
The maximum hydrant spacing shall be no more than four hundred (400) feet apart. Hydrants in
areas zoned multi-family, commercial, industrial or mixed occupancy shall be spaced no farther than
three hundred (300) feet apart except as provided in Appendix C that may require spacing between
hydrants to be less than three hundred (300) feet based on fire flow requirement. Spacing shall be
measured as normal roadway travel between hydrants on an adjacent, all weather, and public road
as hose can be laid from a fire district apparatus and in accordance. All hydrants shall be located
within sixteen (16) feet of the paved portion of an all-weather public roadway with a two (2) feet
minimum setback from curbs or edges of pavement. Variances may be required by the local
authority.
(Ord. 2018-24, 8-28-2018)
Add as an additional section:
507.5.1.2 Hydrant for FDC
Additional fire hydrants shall be located in an approved location of the Fire District Connection
(FDC).
Add as an additional section:
607.9 - Elevator size specifications
Elevator cars shall be of size and dimensions to accommodate the ambulance stretcher used by the
Fire Protection District. In the buildings two stories in height or more, and required to have an
elevator, at least one elevator shall be of such size and arrangement to accommodate a twenty-four
(24) inch by eighty-four (84) inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open position. The diagonal
inside measurements of the elevator car shall not be less than ninety-six (96) inches. When two
elevators are provided in the building and only one is "stretcher" compliant the "stretcher" compliant
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 233/649
elevator shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (Star of Life)
that is not less than three (3) inches high and shall be placed on the elevator door frame on each
floor. The inside hand rail shall be set at the maximum thirty-six (36) inch height allowed under the
American with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards to better accommodate the stretcher. The cab size is
to be a minimum five (5) foot by seven (7) foot platform and minimum two thousand five hundred
(2,500) lb. capacity with a forty-two (42) inch slide door.
Add as an additional section:
607.9.1 - Elevator Communications
All required emergency elevator phones shall directly dial either a 24/7 manned front desk or the
Fire Protection District's Communications Center via the phone number designated by the fire code
official
SECTION 901 - FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS GENERAL
Section 901.4.6 - Pump and riser room size.
Add as additional paragraph:
All fire sprinkler control rooms and fire pump rooms shall be accessible by a direct outside access
door and accessible from inside the building. The doors shall be marked with 6 inch lettering
identifying the rooms. The fire sprinkler control room shall be provided with a one hour separation
from the remaining building.
Add the following section:
901.11 Multi Tenant Occupancy
When an automatic suppression system is installed in a multi tenant building, each tenant shall have
its own sprinkler supply line off the main or riser with its own water flow switch and control valve. A
strobe light shall be mounted on the exterior front of that tenant. The strobe light shall activate upon
water flow and/or fire alarm activation within the individual unit.
Section 902.1 Definitions
Add the following definitions:
Fire Area. The aggregate floor area bounded by the exterior walls of a building; regardless of fire
walls, fire barriers, or fire resistance-rated horizontal assemblies.
Fire Area is defined as the entire building that cannot be subdivided into multiple fire areas to permit
the omission of automatic fire sprinklers.
Section 903.2 Where required.
Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in
locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12.
Amend as follows:
Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in all use groups and every fire area shall
be provided with an automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with the requirements of
the applicable standards; NFPA 13, NFPA 13R, NFPA 13D. All fire areas stated as 12,000 square
feet or greater shall be reduced to 0 square feet. The fire code official shall approve any exempt
locations for fire sprinkler coverage. Provide in all use groups S and F with a ceiling roof height of
twenty five (25) feet or greater with an Early Suppression Fast Response (ESFR) fire sprinkler
system or a hydraulically calculated system for Class IV commodities with rack storage calculated to
the greatest storage height. All fire sprinkler systems shall be supervised by an approved automatic
fire alarm system directly connected to the Fire Districts dispatch center.
The exception as specified in IFC 2015 Section 903.2 shall apply in addition to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 234/649
Exceptions:
1. Mobile portable storage buildings as determined by fire code official.
2. Group R3 homes of less than 5,000 square feet living space.
3. Mobile retail estate sales and constructions trailers utilized during the development of property
when approved by the fire code official.
4. Occupancy Group S where fire area is less than 12,000 square feet, and ceiling roof height is
less than twenty-five (25) feet. This exception shall not apply to S-1 buildings that include bulk
storage cloth, burlap and paper, books and paper in rolls or packs; cardboard and cardboard
boxes; furniture, tires, upholstery, mattresses which for the purpose of this ordinance is classified
as Group H.
5. Occupancy Group U buildings as an accessory building to other occupancy classifications and
is under 12,000 square feet.
903.3.5 Age of Hydraulic Data
Insert as additional to the section:
Hydrant water flow data used for the design of any sprinkler system shall be measured as required
by the Village, but in no circumstance will be older than three (3) years. The Village may require
updated flow data to be collected as a result of changes to water system design, usage, or demand
in a period more recent than three years.
903.3.8.6 Hydraulic Calculations Nameplate
Insert as additional to the section:
A hydraulic nameplate shall be attached to the riser for each hydraulically calculated area.
903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms
All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels
and temperatures, critical air pressures and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be
electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit.
903.4.1 Monitoring
Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically
transmitted to an approved supervising station or, where approved by the fire code official, shall
sound an audible signal at a constantly attended location.
Includes exceptions, not be amended.
Add as additional section:
903.4.1.1 Reporting directly to the Fire District Communication Center
The approved method is defined as all fire alarms shall connect directly to the Fire Protection District
Dispatch Center via a radio alarm monitoring system. The method of connection shall be of a type
compatible with monitoring system available at the Dispatch center and approved by the fire code
official.
903.4.1.2 Method
Alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically
transmitted to Central Station or Remote Supervisory Stations by a two-way private radio alarm
system complying with NFPA 72, which automatically retransmits trouble, supervisory and full fire
alarm signals to the Fire District Dispatch center.
Section 903.4.2 Alarms
An approved device shall be a clear strobe located on the exterior of the building in an approved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 235/649
location, shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water flow alarm
devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest
orifice size installed in the system. When the fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the
automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.
Delete this section and insert the following for local jurisdiction:
Approved audible and visible appliances shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with this section. Sprinkler system water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water
flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system.
Insert as additional section:
903.4.2.1 Exterior appliances. Visible appliances.
A red 75 cd, weather-proof strobe light and 10" bell shall be provided above the fire department
connection. The strobe light shall be supervised by the fire alarm system and shall only operate
upon waterflow activation.
903.4.2.1.1 Audible appliances
An audible appliance supervised by the fire alarm system, 10 inch, 120VDC alarm bell, horn/strobe
(clear) shall be provided above the fire department connection.
903.4.2.1.2 Interior appliances
Interior audible and visible alarms supervised by a fire alarm system shall be provided in
accordance with Section 907.5 and subsections.
Insert as additional section:
903.4.2.2 Interior appliances
Interior and visible alarms supervised by a fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with
Section 907.5 and subsections.
Insert as additional section:
903.4.2.3 Inspector test valve accessibility
Fire sprinkler inspectors test valves shall be accessible at all times and located no more than 6 feet
above the finished floor. On multiple riser systems test valves shall be marked as to which riser area
it tests.
903.4.3 Floor control valves.
Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the
riser on each floor in high-rise buildings.
Delete this section and insert the following for local jurisdiction:
Indicating control valves and water flow switches shall be provided at the point of connection to the
riser on each floor in multiple story buildings.
Add as additional section:
903.4.3.1 Sprinkler control valves
Add as additional section:
All sprinkler control valves shall be equipped with electronic supervision (tamper switches) in
accordance with NFPA 72. All new tamper switches installed shall have the capability to self-restore.
All supervisory signals shall be transmitted directly to the Fire Protection District main dispatch
Communication Center.
Add as an additional section:
903.4.4 Additional Detection Features
Add as an additional section:
Where automatic sprinkler provide protection to an area with an approved flow switch
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 236/649
interconnected to the fire alarm system, and is easily identifiable as to the location, additional
automatic detectors are not required. When a building has numerous rooms protected by the zone
sprinkler system, the fire code official may require additional smoke detectors for a more rapid
means to identify the location of smoke or fire.
Insert as additional section:
903.7 Exterior Control Valve Room Access
Provide an outside access door to the sprinkler riser valve room and fire pump room.
Add as an additional section:
903.8 Hydraulic Nameplate
Add as an additional section:
By each hydraulically calculated area, on each drawing, provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate.
Add as an additional section:
903.9 Fire pump test header
Add as an additional section:
Provide an outside test header on all fire pump installations. An OS&Y control valve shall be
provided on all fire pump test headers.
Add as an additional section:
903.11 Hydraulic calculations
Add as an additional section:
Provide a minimum 5-psi minimum safety factor in the fire protection system hydraulic calculation.
The system demand shall be 5-psi minimum below the seasonal low water flow test supply. The
safety factor will allow for low pressures in the water supply. By each hydraulic calculated area, on
each drawing, provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate. This will make it easier to check the
hydraulics of the sprinkler system for future building or storage changes.
Add as an additional section
904.12.6.4 - Kitchen Exhaust Hood & Duct
All new automatic fire extinguishing systems for commercial cooking systems installed after the
effective date of this ordinance shall automatically transmit activation fire alarm signal to the Fire
Protection District dispatch center over an approved fire alarm system.
Add as an additional section
904.14 - Hood and duct systems
All hood an duct extinguishing systems for commercial kitchen areas requiring such a system, shall
be approved UL 300 system for the following:
1. New Construction
2. Remodeling rehab of existing systems
3. Appliance line changes including the installation of high efficiency/high recovery fryers
Add as an additional section
904.14.1 - Hood extinguishing agent
All existing commercial kitchen systems requiring a hood and duct system shall be required to have
at least one, 6 liter, type K extinguisher.
Add as an additional section:
Section 905.2.1 General
Standpipes for fire hose connections shall be supplied from a separate riser. Two and one half (21/2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 237/649
inch valves shall be supplied by a four (4) inch riser with two and one half (21/2) inch drops to each
valve.
Section 905.3 Required installations
Add the following paragraph:
All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The supply riser shall be
hydraulically designed to supply 21/2" hose drops. The riser system shall be equipped with a
separate control valve and flow switch. The standpipe shall be a 21/2" and all locations shall be
approved by the Code Official. All standpipe and sprinkler risers shall have separate control valves
and flow switches per floor.
Section 905.3.1 Height.
Delete text and insert the following:
Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout new constructed buildings more than two
(2) stories in height or more than two (2) stories below the level of the fire district vehicle access so
that all areas on those floors are within 120 feet of a standpipe. There shall be an approved fire
district connection at grade and hose connections located at each floor level.
Exceptions 1 through 5 shall remain
905.9 Valve Supervision
Add as an additional paragraph:
Valves controlling fire hose connections shall be the field adjustable type approved by the authority
having jurisdiction.
Add as an additional section:
905.12 Piping design
The riser piping, supply piping and the water service piping shall be sized to maintain a residual
pressure of at least 65 psi (448kPa) at the topmost outlet of each riser. The piping size shall be
based on the capacity of the automatic water supply system or, where as automatic water supply is
neither required nor provided to maintain the residual pressure of 65 psi, the pipe size shall be on a
pressure of 150 psi available at the fire district connection.
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings
Add as an additional section:
905.13 Riser sizing
The riser size shall be based on the hydraulic calculations for a minimum flow of 500 gallons per
(gpm) (1892 L/min.).
Exceptions:
1. In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied with water from a common
standpipe riser, the riser shall be sized to satisfy total demand.
2. For occupancies Use Group B, I, R1, or R2 in buildings that are equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3, each riser shall be sized for a
minimum flow of 250 gpm (945 L/min.).
3. Risers that are sized in accordance with the pipe schedule requirements of NFPA 14 listed in
Chapter 35 are not subject to this requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 238/649
Add as an additional section:
905.14 System pipe sizing
The system piping, including the horizontal or common feeder lines, shall be sized for a minimum
flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.). Where more than one standpipe riser is required or provided, all
common system piping shall be sized for a minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.) for the first riser
plus 250 gpm (945 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the total shall not be required to exceed
1,250 gpm (4731 L/min.).
Exceptions:
1. In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied with water from a common
standpipe riser, the supply piping shall be sized for a minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.) plus
the sprinkler demand for first riser, plus 250 gpm (945 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the
total shall be required to exceed 1,250 gpm (4731 L/min.).
2. For occupancies in Use Group B, I, R-1, or R2 in buildings that are equipped throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3, all common supply piping shall
be sized for a minimum flow of 250 gpm (945 L/min.) for the first riser plus 250 gpm (945L/min.)
for each additional riser, and the total shall not be required to exceed 750 gpm (2838 L/min.).
Add as an additional section:
907.1.4 Exceptions for Small Fire Alarm Systems
All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type.
Section 907.2 Where required-new buildings and structures.
Delete text and insert the following:
An approved fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and
NFPA 72 in all new occupancy classifications. The fire alarm shall be installed in accordance with
the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 and shall be provided as follows:
A. A complete fire alarm system consisting of smoke detection, heat detection, pull stations and
audio/visual notification devices shall be installed in all use groups.
B. All fire alarm systems shall be directly connected to the fire district dispatch center by system
that is compatible to be received in the center in accordance with this ordinance.
C. Fire alarm control panels shall be located in the fire sprinkler control room, where applicable, or
where approved by the fire code official.
D. Fire alarm control panels shall be of the addressable type.
E. All new nonresidential multiple tenant buildings shall be "ring by tenant" activated by the fire, a
fire sprinkler system flow switch for the tenant space or automatic fire detection and shall include
a weatherproof clear outside strobe over the entrance to each tenant space as approved by the
fire code official. All outside strobes shall be seventy-five (75) candela minimum.
F. Exception:
a. Group R - single and multi-family dwellings less than 5,000 square feet of living space;
attached & detached, shall not be fire suppressed if three stories or less; or structures covered
under the IBC.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 239/649
b. Occupancy Group U buildings as an accessory building to other occupancy classifications
and is under 12,000 square feet.
Add as a new section:
907.2.2.4 Where required-new buildings and structures
Buildings and structures not provided throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. A fire alarm
system utilizing automatic fire detectors and manual fire alarm devices shall be provided throughout
all buildings not provided with an automatic sprinkler system complying with NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R.
907.4.2.5 Protective covers
Delete text and insert the following:
Listed manual fire alarm box protective covers shall be provided for all installed manual fire alarm
boxes to prevent malicious false alarms or to provide the manual fire alarm box with protection from
physical damage.
907.5 Occupant notification systems
Delete text and insert the following:
A fire alarm system shall annunciate at the fire alarm control unit and shall initiate occupant
notification upon activation, in accordance with Sections 907.5.1 through 907.5.2.3.4. The activation
of any of the following devices shall result in occupant notification:
1. Automatic fire detectors.
2. Automatic sprinkler system waterflow devices.
3. Manual fire alarm boxes.
4. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems when installed in buildings or structures that are provided
with occupant notification.
Add as an additional section:
907.5.2.3.4 Multi-tenant Group M.
In single story, multi-tenant Group M buildings shall be "ring by tenant" activated by a fire sprinkler
system flow switch for each space, or manual and automatic fire detection and shall include a
weatherproof clear outside strobe over the entrance to each tenant space as directed by the fire
department. All outside strobes shall be 75 candela minimum.
Section 912.2.1 Visible location
Add the following paragraph:
An approved sign mounted in a location specified by the fire code official shall be installed and
maintained near the fire district connection. Such sign shall have the letters "FDC" at least 6 inches
high to indicate the location. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire code official
912.3 Fire hose threads
Delete text and insert the following:
All fire department connections shall be as specified by the responsible fire protection district, with
consent from the Village of Minooka.
Section 913.4.1 Test outlet valve supervision
Fire pump test outlet valve shall be supervised in the closed position
Add the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 240/649
A. Provide an OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers.
B. Provide an outside test header on all fire pump installations.
Add as an additional section:
913.4.2 Fire pump test header
a. Add-provide an OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers.
b. Provide an outside test header on fire pump installations.
1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces
Add as a new number 6:
All rooms containing the building fire sprinkler and standpipe riser(s) and fire alarm control panel(s).
Chapter 80
Revise all listed NFPA standards in IBC Chapter 35 and IFC Chapter 80 to include the latest
edition available as of the effective date of the adoption of the 2015 IBC and IFC.
(Ord. 2018-06, 1-23-2018)
4-2-12: PENALTIES:
A. Violation Penalties Generally: Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provision of this chapter, and any person, firm, or corporation guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section 1-4-1 of
this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-
26-2010)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE1
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
Chapter 4
FIRE PREVENTION CODE1
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 241/649
Chapter 5
SUPPLEMENTARY BUILDING REGULATIONS
4-5-1: MOVING BUILDINGS:
A. Permit Required, Fee:
1. It shall be unlawful to move any building in the village, not otherwise prohibited, without first
obtaining a permit therefor, as provided in this section.
2. The fee for a permit required by this section shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). (1977 Code)
B. Moving Certain Buildings Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to move any building which has been
damaged to any extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of its value at the time of damage by fire,
action of the elements or otherwise.
C. Conditions Of Permit: Permits for the moving of buildings other than those prohibited in this section
may be granted upon the following imposed conditions:
1. Written consent must be secured from a majority of the property owners located within a radius of
two hundred feet (200') from the center of the lot on which the house is to be situated and such
consent shall be filed with the village clerk.
2. Application for a permit required by this section must be made in writing, stating in detail the method
of moving to be used, the exact route to be followed and the clearances necessary to traverse such
route.
3. The written application shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and forwarded to
the village board of trustees for approval.
4. A bond shall be furnished to the village in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), conditioned
to indemnify the village for any liability which may be imposed upon it by reason of the moving of the
building and the bond shall also be conditioned upon the faithful observance of all provisions of the
building code or other ordinances of the village, and the repair of any streets or other public property
damaged in the movement of any buildings.
5. In addition, the person requesting the permit shall furnish the village with a certificate of insurance
from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, which certificate shall name the
village as coinsured. The insurance policy shall indemnify the applicant and the village against
liability for the injury or death or damages in the following amounts: for the injury or death of any one
person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00); for the injury or death of more than one
person arising from the same accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); and for
damages to the property of another, including the village, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
D. Denial Of Permit: The building officer and inspector shall have the power to refuse to issue a permit to
move any building if he shall find that the methods or equipment to be used are improper or insufficient
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 242/649
to properly protect the public or public property from injury or damage or if the condition is such as to
render it not susceptible to movement. No permit will be issued if the building is to be moved over
state routes and the state has denied the applicant similar permits.
E. Moving Certain Small Buildings, Fees: Permits for moving buildings or parts of buildings not exceeding
sixteen feet (16') in width and twelve feet (12') in height may be granted by the building officer and
inspector upon the furnishing of the insurance and bond required above except that the bond shall be
in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), and the payment of a permit fee of twenty three
dollars fifty cents ($23.50); however, the building for which a permit is issued pursuant to this section
shall be transported on a rigid, flat bodied, pneumatic tired vehicle subject to the provisions for the
safeguarding of life and property as set out in this section.
F. Obstructing Streets:
1. Any obstruction or occupation of a public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property by any
person operating under a permit issued pursuant to this section for a period longer than six (6) hours
shall be considered an offense and each hour after the six (6) hour period shall constitute a
separate offense.
2. A permittee under this section shall, at all times, when the building or equipment incidental to
moving the building, occupies or obstructs any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other
public property, provide watchmen both in front and behind the obstruction and utilize all other
devices necessary to completely protect the public from injury.
G. Planking Street: It shall be unlawful to move any building on any macadam, concrete or asphalt street
or alley on hard skids, wheels or rollers unless the weight of the building and equipment combined
shall be spread by the use of plank to a sufficient area on the surface of the street which, by the
findings of the building inspector, is sufficient to protect the street surface from injury.
H. Conformity To State Laws: Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter in any way the obligation
of the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this section to comply with all the restrictions and
regulations which are or may be imposed by the department of highways in the state where the
highways are used within the village.
I. Exception: Nothing in this section shall be construed as forbidding the raising or moving of a building
where the process is conducted entirely within the premises of its original location. For the purposes of
this section, this type of operation shall be considered as remodeling and the permit for, and the
conduct of the same, shall be subject to the same regulations as any remodeling process. (1977
Code)
4-5-2: BUILDING MATERIALS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words as used herein shall be construed to
have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
ENGINEERED LUMBER: Prefabricated I-joists, truss joists, and truss rafters, and laminated beams
and studs.
FACADE: The elevation or exterior face of the building, exclusive of doors, windows, and trim.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 243/649
LOT, KEY: Any corner lot, or any lot which fronts or backs on a state, county or township road, or on a
village collector or arterial road within the subdivision.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
MASONRY: Face brick, decorative stone, sandstone, exposed aggregate, or any other high quality
masonry products. This does not include materials such as, but not limited to, unpainted concrete,
noncolored concrete blocks or unpainted tilt-up concrete panels.
NATURAL MATERIALS: Face brick, decorative stone, sandstone, exposed aggregate, cement board
or any other high quality masonry products or redwoods, cedar or other high quality wood products
that are impervious to weathering or insect infestation. This does not include materials such as, but not
limited to, painted or unpainted concrete, plain cement blocks or tilt-up concrete panels or vinyl.
STRUCTURE: Primary, secondary and accessory structures as defined in the Minooka zoning code
that have electrical meters that serve the structure. (Ord. 2005-29, 6-14-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-39, 8-
23-2005; Ord. 2006-05, 1-24-2006; Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
B. Building Materials In Business Districts: All business establishments shall have one hundred percent
(100%) of all exterior building facades constructed of masonry. For purposes of this section tilt-up
concrete panels are not an approved exterior building facade material. No business establishments
shall incorporate an uninterrupted length of facade exceeding fifty feet (50'), measured horizontally. All
facades greater than fifty feet (50') in length shall incorporate horizontal architectural relief that may
include wall plane projections, wall plane recesses, pilasters or other elements as approved by the
village building official. The requirements of this section shall apply to any business establishment
receiving a building permit approval after September 1, 2005.
C. Building Materials In M1 And M2 Manufacturing Districts: All business establishments shall have one
hundred percent (100%) of exterior building facades facing the public street constructed of masonry.
No business establishments shall incorporate an uninterrupted length of facade facing the public street
exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150'), measured horizontally. All facades greater than one hundred
fifty feet (150') in length facing the public street shall incorporate horizontal architectural relief that may
include wall plane projections, wall plane recesses, or pilasters. The requirements of this section shall
apply to any business establishment receiving building permit approval after September 1, 2005. (Ord.
2005-29, 6-14-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005)
D. Building Materials In Residential Districts:
1. The provisions of this subsection D1 shall apply to all dwellings constructed in R1A zoning districts:
a. Exterior Building Materials:
(1) All dwellings: One hundred percent (100%) of the front elevation exterior building facade shall
be constructed of natural materials.
(2) Dwellings on key lots and through lots: One hundred percent (100%) of the front elevation
exterior building facade shall be constructed of natural materials, and fifty percent (50%) of the
total remaining exterior building facade shall be constructed of natural materials.
No dwellings shall incorporate an interrupted length of facade exceeding twenty feet (20'),
measured horizontally. All facades greater than twenty feet (20') in length shall incorporate
horizontal architectural relief that may include wall plane projections, wall plane recesses,
pilasters or other elements as approved by the village building official.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 244/649
b. Windows: Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, every story of each exterior wall
shall contain at least one window, and all windows shall be a minimum of 5.7 square feet,
measured between stops, with a minimum height of twenty four inches (24") and a minimum width
of twenty inches (20").
2. The provisions of this subsection D2 shall apply to all dwellings constructed in R2 zoning districts:
a. Windows: Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, every story of each exterior wall
shall contain at least one window, and all windows shall be a minimum of 5.7 square feet,
measured between stops, with a minimum height of twenty four inches (24") and a minimum width
of twenty inches (20"). (Ord. 2006-05, 1-24-2006)
E. Building Materials In All Districts:
1. All structures constructed with engineered lumber on or after August 1, 2010, must have a reflective
symbol affixed to each electrical meter serving the structure.
2. The reflective symbol shall be in the form of a sticker, issued by the village of Minooka, that states
that the structure is constructed with engineered lumber.
3. Any person violating this subsection by refusing to use the reflective symbol or by removing the
reflective symbol shall be subject to a fine in an amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per violation.
Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation, subject to a separate fine.
4. The owner of any structure that was constructed with engineered lumber prior to August 1, 2010, is
requested to place the reflective symbol on the electrical meter serving the structure on a voluntary
basis. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
Chapter 6
SWIMMING POOLS
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER: The possessor of any interest in the land, a tenant, lessee, occupant or person in control of the
premises.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company, governmental agency, club or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL: Any swimming pool, located on private residential property, the use of
which is intended for the owner and guest.
SWIMMING POOL: Any structure basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for
swimming and wading, having a wall height or water depth of twenty four inches (24") or more. (Ord.
2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-2: COMPLIANCE:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, or enlargement of any swimming pool
and its appurtenances within the village without first obtaining a building permit. Upon application for a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 245/649
permit, a plat of survey must be submitted showing the pool location. If a plat of survey is not available,
the village will accept an accurate sketch of the property. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-3: POOL LOCATIONS:
A. Aboveground pools shall be located at least ten feet (10') from any side or rear property line and at
least ten feet (10') from the principal building.
B. Inground pools shall be located at least ten feet (10') from any side or rear property line and a minimum
of ten feet (10') from the principal building.
C. No swimming pool shall encroach onto any dedicated easement.
D. No swimming pool shall be located in the front yard of any lot including both street frontages on corner
lots.
E. Pumps, filters, and pool disinfecting equipment shall be located at a distance not less than five feet (5')
from any side or rear property line and not less than five feet (5') from principal building. (Ord. 2000-
42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-4: OVERHEAD AND UNDERGROUND ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS:
Swimming pools shall not be located below or within ten feet (10') of overhead electrical conductors, and
five feet (5') of underground conductors. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-5: ELECTRICAL DEVICES:
All electrical devices used in conjunction with or connected to all pools must be grounded and protected
by approved ground fault interrupter circuits. All grounding must be in accordance with the National
Electrical Code. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-6: FENCE REGULATIONS:
A. All outdoor inground swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence or the yard in which the
pool is located, shall be completely enclosed by a fence with a minimum height from the established
grade of six feet (6'). All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with
self-closing gates. All gates shall be self-latching with the latches placed at least four feet (4') above
the ground. Fences shall be constructed so as to prohibit the passage of a sphere larger than four
inches (4") in diameter through any opening or under the fence.
B. Aboveground four foot (4') pools must have a manually activated entrance ladder that can be locked in
the upright position and a self-contained fence with a minimum overall height of six feet (6').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 246/649
C. Aboveground two (2) and three feet (3') pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence or the yard in
which the pool is located, shall be completely enclosed by a fence with a minimum height from the
established grade of four feet (4'). All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be
equipped with a self-closing gate. All gates shall be constructed so as to prohibit the passage of a
sphere larger than four inches (4") in diameter through any opening or under the fence. (Ord. 2000-42,
9-12-2000)
4-6-7: WATER DRAINAGE:
A. Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the storm sewer system during periods of rain
or storms. At no time shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred fifty (250)
gallons per minute.
B. Water drained from the pool shall not be drained over an adjacent owner's property but must be
drained to streets with curb and gutters or to street drainage ditches with a closed header, hose or
pipeline. In no event shall such water be drained directly into a stormwater detention or retention
basin. Any prohibited drainage shall constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-8: SAFETY REGULATIONS:
A. All public pools and private inground swimming pools with a diving board, must be constructed to
BOCA specifications.
B. All metal fence, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming pools, which might become
electrically alive as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall
be effectively grounded.
C. During the construction of an inground pool a four foot (4') temporary fence must be installed in
sufficient strength to prevent access to the construction area.
D. An approved cover shall be installed during the months when the pool is not in use.
E. An anti-siphon device "hose bib vacuum breaker" must be provided on the faucet supplying water for
the pool.
F. Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than fifteen
inches (15") in diameter and having a three-sixteenths inch (3/16") line at a length of no less than three
feet (3') greater than the longest dimension of the pool, and one or more light, but strong, poles with
blunted ends being not less than twelve feet (12') in length, for making reach assists or rescues.
G. All swimming pools must have gates and ladders locked when not in use. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-9: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 247/649
Anyone violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
Chapter 7
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-12-12m, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this Chapter is to
maintain this Village's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due
to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare;
and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and
provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. This Chapter is adopted in order to
accomplish the following specific purposes:
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(g), "An Act in Relation to the
Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State of Illinois", approved June 10, 1911, as
amended.
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create
unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; and
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the Village by fulfilling the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR
59-79, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 248/649
H. To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
I. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and flood plains and to
protect water quality and aquatic habitats;
J. To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-06 - FLOODPLAIN. Go to new
ordinance.
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACT: "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State of Illinois", 615
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and will be considered for
permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in subsection 4-7-7B of this Chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 4-7-5 of this Chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term
includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or prefabricated building. This
term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage,
slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a
definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or
intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of
its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening,
deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris or trash from the
channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification typically involving relocation of the
existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within
the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 249/649
placed within the flood plain. The uncompensated loss of natural flood plain storage can increase off-site
flood water elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval
by DNR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency of a proposed change to the Floodway Map.
This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this Chapter, gives assurances to the property owner that once
an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the Floodway Map can be changed, as
previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the Federal
Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate
Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the
structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation.
DNR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant
works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground
water storage tanks are not included.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or any addition to any building.
B. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a
travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
C. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects.
D. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
E. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or culverts; channel modification; filling,
dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
G. Any other activity of a man that might change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface
water, including extensive vegetation removal.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or
resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is
used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 250/649
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per the Illinois Compiled
Statutes including state, federal or local units of government.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of
October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated
magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below
the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special
flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area
(SFHA). The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation
by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such
on the flood insurance rate map of the village prepared by the federal emergency management agency
and dated September 6, 1995, and such other amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may
be prepared from time to time. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village are generally identified as
such on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared for Will County by the federal emergency
management agency and dated September 6, 1995, and such other amendments or revisions to such
study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated
Grundy County that are within extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed to the
village are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for Grundy County by
the federal emergency management agency and dated August 2, 2012, and such other amendments or
revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. The SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated Kendall County that are within extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed to the village are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for
Kendall County by the federal emergency management agency and dated January 8, 2014, and such
other amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that
is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to
the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for
uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 251/649
as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine expected
flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not
in a 100-year flood zone, amends the effective flood hazard boundary map or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or
FIRM.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities. The term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain
development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include
compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NGVD: National geodetic vertical datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey
deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface
topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering
path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial
alteration of the course or cross section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel
may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through
regrading and revegetation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and
action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction
or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by
a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic
and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition
shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control
project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois
land surveyors act1.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, under the
Illinois professional engineering act2.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 252/649
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain
adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by DNR, which is needed to store and convey the
existing and anticipated future of 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot
(0.1') increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent
(10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways for those parts of unincorporated Kendall and
Grundy Counties within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed to the village are
designated for Aux Sable Creek on the flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA, for Kendall County,
and dated January 8, 2014, and for Grundy County, dated August 2, 2012, and such other amendments
or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. The regulatory floodways for
those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that
may be annexed to the village are designated for the DuPage River and the I and M Canal on the flood
boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA and dated September 6, 1995, and such other
amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. To locate the
regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the
regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the office of
water resources should be contacted for the interpretation.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any
increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions
during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the
average equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity
release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff
during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream
lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from
lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the
surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials either on other ground
surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard
boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M or E.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground,
including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing
a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative
percentage of damage during a ten (10) year period equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer
labor and materials must be included in this determination. This term includes "repetitive loss" buildings.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure, either: a) before the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 253/649
improvement or repair is started, or b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions,
or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state inventory of
historic places.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross
section to a wide cross section or vice versa. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995; amd. Ord. 1997-03, 1-28-1997;
Ord. 2008-34, 12-17-2008; Ord. 2012-19, 7-24-2012; Ord. 2013-29, 11-26-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
The building officer and inspector shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 4-7-4 of
this chapter.
To fulfill those duties, the building officer and inspector first should use the criteria listed in section 4-7-5,
"Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the development site is located within a
floodplain. Once it has been determined that the site is located within a floodplain, the building officer and
inspector must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway or
within an SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe,
the building officer and inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section 4-7-6 of this
chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the building officer and inspector shall require that the
minimum requirements of section 4-7-7 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or
floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the building officer and
inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section 4-7-8 of this chapter be met.
In addition, the general requirements of section 4-7-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments
meeting the requirements of section 4-7-6, 4-7-7, or 4-7-8 of this chapter. The building officer and
inspector shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 4-7-10 of this
chapter.
If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the building officer and inspector shall review the
requirements of section 4-7-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the building officer
and inspector shall complete all notification requirements.
In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the building officer and
inspector may take any and all actions as outlined in section 4-7-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-
1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-4: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
The building officer and inspector shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of
this chapter which shall include the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 254/649
A. Determining The Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they
are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a
floodway, flood fringe or a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains
more than one square mile.
B. Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a
detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one square mile then the permit shall
be referred to a registered professional engineer (PE) under the employ or contract of the village for
review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 4-7-7 of this chapter. In the
case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements
of section 4-7-7 of this chapter.
C. Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that a DNR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter indicating
no dam safety permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes construction of a "dam"
as defined in section 4-7-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are
received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuances: Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this chapter and issue a floodplain development
permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when
the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
F. Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure
proper elevation of the structure and to ensure they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying
the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the
elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for
all buildings subject to section 4-7-9 of this chapter for public inspection and provide copies of same.
H. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data,
SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance
documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and
"as built" elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings
constructed subject to this chapter.
I. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois office of water
resources, for all development projects subject to sections 4-7-7 and 4-7-8 of this chapter, unless
enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by DNR
and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as per 92 Illinois administrative code 708
for construction in the regulatory floodway and floodplain when floodways have not been defined in
sections 4-7-7 and 4-7-8 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to
the village and shall require review or permits from DNR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 255/649
2. Department of transportation projects, "dams" or impoundment "structures" as defined in section 4-
7-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including projects
of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection 4-7-7B6
of this chapter.
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood
damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per subsection 4-7-7B2e of this
chapter.
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 4-7-7B2d of this chapter.
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in
subsections 4-7-7B2a, B2b and B2h of this chapter.
6. Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams.
7. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations.
8. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
J. Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies
to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the
administration of this chapter. Submit data to DNR and the federal emergency management agency
for proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance
program. Notify the federal emergency management agency of any proposed amendments to this
chapter.
K. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter, subject however to the review and approval of DNR and FEMA for any
chapter changes. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base flood
elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available in federal, state or other sources. When a
party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to
replace existing data with better data and submit it to DNR and FEMA. (Ord. 2012-34, 12-18-2012)
A. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of the DuPage River shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the village prepared by FEMA
and dated September 6, 1995, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated
Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Will County
prepared by FEMA and dated September 6, 1995, and such amendments or revisions to such study
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 256/649
and maps as may be prepared from time to time. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Grundy County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year
flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Grundy County prepared by FEMA and dated August 2,
2012, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated Kendall County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may
be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance
study of Kendall County prepared by FEMA and dated January 8, 2014, and such other amendments
or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. (Ord. 2013-29, 11-26-
2013)
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH zone" or
"AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
(Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
D. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as
an "A zone" on the flood insurance rate map of the village shall be according to the best existing data
available from federal, state or other sources. When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a backwater model approved by the village engineer. The flood flows used in the
hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, or HIP, or by
techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological survey for
estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use
conditions in the watershed as determined from adopted local and regional land use plans. Along any
watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to DNR for
approval. (Ord. 2012-19, 7-24-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation and compensatory storage and other provisions of
this chapter are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or
systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along
with the requirements of section 4-7-9 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law
shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the
building officer and inspector.
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the building officer and
inspector. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing
property line dimensions and legal description for the property, and sealed by a licensed engineer,
architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum of
NGVD and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of
buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the
development will be subject to the requirements of section 4-7-9 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 257/649
2. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the building officer and inspector shall compare
the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development
located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the sites
first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter. The building officer and inspector shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed
prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
3. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall
include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion
control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures and the identification of a responsible
party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
4. The building officer and inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant, copies of all
other local, state and federal permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required
for this type of activity. The building officer and inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other
local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public
health and safety.
1. Elevation Of Site: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR)
from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
2. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The
excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and five-tenths (1.5) times the volume of storage
lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This Section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification
within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory floodway for DuPage River shall be as delineated on the
regulatory floodway maps designated by DNR and referenced in Section 4-7-2 of this Chapter. Only those
uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this Section. All floodway modifications
shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also
meet the requirements of Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by State law
shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the
Building Officer and Inspector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 258/649
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Building Officer and
Inspector. The application shall include the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the Regulatory
Floodway Map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Name of stream or body of water affected;
d. Description of proposed activity;
e. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
f. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
g. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
h. Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application
form;
j. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
k. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him as trust
officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the
trust by name and address and defining the respective interest therein.
l. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of
roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level
(1929 adjustment) datum of NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a
commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, flood plain limit, specifications
and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross
sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale.
(3) Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and
proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical).
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a
description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion
control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
(5) A copy of the Regulatory Floodway Map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the
regulatory floodway location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 259/649
m. Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this
type of development.
n. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work
will meet the permit criteria of subsection 4-7-7B of this Chapter.
o. If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will
change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until the DNR
has indicated conditional approval of the Regulatory Floodway Map change. No structures may be
built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
p. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale
showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and flood plain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 4-7-9 of this
Chapter.
q. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following
information:
(1) A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
(2) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the
purpose of the proposed work;
(3) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the
physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
(4) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in
subsection B2d(1) of this Section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected; and
(5) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the
physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected.
2. The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all
other local, State and Federal permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity.
The Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue the development permit unless all required
Federal and State permits have been obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the
employ or contract of the Village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this Section.
B. Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:
1. Floodway Development: The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate
uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety
and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those appropriate
uses listed in 92 Illinois Administrative Code 708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include
the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 260/649
materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved appropriate
uses are as follows:
a. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to
the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
b. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as
pumping and treatment facilities and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating,
commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
c. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
d. Underground and overhead utilities;
e. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at
least 50 percent open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood
flows and including open air pavilions;
f. Detached garages, storage sheds or other nonhabitable accessory structures without toilet
facilities to existing buildings that will not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;
g. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification
thereto;
h. Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency
flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot) and aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;
i. Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a
watercourse;
j. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of
watertight window wells, elevating structures or construction of floodwalls around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no
more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and which are not
considered substantial improvements to the structure;
k. In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs made to a building
that are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the building before it was
damaged or replaced and, which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building;
l. Additions to existing buildings above the BFE3 that do not increase the building's footprint and are
valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the building.
2. Appropriate Use: Within the regulatory floodway, as identified on the regulatory floodway maps
designated by DNR, the construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible provided
that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in
writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and
provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter:
a. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For
appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective
regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to
and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
(1) Regulatory floodway conveyance,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 261/649
'K' = 1.486 AR 2/3
n
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section and "R" is
the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow,
1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.)
(2) The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless
a recorded maintenance agreement with a Federal, State or local unit of government can
assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a
vegetative to a nonvegetative land cover.
(3) Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective regulatory floodway
conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's
engineer can prove to DNR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(A) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be
assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of
the flooded stream's length.
(B) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be
assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1')
of the flooded stream's length.
(C) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1')
vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length shall be used.
(D) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and
contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(E) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
b. Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream Flooding: Compensatory
storage shall be provided for any regulatory floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from
the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and five-tenths (1.5)
times the volume of flood plain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in
head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory
floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed
100-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the existing 10-year flood elevation. All regulatory flood
elevation storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the 10-
year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to DNR through a determination of flood
discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically
equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway
modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
c. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For
all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work will
not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage, for all
flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or
culverts or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 262/649
normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
d. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches: The proposed
structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1')
when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event, or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks
(or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection
grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed
construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1'), the developer
must contact DNR, Dam Safety Section for a dam safety permit or waiver.
(1) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study
flows and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in
Section 4-7-5 of this Chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/FHWA Hydraulic
Chart for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S.
DOT/Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation procedures.
(2) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection B2b of this Section.
(3) Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection B2c above.
(4) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial
navigation, a Department of Transportation permit must be received.
(5) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition
and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to DNR for concurrence that a CLOMR is
not required by subsection B of this Section.
(6) All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection B2h of
this Section.
e. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And Approach Roads:
(1) The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be
constructed within no more than one-tenth foot (0.1') increase in backwater over the existing
flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing
structure is not a source of flood damage.
(2) If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings
or structures in the upstream flood plain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of
redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects
on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
(3) The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and
should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with the Department of Transportation
Rules 92 Illinois Administrative Code 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and
submitted to the Office of Water Resources for review and concurrence before a permit is
issued.
f. On-Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream
flood stages greater than zero foot (0.0') when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design
protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or
letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from DNR, Dam Safety Section for a
dam safety permit or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 263/649
stream during normal or flood flow. All "dams" and impoundment "structures" as defined in
Section 4-7-2 shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Illinois Administrative Code 702
(Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the
channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public
recreation or regional storm water detention.
(2) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require
access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning.
(3) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions.
Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization
measures and a presedimentation basin.
(4) A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control
the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals
and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream
municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control.
(5) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this Section.
g. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is
required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the
floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing
activities.
h. Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert
openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures,
or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless
an applicant's engineer can prove to DNR through engineering calculations or model tests that
more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed
to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded
stream's length;
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed
to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the
flooded stream's length; and
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical
transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length shall be used.
(4) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition
sections.
i. If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with
less impact to the natural conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include
levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
flood plain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 264/649
strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural
conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat.
(2) Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the
modification and no significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the
replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values.
(3) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will
minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent
with the following criteria:
(A) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible
those of the existing channel in length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing
channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should
be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
(B) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream
ends of the project, designed such that they will prevent erosion.
(C) One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside
(riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve
the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation.
(D) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the
channel.
(E) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1)
horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are
the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends
necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions or construction rubble should be
avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(F) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized
as soon as possible upon completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent
material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the
vegetative cover.
(G) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles
and other similar features, such features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and
nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate.
(H) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce
sedimentation and degradation of downstream water quality.
(I) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including
vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel.
(J) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project
site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless
such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
(K) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the
volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
(4) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 4-7-7.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 265/649
j. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization
plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
k. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading,
filling and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The construction areas shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible.
Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no
case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen
(15) days prior to the initiation of improvements.
(2) Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as
possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final
grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which
may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
(3) Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is
initiated on the site to prevent the movement of eroded sediments off site or into the channel.
Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale, fences, check dams,
diversion ditches and sediment basins.
(4) A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished,
where possible, along existing channels (see subsection B2p of this Section).
Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be
constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along
channels shall be restabilized immediately.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented
consistent with Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in
Illinois (1988), also known as the Green Book and Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control (IEPA, 1987).
l. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this
Section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to DNR through hydraulic and
hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in
increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event.
m. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
(1) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study, referenced in
Section 4-7-5 must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be
in error or conditions have changed, DNR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on
the appropriate base conditions data to use.
(2) If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is
affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the
proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this Section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
(3) If the applicant learns from DNR, local governments or a private owner that a downstream
restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional
flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next
five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 266/649
of this Section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when
the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
n. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit
to DNR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from DNR a conditional approval of the
regulatory floodway change before a permit is issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map
will not be changed by DNR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by
FEMA and DNR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the Municipality in incorporated areas
and the County in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional regulatory
floodway map revision before DNR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or
excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities
shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and DNR.
o. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the
supervision of a registered professional engineer.
p. For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel,
the following criteria shall be met:
(1) A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the
ordinary high water mark of the channel.
(2) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use,
a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon completion of construction.
(3) The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer
strip shall be provided, when necessary, for stream maintenance purposes.
After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit
and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the regulatory
floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is
not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the Regulatory Floodway Map is
changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The Regulatory Floodway Map will be
revised upon acceptance and concurrence by DNR and FEMA of the "as built" plans.
3. State Review: For those projects listed below located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria
shall be submitted to DNR for their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
a. The DNR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant
to subsection B2d of this Section.
b. The DNR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not
a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to
subsection B2e of this Section.
c. The DNR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant
to subsection B2a, 2b and 2h of this Section.
d. The DNR will review and approve prior to the start of construction any Department projects, dams
(as defined in Section 4-7-2 of this Chapter) and all other State, Federal or local units of
government projects, including projects of the Municipality or County.
4. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, a development permit for a site
located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written
documentation that a permit is not required from DNR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 267/649
Statutes 5/5 et seq. No permit from DNR shall be required if the Office of Water Resources has
delegated this responsibility to the Village.
5. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as
defined in Section 4-7-2 of this Chapter per 92 Illinois Administrative Code 702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams) shall obtain an Illinois Office of Water Resources dam safety permit prior to
the start of construction of a dam. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam that does not
have a DNR permit, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify the Dam Safety
Section of the Office of Water Resources. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify the
owner of the dam, DNR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield and the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency (EMA).
6. Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following
activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review. Such activities shall
still meet the other requirements of this Chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(1) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(2) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
(3) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a
minimum of three feet (3') below the existing stream bed, and
(4) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are
designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(1) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(2) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(3) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground
equipment and patios at grade.
d. Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
(1) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
(2) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(3) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or
bank of the lake.
(4) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for
existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action
necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should be
avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
e. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(1) The approach roads will be five-tenths foot (0.5') (1/2 foot) or less above natural grade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 268/649
(2) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream
bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert.
(3) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the
lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
(4) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
installation and again upon removal of construction.
(5) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
(Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE
FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
A. Development: In SFHA or floodplains (including AO zones, AH zones or unnumbered A zones), where
no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have
been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted
unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters
nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
1. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law,
shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a development
permit from the building officer and inspector. Application for a development permit shall be made on
a form provided by the building officer and inspector. The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect
or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of
section 4-7-9 of this chapter.
The application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
a. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory
floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity.
d. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of
roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale and north arrow;
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level
(1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 269/649
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location
and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
(3) Cross sectional views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and
proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing
and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a
description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion
control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
e. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work
will meet the criteria of subsection B of this section.
f. Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of
development. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
2. Calculation And Documentation: Based on the best available existing data according to federal,
state or other sources, the building officer and inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the
site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 4-7-5D of this
chapter. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base
flood elevation as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The building officer and inspector shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification
that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification. (Ord. 2012-34, 12-18-2012)
3. Permits: The building officer and inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other local, state and federal permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may
be required for this type of activity. The building officer and inspector shall not issue the
development permit unless all required local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been
determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or
threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall
be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
1. Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following
standards shall apply:
a. The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through
supporting plans, calculations and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of
subsection 4-7-7B2a through B2l of this chapter, for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of subsection 4-7-5D of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to DNR
for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of the floodway by the department, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 4-7-7 of this
chapter for the regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition of
"regulatory floodway" in section 4-7-2 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 270/649
b. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from DNR or
written documentation that a permit is not required from DNR.
c. No permit from DNR shall be required if the office has delegated permit responsibility to the
village per 92 Illinois administrative code, part 708 for regulatory floodways, per DNR statewide
permit entitled "Construction In Floodplains With No Designated Floodways In Northeastern
Illinois".
d. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam or an on stream "structure"
to impound water as defined in section 4-7-2 of this chapter, shall obtain an Illinois office of water
resources dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the start of
construction of a dam. If the building officer and inspector finds a dam that does not have a DNR
permit, the building officer and inspector shall immediately notify the dam safety section of the
office of water resources. If the building officer and inspector finds a dam which is believed to be
in unsafe condition, the building officer and inspector shall immediately notify the owner of the
dam and the Illinois emergency management agency (EMA), and the DNR, dam safety section in
Springfield.
e. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or
calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the
other requirements of this chapter:
(1) Underground and overhead utilities that:
(A) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(B) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
(C) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a
minimum of three feet (3') below the existing streambed, and
(D) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are
designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris.
(2) Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(A) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(B) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(C) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
(3) Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that:
(A) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot of
stream bed.
(B) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(C) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel by
more than ten percent (10%).
(D) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for
existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action
necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be
avoided unless there are not practicable alternatives.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 271/649
(4) Temporary stream crossings in which:
(A) The approach roads will be five-tenths foot (0.5') (1/2 foot) or less above natural grade.
(B) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream
bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert.
(C) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the
lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
(D) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
installation and again upon removal of construction.
(E) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after
authorization.
(5) The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures;
(6) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar
surfaces which are built at grade;
(7) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground
equipment, pavilions and carports built at or below existing grade that would not obstruct the
flow of flood waters;
(8) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size,
nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds);
(9) The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by
more than twenty percent (20%), which are located on the upstream or downstream side of the
existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are
parallel to the flow of flood waters;
(10) Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
(A) The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000');
(B) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels; or
(C) The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel
upstream and downstream of the site.
f. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
2. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The
excavation volume shall be at least equal one and five-tenths (1.5) times to the volume of storage
lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All flood plain storage lost below the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 272/649
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOOD PLAIN AREAS
AND PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS4:
In addition to the requirements found in Sections 4-7-6, 4-7-7 and 4-7-8 of this Chapter, for development
in flood fringes, regulatory floodways and SFHA or flood plains where no floodways have been identified
(Zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-30, A99, VO, V-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements shall be met:
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic
materials below the FPE.
2. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal
systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other aboveground openings located below the
FPE are watertight.
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In
addition, the Village shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of
a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings:
1. All buildings located within a 100-year flood plain also known as a SFHA, shall be protected from
flood damage below the flood protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within a
regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in
Section 4-7-7 of this Chapter. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building;
b. A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by more than
twenty percent (20%) or the building's market value by more than fifty percent (50%);
c. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site.
This building protection requirement does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it
lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
d. Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
2. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
a. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill
in accordance with the following:
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction and
should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below
the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 273/649
However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill
shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
b. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(1) The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl spaces, stilts, piles, walls or other
foundation that is permanently open to flood waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic
pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no
more than one foot (1') above grade and consists of a minimum of two (2) openings. The
openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
(2) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood
flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
(3) All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to
flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the
flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood protection
elevation.
(4) No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of items or materials.
(5) Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with
the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois Administrative Code 870.
c. Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided
that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry
floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing
measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the
purpose of this subsection).
d. Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be
enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind
or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this Chapter.
D. Filing Fee And Engineer's Services:
1. A filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time of filing of
any application under this Chapter.
2. The cost incurred by the Village for the review of applications, plans and specifications, and for
inspection of any development, by the Village Engineer, or by a registered professional engineer
under the employ or contract of the Village, shall be paid by the applicant. Such costs shall be paid
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 274/649
to the Village Clerk at the time of issuance or denial of any permit under this Chapter, or at the time
of the issuance or denial of any variance under this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official
actions related to land management, use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and planned unit developments
(PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent
with sections 4-7-6, 4-7-7, 4-7-8 and 4-7-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage.
Plats or plans for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account
for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act5. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-
1995)
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit
developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall
include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the federal, state or other sources, the
applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation per subsection 4-7-5D of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition of
"regulatory floodway" in section 4-7-2 of this chapter and submitting it for review and approval as best
available regulatory data. (Ord. 2012-34, 12-18-2012)
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as
to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be
included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision
located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-11: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in "regulatory floodway", as defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter. However, when a development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway,
and whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal,
the applicant may apply to the village for a variance. The plan commission shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the board of trustees.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 275/649
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions,
especially aquatic habitat or creation of a nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and
functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities or
other public facilities;
6. The provisions of subsections 4-7-6B and 4-7-8B of this chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including
existing stream uses.
B. The building officer and inspector shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of section 4-7-9 of this chapter, that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in
writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building listed on the national register of
historical places or documented as worthy of preservation by the Illinois historic preservation agency
may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections A and B of this
section. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger
floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
This chapter does not create liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 276/649
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-13: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed
to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the building officer and inspector may determine
that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The building officer and inspector shall
notify the owner in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with
this chapter or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.
4. The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
B. The building officer and inspector shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful
act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
1995-28, 8-8-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Go
to new ordinance.
4-7-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This chapter is intended to
repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance
program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to
establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 1995-28, 8-8-1995)
Chapter 8
STORMWATER DRAINAGE AND DETENTION
4-8-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 277/649
A. Purpose:
1. This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the Village by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
2. The purpose of this Chapter is to diminish threats to public health, safety and welfare caused by
runoff of excessive stormwater from new development and redevelopment. This excessive
stormwater could result in the inundation of damageable properties, the erosion and destabilization
of downstream channels, and the pollution of valuable stream and lake resources. The cause of
increases in stormwater runoff quantity and rate and impairment of quality is the development and
improvement of land and as such this Chapter regulates these activities to prevent adverse impacts.
B. Objectives: This Chapter is adopted to accomplish the following objectives:
1. To assure that new development does not increase the drainage or flood hazards to others, or
create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
2. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage due to increased
stormwater runoff;
3. To protect human life and health from the hazards of increased flooding on a watershed basis;
4. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public
facilities and utilities, correction of channel erosion problems, and flood rescue and relief operations
caused by increased stormwater runoff quantities from new development;
5. To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
6. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to
protect water quality and aquatic habitats:
7. To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and
stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADVERSE IMPACTS: Any deleterious impact on water resources or wetlands affecting their beneficial
uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, quality and quantity.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure
official approval of a development or permit to carry out construction of a development from the Village of
Minooka.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation at all locations delineating the level of flooding resulting from
the 100-year frequency flood event.
BYPASS FLOWS: Stormwater runoff from upstream properties tributary to a property's drainage system
but not under its control.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage,
slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 278/649
definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennial or
intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of
its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening,
deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of debris or removal of trash.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulicly equivalent volume of storage within
the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed
within the floodplain.
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or movement of water, whether
open or closed.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of stormwater
runoff and the controlled release by gravity of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or
storm.
DETENTION TIME: The mean residence time of stormwater in a detention basin.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Preparation of a plot of subdivision;
B. Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building;
C. Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days;
D. Construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
E. Redevelopment of a site;
F. Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving or other nonagricultural alterations of the
ground surface;
G. Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste;
H. Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency, deviation, direction or velocity of
stormwater flows from a property.
DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting calculations, which describes
the existing stormwater drainage system and environmental features, as well as the drainage system and
environmental features which are proposed after development of a property.
DRY BASIN: A detention basin designed to drain completely after temporary storage of stormwater flows
and to normally be dry over the majority of its bottom area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 279/649
EROSION: The general process whereby earth is removed by flowing water or wave action.
EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF: The volume and rate of flow of stormwater discharged from an
urbanized drainage area which is or will be in excess of that volume and rate which pertained before
urbanization.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base
flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
FLOODWAY: The channel and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse which is
needed to store and convey the anticipated existing and future 100-year frequency flood discharge with
no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage and no more
than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph showing for a given location on a stream or conduit, the flow-rate with respect to
time.
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system needed to store and convey flows
beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system designed for the convenience of the
public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small open channels, and swales and, where manmade,
is usually designed to handle the 10-year runoff event or less.
MITIGATION: Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
stormwater drainage and development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare.
Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control and channel
restoration.
NATURAL: Conditions resulting from physical, chemical and biological processes without intervention by
man.
100-YEAR EVENT: A rainfall, runoff or flood event having a one percent (1%) chance of occurring in any
given year.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or conduit.
POSITIVE DRAINAGE: Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property including depressional
areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.
PROPERTY: A parcel of real estate.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the flood plain
adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by the DWR, which is needed to store and convey the
existing and anticipated future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase
in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in
velocities. The regulatory floodways are designated for the DuPage River on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map prepared by FEMA and dated September 16, 1988. The regulatory floodways for those
parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village that may be
annexed into the Village are designated for the DuPage River on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 280/649
prepared by the FEMA and dated April 15, 1982. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site,
the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site
plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the
exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the Division should be contacted for the interpretation.
RETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of stormwater runoff
without release except by means of evaporation, infiltration, emergency bypass or pumping.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris and other materials either on other ground
surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater drainage systems.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All means, natural or manmade, used for conducting stormwater
to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet from a property. The stormwater drainage
system includes but it not limited to any of the following: conduits and appurtenance features, canals,
channels, ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins, swales and pumping
stations.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage
basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface
of the ground or are collected in channels or conduits.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: The elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the most hydraulicly remote
point in a drainage basin to a particular point of interest in that watershed.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a given point.
2-YEAR EVENT: A runoff, rainfall or flood event having a fifty percent (50%) chance of occurring in any
given year.
WET BASIN: A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water after the temporary
storage of stormwater runoff. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter shall apply to all development in the Village. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-4: DRAINAGE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each applicant shall submit the following information, depending on development size, to ensure that
the provisions of this Chapter are met. The submittal shall include sufficient information to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the property, the potential adverse impacts of the development on
water resources both on-site and downstream, and the effectiveness of the proposed drainage plan in
managing stormwater runoff. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading,
drainage and construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the drainage plan. The
following information shall be submitted for both existing and proposed property conditions.
B. Properties smaller than ten (10) acres shall submit only the basic drainage plan called for in Section 4-
8-4-1. Properties larger than ten (10) acres shall comply with the submittal requirements of both the
basic drainage plan and the advanced drainage plan of Section 4-8-4-2. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 281/649
4-8-4-1: BASIC DRAINAGE PLAN:
A. Topographic Map: A topographic survey of the property at one foot (1') contours under existing and
proposed conditions, and area upstream and downstream, necessary to determine off-site impacts of
the proposed drainage plan. The map shall be keyed to a consistent datum specified by the Village.
B. Drainage System: Mapping and descriptions, where relevant, of existing and proposed drainage
system features of the property and immediate vicinity including:
1. The banks and center line of streams and channels;
2. Shoreline of lakes, ponds and detention basins;
3. Farm drains and tiles;
4. Sub-watershed boundaries within the property;
5. Watershed soils classifications;
6. The property's location within the large watershed;
7. Location, size and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage swales;
8. Sanitary or combined sewers;
9. Depressional storage areas;
10. Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and watersheds which might be
affected by the development;
11. Detention facilities:
12. Roads and streets and associated stormwater inlets;
13. Base flood elevation, and regulatory floodway where identified for the property; and
14. Basis of design for the final drainage network components.
C. Environmental Features: A depiction of environmental features of the property and immediate vicinity
including the following:
1. The limits of wetland areas;
2. Any designated natural areas; and
3. Any proposed environmental mitigation features. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-4-2: ADVANCED DRAINAGE PLAN:
The same information as required in Section 4-8-4-1 is required for properties larger than ten (10) acres
along with the following additional information for the minor drainage system's design runoff event and the
100-year runoff event of critical duration:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 282/649
A. Elevations and maps of 100-year flooding;
B. Cross section data for open channel flow paths and designated overland flow paths;
C. Direction of stormflows;
D. Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage system; and
E. A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's provisions for handling events greater
than the 100-year's runoff. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-5: MINIMIZATION OF INCREASES IN RUNOFF VOLUMES AND RATES:
In the selection of a drainage plan for a development, the applicant shall evaluate and implement, where
practicable, site design features which minimize the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the site.
The applicant's drainage plan submittal shall include evaluations of site design features which are
consisted with the following hierarchy:
A. Minimize impervious surfaces on the property, consistent with the needs of the project;
B. Attenuate flows by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions and preserve existing
natural stream channels;
C. Infiltrate runoff on-site;
D. Provide stormwater retention structures;
E. Provide stormwater detention structures; and
F. Construct storm sewers. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-6: WATER QUALITY AND MULTIPLE USES:
A. The drainage system should be designed to minimize adverse water quality impacts downstream and
on the property itself. Detention basins shall incorporate design features to capture stormwater runoff
pollutants. Retention and infiltration of stormwater shall be promoted throughout the property's
drainage system to reduce the volume of stormwater runoff and to reduce the quantity of runoff
pollutants.
B. The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where practicable. Uses considered compatible
with stormwater management include open space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 283/649
trails, playing fields), wetlands and water quality mitigation. The applicant should avoid using portions
of the property exclusively for stormwater management. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-7: DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND METHODS:
A. Release Rates: The drainage system for a property shall be designed to control the peak rate of
discharge from the property for the 2-year, twenty four (24) hour and 100-year, twenty four (24) hour
rainfall events to levels which will not cause an increase in flooding or channel instability downstream
when considered in aggregate with other developed properties and downstream drainage capacities.
The peak discharge from events less than or equal to the 2-year event shall not be greater than 0.04
cfs per acre of property drained. The peak 100-year discharge shall not be greater than 0.15 cfs per
acre of property drained.
B. Detention Basin Outlet Design: Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage
system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet.
C. Detention Storage Requirements: The design maximum storage to be provided in a detention basin
shall be based on the runoff from the 100-year, twenty four (24) hour rainfall event and reservoir (also
called modified puls or level pool) routing or equal. Detention storage shall be computed using
hydrograph methods as described in this Section.
D. Drainage System Design And Evaluation: The following criteria should be used in evaluating and
designing the drainage system. The underlying objective is to provide capacity to pass the 10-year
peak flow in the minor drainage system and an overload flow path for flows in excess of the design
capacity.
1. Design Methodologies: Major and minor conveyance systems for areas up to ten (10) acres may be
designed using the rational formula. The rational formula may also be used in sizing the minor
drainage system for larger sites. Runoff hydrograph methods as described in subsection E of this
Section must be used for major drainage system design for all systems with greater than ten (10)
acres of drainage area and for the design of all detention basins.
2. Positive Drainage: Whenever practicable, all areas of the property must be provided an overland
flow path that will pass the 100-year flow at a stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation
grade in the vicinity of the flow path. Overland flow paths designed to handle flows in excess of the
minor drainage system capacity shall be provided drainage easements. Street ponding and flow
depths shall not exceed curb heights by more than one inch (1").
E. Methods For Generating Runoff Hydrographs: Runoff hydrographs shall be developed incorporating
the following assumptions of rainfall amounts and antecedent moisture.
1. Rainfall: Under a continuous simulation approach to drainage system hydrology is used, all design
rainfall events shall be based on the Illinois State Water Survey's Bulletin 70. The first quartile point
rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of conveyance systems with critical
durations less than or equal to twelve (12) hours. The third quartile point rainfall distribution shall be
used for the design and analysis of detention basins and conveyance system with critical durations
greater than twelve (12) and less than or equal to twenty four (24) hours. The fourth quartile
distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with durations greater than twenty
four (24) hours. The first, third and fourth quartile distributions described by Huff are presented in
table 37 of Bulletin 70. The SCS Type II distribution may be used as an alternate to the Huff
distributions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 284/649
2. Antecedent Moisture: Computations of runoff hydrographs which do not rely on a continuous
accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall assume a conservative wet antecedent moisture
condition as a minimum.
F. Wet Detention Basin Design: Wet detention basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants,
to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and as much as feasible to be available for recreational use.
1. Wet Basin Depths: Wet basins shall be at least three feet (3') deep, excluding nearshore banks and
safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided they shall be at least ten feet (10') deep over twenty
five percent (25%) of the bottom area to prevent winter freeze-out.
2. Wet Basin Shoreline Slopes: The side slopes of wet basins at the normal pool elevation shall not be
steeper than five to one (5:1) (horizontal to vertical).
3. Permanent Pool Volume: The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at normal depth shall be equal
to the runoff volume from its watershed for the 2-year event.
4. Inlet And Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the distance between detention inlets and outlets
shall be maximized. If possible, they should be at opposite ends of the basin.
G. Dry Detention Basin Design: In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, dry basins shall be
designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and as much as
feasible to be available to multiple uses.
1. Dry Basin Drainage: Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty percent (80%) of their bottom area
shall have standing water no longer than seventy two (72) hours for any runoff event less than the
100-year event. Underdrains directed to the outlet control shall be used if necessary to accomplish
this requirement.
2. Velocity Dissipation: Velocity dissipation measures shall be incorporated into dry basin designs to
minimize erosion at inlets and outlets and to minimize the resuspension of pollutants.
3. Inlet And Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the distance between detention inlets and outlets
shall be maximized. If possible, they should be at opposite ends of the basin.
H. Minimum Detention Outlet Size: Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control
discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of four inches (4"). If this minimum orifice size permits
release rates greater than those specified in this Section, and regional detention is not a practical
alternative, alternative outlet designs shall be utilized which incorporate self cleaning flow restrictors.
I. Detention In Floodplains: The placement of detention basins within the floodplain is strongly
discouraged because of questions about their reliable operation during flood events. However, the
stormwater detention requirements of this Chapter may be fulfilled by providing detention storage
within flood fringe areas on the project site provided the following provisions are met.
1. Detention In Flood Fringe Areas: The placement of a detention basin in a flood fringe area shall
require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume below the base flood elevation occupied by
the detention basin including any berms. The release from the detention storage provided shall still
be controlled consistent with the requirements of this Section. The applicant shall demonstrate its
operation for all streamflow and floodplain backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory
storage along watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All
floodplain storage lost below the 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the ten-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 285/649
above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
2. Detention In Floodways: Detention basins shall be placed in the floodway only in accordance with
subsection I3 of this Section.
3. On-Stream Detention: On-stream detention basins are discouraged but allowable if they provide
regional public benefits and if they meet the other provisions of this Chapter with respect to water
quality and control of the 2-year and 100-year, twenty four (24) hour events from the property.
Further criteria are presented in Section 4-8-8 of this Chapter. If on-stream detention is used for
watersheds larger than one square mile, it is recommended that the applicant use dynamic
modeling to demonstrate that the design will not increase stage for any properties upstream of
downstream of the property. Also, impoundment of the stream as part of on-stream detention:
a. Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream
areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning,
b. Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality or stream aquatic habitat,
c. Shall not include a design calling for gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization
measures and a pre-sedimentation basin,
d. Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of wetlands,
e. Shall require the implementation of an effective nonpoint source management program
throughout the upstream watershed,
f. Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge, and
g. Shall comply with 92 Illinois Administrative Code parts 702 and 708 and the floodplain chapter of
the Village.
J. Drainage Into Wetlands: Wetlands shall be protected from damaging modifications and adverse
changes in runoff quality and quantity associated with land developments. In addition to the other
requirements of this Chapter, the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose
drainage flows into wetlands:
1. Detention In Wetlands: Existing wetlands shall not be modified for the purposes of stormwater
detention unless it is demonstrated that the existing wetland is low in quality and the proposed
modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial functions. Existing
depressional storage in wetlands shall be maintained and the volume of detention storage provided
to meet the requirements of this Section shall be in addition to this existing storage.
2. Sediment Control: The existing wetland shall be protected during construction by appropriate soil
erosion and sediment control measures and shall not be filled.
3. Alteration Of Drainage Patterns: Site drainage patterns shall not be altered to substantially decrease
or increase the existing area tributary to the wetland.
4. Detention/Sedimentation: All runoff from the development shall be routed through a preliminary
detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture the 2-year, twenty four (24) hour event and hold
it for at least twenty four (24) hours, before being discharged to the wetland. This basis shall be
constructed before property grading begins. In addition, the drainage hierarchy defined in Section 4-
8-5 should be followed to minimize runoff volumes and rates being discharged to the wetland.
5. Vegetated Buffer Strip: A buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width, preferably vegetated
with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the periphery of the wetland.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 286/649
K. Street, Parking Lot And Culvert Drainage:
1. Streets: If streets are to be used as part of the minor or major drainage system, ponding depths
shall not exceed curb heights by more than one inch (1") and shall not remain flooded for more than
eight (8) hours for any event less than or equal to the 100-year event.
2. Parking Lots: The maximum stormwater ponding depth in any parking area shall not exceed six
inches (6") for more than four (4) hours.
3. Culvert Road And Driveway Crossings: Sizing of culvert crossings shall consider entrance and exit
losses as well as tailwater conditions on the culvert.
L. Infiltration Practices: To effectively reduce runoff volumes, infiltration practices including basins,
trenches and porous pavement should be located on soils in hydrological soil groups "A" or "B" as
designated by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Infiltration basins and trenches designed to
recharge ground water shall not be located within seventy five feet (75') of a water supply well or a
building foundation. A sediment settling basin shall be provided to remove coarse sediment from
stormwater flows before they reach infiltration basins or trenches. Stormwater shall not be allowed to
stand more than seventy two (72) hours over eighty percent (80%) of a dry basin's bottom area for the
maximum design event to be ex-filtrated. The bottom of infiltration facilities shall be a minimum of four
feet (4') above seasonally high ground water and bedrock.
M. Safety Considerations: The drainage system components, especially all detention basins, shall be
designed to protect the safety of any children or adults coming in contact with the system during runoff
events.
1. Side Slopes: The side slopes of all detention basins at 100-year capacity shall be as level as
practicable to prevent accidental falls into the basin and for stability and ease of maintenance. Side
slopes of detention basins and open channels shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1)
(horizontal to vertical).
2. Safety Ledge: All wet detention basins shall have a level safety ledge at least four feet (4') in width
two and one-half feet to three feet (21/2' to 3') below the normal water depth.
3. Velocity: Velocities throughout the surface drainage system shall be controlled to safe levels taking
into consideration rates and depths of flow.
4. Overflow Structures: All stormwater detention basins shall be provided with an overflow structure
capable of safely passing excess flows at a stage of at least one foot (1') below the lowest
foundation grade in the vicinity of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structure
shall be equivalent to the 100-year inflow rate.
N. Maintenance Considerations: The stormwater drainage system shall be designed to minimize and
facilitate maintenance. Turfed slideslopes shall be designed to allow lawnmowing equipment to easily
negotiate them. Wet basins shall be provided with alternate outflows which can be used to completely
drain the pool for sediment removal. (Pumping may be considered if drainage by gravity is not
feasible.) Pre-sedimentation basins shall be included, where feasible, for localizing sediment
deposition and removal. Access for heavy equipment shall be provided. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-8: ACCOMMODATING FLOWS FROM UPSTREAM TRIBUTARY AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 287/649
Stormwater runoff from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in the design of the property's
drainage system. Whenever practicable, flows from upstream areas that are not to be detained should be
routed around the basin being provided for the site being developed.
A. Upstream Areas Not Meeting Chapter Requirements: When there are areas not meeting the storage
and release rates of this Chapter, tributary to the applicant's property, regionalized detention on the
applicant's property shall be explored by the applicant. The following steps shall be followed:
1. The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his property using the release rates of
Section 4-8-6, the applicant's property area, and the procedures described in Section 4-8-7.
2. Areas tributary to the applicant's property, not meeting the storage and release rate requirements of
this Chapter, shall be identified.
3. Using the areas determined in subsection A2 above, plus the applicant's property area, total storage
needed for the combined properties shall be computed.
a. Allowable release rates shall be computed using the combined property areas. Storage shall be
computed as described in Section 4-8-7. If tributary areas are not developed, a reasonable fully
developed land cover, based on local zoning, shall be assumed for the purposes of computing
storage.
b. Once the necessary combined storage is computed the Village may choose to pay for oversizing
the applicant's detention basin to accommodate the regional flows. The applicant's responsibility
will be limited to the storage for his property as computed in subsection A1 above. If regional
storage is selected by the Village, then the design produced in this subsection A3 shall be
implemented. If regional storage is rejected by the Village, the applicant shall bypass all tributary
area flows around the applicant's basin whenever practicable. If the applicant must route
upstream flows through his basin and the upstream areas exceed one square mile in size, the
applicant must meet the provisions of this subsection for on-stream basins.
B. Upstream Areas Meeting Chapter Requirements: When there are areas which meet the storage and
release rate requirements of this Chapter, tributary to the applicant's property, the upstream flows shall
be bypassed around the applicant's detention basin, or be routed through the applicant's detention
basin if this is the only practicable alternative. Storage needed for the applicant's property shall still be
computed as described in subsection A1 of this Section. However, if the Village decides to route
tributary area flows through an applicant's basin, the final design stormwater releases shall be based
on the combined total of the applicant's property plus tributary areas. It must be shown that at no time
will the runoff rate from the applicant's property exceed the allowable release rate for his/her property
alone. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-9: EARLY COMPLETION OF DETENTION FACILITIES:
Where detention, retention or depressional storage areas are to be used as part of the drainage system
for a property, they shall be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program. Any eroded
sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant before project completion in order
to maintain the design volume of the facilities. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-10: RESERVED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 288/649
(Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-11: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Definitions:
MAINTENANCE OR MAINTAIN: Shall mean the inspection, cleaning out, mowing, repairing, and
removing of any and all accumulated sediment, leaves, nuisance, noxious weeds, invasive or nonnative
plants debris and obstructions from all detention ponds, leach basins, pollution control devices
or similar appurtenances of the stormwater drainage system such that a failure to maintain would be
likely to result in an impairment or impeding of the functioning of the stormwater drainage system. For
wet bottom ponds, maintenance shall also include necessary services that promote a healthy pond
ecosystem and prevent invasive vegetation, algae blooms, or fish kills. All stormwater and drainage
systems or stormwater management facilities shall be continually stabilized to prevent soil erosion.
STORMWATER AND DRAINAGE SYSTEM OR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: Shall be
defined to include all stormwater systems, catch basins, storage structures, drains, leaching basins,
ponds, detention ponds, sediment basins, swales, overflow weirs and/or structure restrictor manholes,
ditches, pipes and appurtenances located in the Village. This includes, but is not limited to, any and all
pollution control devices utilized as a part of the stormwater and drainage system.
B. Maintenance Requirements: Maintenance of stormwater drainage systems located on private property
shall be the responsibility of the owner of that property and all future owners of the property. All
maintenance of stormwater and drainage systems shall be the sole financial responsibility of the
property owner. However, representatives of the Village shall be authorized to enter onto the property
at reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and determining the need for maintenance of any
stormwater drainage system.
C. Maintenance Schedule: The design plans for any stormwater drainage system shall include a written
schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the property's stormwater drainage system.
Following the completion of any stormwater drainage system, and after final approvals by the Village,
the property owner shall maintain the stormwater drainage system located on the property on not less
than an annual basis. The annual regular maintenance schedule, as required by this section, shall be
made available to the Village upon reasonable written request by the Superintendent of Public Works
(SPW). If the SPW makes the determination that specific maintenance problems exist or issues that
require correction, the property owner shall complete the required maintenance and correct any issues
within thirty (30) calendar days of such written notification. If the maintenance and/or correction of
issues is not made within the time period, the Village may, pursuant to the easement required by
section 4-14-9 of this title enter upon the property and either complete the maintenance itself and
assess all costs to the property owner, or contract with other contractors for the completion of the
maintenance work and assess those costs to the property owner.
D. Bond: The Village also may, at its discretion, request a bond to be provided by the property owner for
maintenance of the stormwater drainage system in an amount to be determined in the sole discretion
of the Village. (Ord. 2017-26, 10-24-2017)
4-8-12: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Inspections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 289/649
1. Inspections During Construction: General site grading shall not begin until the Superintendent of
Public Works has determined that any necessary detention facilities are in place and operational.
The Superintendent of Public Works (SPW) or his representative will also conduct periodic
inspections of the work in progress to be certain that the drainage system is being built as designed.
If any violations of the provisions or requirements of this chapter are noted during such inspections,
the SPW shall notify the property owner in writing of the items needing correction. The property
owner shall have ten (10) calendar days to make such corrections unless given a specific extension
of time in writing by the SPW. Failure to complete such corrections within the specified time period
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
2. Final Inspection: Upon notification by the applicant that the drainage system is completed, the SPW
or his representative shall conduct a final inspection. If the drainage system is found to contain
deficiencies which require correction the SPW or his representative shall notify the property owner
of the necessary conditions. The property owner shall correct such deficiencies within ten (10)
calendar days unless given a specific extension of time in writing by the SPW. Failure to make
necessary corrections within the specified time period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
3. Routine Inspections: All privately owned drainage systems shall be inspected by representatives of
the Village not less often than once per year. A written report shall be filed of the results of any
inspection and a copy sent to the property owner detailing any problems which need correction.
B. Enforcement: The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Superintendent of Public Works (SPW) or his representatives.
C. Appeals: All appeals to the Superintendent of Public Works decisions regarding the interpretation of
this chapter shall be heard by the Village Board of the Village. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-14: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be
imprisoned for not more than six (6) months. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
Chapter 9
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
4-9-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. Findings: The Board of Trustees of the Village hereby finds that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 290/649
1. Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing development for certain
nonagricultural uses including but not limited to the construction of dwelling units, commercial
buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, the modification of stream
channels and drainageways, and the creation of recreational facilities;
2. The washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health
and safety of users thereof, by decreasing vision and reducing traction of road vehicles;
3. Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys, washed-out fills, and embankments;
4. Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams,
lakes, wetlands, and reservoirs;
5. Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes, promotes the growth
of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and other desirable aquatic life, and is costly and
difficult to remove; and
6. Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the storage capacity of floodplains and
natural depressions, resulting in increased chances of flooding at risk to public health and safety.
B. Purpose: The Board of Trustees therefore declares that the purpose of this Chapter is to safeguard
persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment, and promote the public welfare by
guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development
or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on
land situated in the Village. It is the intention of this Chapter that the delivery of sediment from sites
affected by land-disturbing activities be limited, as closely as practicable, to that which would have
occurred if the land had been left in its natural undisturbed state. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter certain terms used herein are defined as set forth below:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village of Minooka for the construction, erection or alteration
of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests where required
have been performed, and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this Chapter.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of "average end
areas".
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar, material is
cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced,
pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the grading work is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 291/649
completed in accordance with the site development plan.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from
any excavation or fill.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes
made by unnatural causes.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of Illinois and its agencies or
political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent,
servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a
single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the village of Minooka for the construction or
alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading.
STOCKPILE: Earth, soil, or other similar material stripped and piled into a mound which is greater than
one hundred (100) square yards and remaining in place for more than seven (7) days.
STREAM: Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade drainageway which
has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing,
and storage or removal of topsoil.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or
maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Will County and Grundy County, Illinois.
WETLANDS: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-33, 12-17-
2008)
4-9-3: GENERAL PRINCIPLES:
It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion and sedimentation caused by development
activities, including clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and filling of land, in the village. Measures
taken to control soil erosion and off site sediment runoff should be adequate to assure that sediment is
not transported from the site by a storm event of 10-year frequency or less. The following principles shall
apply to all development activities within the village and to the preparation of the submissions required
under section 4-9-4 of this chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 292/649
A. Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least
potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required should be
avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
B. Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to
natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands should be left undisturbed wherever possible.
Temporary crossings of watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate stabilization
measures.
C. Special precaution should be taken to prevent damages resultant from any necessary development
activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake, pond, or wetland. Preventative measures should reflect
the sensitivity of these areas to erosion and sedimentation.
D. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time during
development.
E. Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other appropriate sediment or runoff
control measures should be installed prior to site clearing and grading and maintained to remove
sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development.
F. The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based on assessment of the
probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the
risks, costs, and benefits involved.
G. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing
maintenance should be considered.
H. Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface
conditions during and after development. Drainageways should be designed so that their final
gradients and the resultant velocities and rates of discharge will not create additional erosion on site or
downstream.
I. Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and functional as soon as practical during
development.
J. Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land uses should be vegetated with an
appropriate protective cover prior to development.
K. All waste generated as a result of site development activity should be properly disposed of and should
be prevented from being carried off the site by either wind or water.
L. All construction sites should provide measures to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or
private roadways. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 293/649
4-9-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall commence or perform
any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or filling of land which meets any of the following
provisions without having first obtained a site development permit from the Village Board. (Ord. 2017-
16, 6-27-2017)
1. Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination
thereof) that will affect an area in excess of one (1) acre;
2. Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet if
the activity is within twenty five feet (25') of a lake, pond, stream, or wetland; or
3. Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof that will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards.
B. Exceptions: A permit shall not be required for any of the following; provided, that the person
responsible for any such development shall implement necessary soil erosion and sediment control
measures to satisfy the principles set forth in section 4-9-3 of this chapter:
1. Excavation below final grade for the basement and footings of a single-family residence and
appurtenant structures on a site in excess of two (2) acres for which a building permit has been
issued by the Village;
2. Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation measures included in a farm
conservation plan approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District, and including the
construction of agricultural structures;
3. Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system to serve an existing dwelling or structure.
(Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
C. Application For Permit; Fee: Application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of
the property or his authorized agent to the Building Department on a form furnished for that purpose.
Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of
any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact
at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Each application
shall include certification that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement
of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2017-16, 6-
27-2017)
D. Submissions: Each application for a site development permit shall be accompanied by the following
information:
1. A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the field of the site for which the permit is
sought, and including the boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a
legend and scale.
2. A development plan of the site showing:
a. Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within approximately one hundred feet (100') of
the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two foot (2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the
conformation and drainage pattern of the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 294/649
b. The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands and
depressions, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas, and other significant natural or
manmade features on the site and adjacent land within one hundred feet (100') of the boundary.
c. A general description of the predominant soil types on the site, their location, and their limitations
for the proposed use.
d. Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned utilization; areas of
clearing, stripping, grading, excavation, and filling; proposed contours, finished grades, and street
profiles; provisions for storm drainage, including storm sewers, swales, detention basins and any
other measures to control the rate of runoff, with a drainage area map, indications of flow
directions, and computations; kinds and locations of utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to
be paved, covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed.
3. An erosion and sediment control plan showing all measures necessary to meet the objectives of this
chapter throughout all phases of construction and permanently after completion of development of
the site, including:
a. Location and description, including standard details, of all sediment control measures and design
specifics of sediment basins and traps, including outlet details.
b. Location and description of all soil stabilization and erosion control measures, including seeding
mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type
and rate of lime and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, and types of nonvegetative stabilization measures.
c. Location and description of all runoff control measures, including diversions, waterways, and
outlets.
d. Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of sediment off site, including
construction entrance details, as appropriate.
e. Description of dust and traffic control measures. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
f. An exhibit indicating location and dimensions of all stockpiles, description of stabilization methods,
and approximate dates from the creation of each stockpile until complete removal. (Ord. 2008-33,
12-17-2008)
g. Description of off site fill or borrow volumes, locations, and methods of stabilization.
h. Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type and frequency of maintenance,
easements, and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
i. Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures during development
and after development is completed. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
4. The proposed phasing of development of the site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading
and construction, and final grading and landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of
installation of temporary sediment control measures (including perimeter controls), clearing and
grading, installation of temporary soil stabilization measures, installation of storm drainage, paving
streets and parking areas, final grading and the establishment of permanent vegetative cover, and
the removal of temporary measures. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the
Superintendent of Public Works of any significant changes which occur in the site development
schedule after the initial erosion and sediment control plan has been approved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 295/649
These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the
standards and requirements contained in the latest version of the Illinois Urban Manual prepared for
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) by the United States Department of Agriculture's
(USDA) - Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) in Illinois and adopted by the Will
County and/or Grundy County Soil and Water Conservation District, which standards and
requirements are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference. (Ord. 2017-16, 6-27-2017)
The Village Board may waive specific requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that
the information submitted is sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives and
principles of this chapter. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
E. Bonds: The applicant is required to file with the Village a faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of
credit, or other improvement security satisfactory to the Village Attorney in an amount deemed
sufficient by the Village Engineer to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of
improvements and landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment control measures for such period as
specified by the Village, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of
improvements installed on the site.
F. Review And Approval: Each application for a site development permit shall be reviewed and acted upon
according to the following procedures:
1. The Village Engineer will review each application for a site development permit to determine its
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and report his findings to the Village Board. The
Village Engineer may also refer any application to the Will and/or Grundy County Soil and Water
Conservation District and/or any other local government or public agency within whose jurisdiction
the site is located for review and comment. Within sixty (60) days after receiving an application,
unless additional review time is necessary, the Village Board, shall in writing: (Ord. 2017-16, 6-27-
2017)
a. Approve the permit application if it is found to be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and issue the permit;
b. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to
secure substantially the objectives of this chapter and issue the permit subject to these conditions;
or
c. Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a
revised application and/or submission.
2. No site development permit shall be issued for an intended development site unless:
a. The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and planned unit development, has
been approved by the Village where applicable, or
b. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the Village, or
c. The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall development program previously
approved by the Village for the area in which the site is situated; and
d. All relevant Federal and State permits (i.e., for floodplains and wetlands) have been received for
the portion of the site subject to soil disturbance. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
3. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to
proceed in accordance with conditions established by the Village. Failure of the Village Board to act
on an application or revised application within sixty (60) days of its submittal, unless the Village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 296/649
Engineer has determined that additional review time is necessary, shall entitle the applicant to
appeal the delay in accordance with the appeals procedure set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2017-16, 6-
27-2017)
G. Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not
completed by a date which shall be specified in the permit; except that the Village Board may, if the
permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being
commenced or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if
written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. The Village Board may require
modification of the erosion control plan to prevent any increase in erosion or offsite sediment runoff
resulting from any extension.
H. Appeals: The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice of the filing of the application,
may make an appeal of the decision of the Village Board. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Village Board
shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving fifteen (15) days' notice thereof. The Village
Board shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing. Factors to be considered on
review shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities on
the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed management
plans, or the use of any retention facilities; possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water,
both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways;
nature and type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the proposed development activities may
create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and
unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 1996-2,
1-9-1996)
I. Retention Of Plans: Plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments shall be retained in
printable document format (PDF), as well as in original form or on microfilm by the Village. (Ord. 2017-
16, 6-27-2017)
4-9-5: DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and filling which is subject to the permit
requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth in
this section.
B. Responsibility: The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or property
otherwise imposed by law, and the Village or its officers or agents will not be made liable for such
damage, by: 1) the issuance of a permit under this chapter, 2) compliance with the provisions of that
permit or with conditions attached to it by the Village Board, 3) failure of Village officials to observe or
recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, 4) failure of Village officials to recommend denial of or to
deny a permit, or 5) exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter.
C. Site Design Requirements:
1. On-site sediment control measures, as specified by the following criteria, shall be constructed and
functional prior to initiating clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site.
a. For disturbed areas draining less than one (1) acre, filter barriers (including filter fences, straw
bales, or equivalent control measures) shall be constructed to control all off-site runoff as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 297/649
specified in referenced handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet
(25'), may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is expected.
b. For disturbed areas draining more than one (1) but less than five (5) acres, a sediment trap or
equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area.
c. For disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, a sediment basin or equivalent control
measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area.
d. Sediment basins and sediment traps designs shall provide for both detention storage and
sediment storage. The detention storage shall be composed of equal volumes of "wet" detention
storage and "dry" detention storage and each shall be sized for the 2-year, 24-hour runoff from the
site under maximum runoff conditions during construction. The release rate of the basin shall be
that rate required to achieve minimum detention times of at least ten (10) hours. The elevation of
the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention storage.
e. The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load generated from the site
over the duration of the construction period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of
sediment generated in one (1) year. For construction periods exceeding one (1) year, the 1-year
sediment load and a sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
2. Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and diversions, and the outlets of all
channels and pipes shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from
the 10-year frequency storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized
within forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the following standards:
a. For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with mulch, erosion blanket, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the
bottom of the channel.
b. For grades of four percent (4%) to eight percent (8%), sod or an equivalent control measure shall
be applied in the channel.
c. For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap, or an equivalent control measure shall
be applied, or the grade shall be effectively reduced using drop structures.
3. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent measures within seven (7)
calendar days following the end of active disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following
criteria:
a. Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall include seeding, mulching,
sodding, and/or nonvegetative measures.
b. Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be stabilized with sod, mat or
blanket in combination with seeding, or equivalent.
4. Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided, where possible. If disturbance
activities are unavoidable, the following requirements shall be met:
a. Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the maximum extent practicable.
Where construction crossings are necessary, temporary crossings shall be constructed of
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
b. The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept to a minimum. The stream
channel, including bed and banks, shall be restabilized within forty eight (48) hours after channel
disturbance is completed, interrupted, or stopped.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 298/649
c. Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be constructed in the dry and
fully stabilized before flow is diverted.
5. Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps or filter barriers meeting
accepted design standards and specifications. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
6. If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected from erosion. All pumped
discharges shall be routed through appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent.
7. Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads, access drives, and parking areas of
sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.
Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.
8. All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices must be maintained and
repaired as needed to assure effective performance to their intended function.
9. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed of within thirty (30) days
after final site stabilization is achieved with permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment
and other disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures should be
permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996; amd.
Ord. 2008-33, 12-17-2008)
D. Handbooks Adopted By Reference: The standards and specifications contained in "Standards And
Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control" (the Yellow Book) and the "Illinois Procedures
And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control" (the Green Book) cited in section
4-9-4 of this chapter, are hereby incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by reference for
the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under site development and erosion
and sedimentation control plans approved under section 4-9-4 of this chapter. In the event of conflict
between provisions of said manuals and of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.
E. Maintenance Of Control Measures: All soil erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet
the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained periodically by the applicant or subsequent
landowner during the period of land disturbance and development of the site in a satisfactory manner
to ensure adequate performance.
F. Inspection: The village board or its designee shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall
either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to
comply with the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved. Plans for
grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the village board or its
designee shall be maintained at the site during progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections and
to ensure compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, the grading or building
permit, and this chapter the permittee shall notify the village board or its designee within two (2)
working days of the completion of the construction stages specified below:
1. Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control measures (including perimeter
controls and diversions), prior to proceeding with any other earth disturbance or grading,
2. After stripping and clearing,
3. After rough grading,
4. After final grading,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 299/649
5. After seeding and landscaping deadlines, and
6. After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of sediment controls.
If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done in phases or areas, the permittee
shall give notice and request inspection at the completion of each of the above work stages in each
phase or area. If an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five (5)
working days after notice is received by the village from the permittee, the permittee may continue
work at his own risk, without presuming acceptance by the village. Notification of the results of the
inspection shall be given in writing at the site.
G. Special Precautions:
1. If at any stage of the grading of any development site the village board determines by inspection
that the nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil
any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure, the village board may require,
as a condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be taken
as is considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include,
but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities,
berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and
recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering geologist which may be made
requirements for further work.
2. Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any development site is not
complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install temporary structures or take
such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the village board may specify the time of
starting grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific
stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal
rains.
H. Amendment Of Plans: Major amendments of the site development or erosion and sedimentation
control plans shall be submitted to the village board and shall be processed and approved or
disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be
authorized by the village board by written authorization to the permittee. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
I. Stockpiles:
1. The area of land exposed during site development should be limited to the smallest working area
practicable. The period of time during which land is exposed without vegetation should be limited to
the shortest period practicable.
2. The base of stockpiles shall not be located within two hundred feet (200') of the perimeter of the
development or within two hundred feet (200') from the nearest home, and stockpiles shall not be
located on floodplains, overflow routes, areas subject to frequent inundation, or park sites.
Stockpiles shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than twenty five feet (25') to
a roadway or drainage channel. Filter barriers, including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall
be installed immediately on the downslope side of the stockpiles.
3. Stockpiles shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height.
4. Any stockpile that remains undisturbed longer than seven (7) days shall have approved sediment
and erosion control measures, such as a silt fence, surrounding the entire base of the stockpile, and
a gradient ratio of not more than three to one (3:1).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 300/649
5. No stockpile shall be allowed to remain in the development phase after completion of the last
structure in that development phase, and no occupancy permit shall be issued for the last structure
in the development phase until all dirt stockpiles are removed from that phase. Without prior written
approval from the village, all dirt stockpiles shall be removed for each phase no later than three (3)
years after the first building permit is issued for that phase or prior to the issuance of the last
occupancy permit in the phase, whichever is first to occur.
6. The permittee, developer, and/or owner shall abide by the village's noxious weeds ordinance (title 7,
chapter 3 of this code), and shall not permit weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle,
cocklebur, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac or other weeds of a like kind, to grow in and around
any stockpile.
7. Any stockpile that remains in the same place longer than one year must be seeded or sodded and
maintained in that condition for the remainder of the term of that stockpile.
8. Stockpiles must be maintained in such a way as to minimize the height and to minimize the danger
to children, including the removal of all potentially harmful debris.
9. All stockpiles in existence at the time of passage of this subsection, but which do not conform to one
or more provisions of this subsection, shall be brought into compliance by July 30, 2009. (Ord. 2008-
33, 12-17-2008)
4-9-6: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Exceptions: The village board may, in accordance with the following procedures, authorize exceptions
to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter:
1. Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant for a site
development permit, stating fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon by the
applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the
petition to be granted, it shall be necessary that the village board find all of the following facts with
respect to the land referred to in the petition:
a. That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is subject to
such title limitations of record, that it is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with
all of the requirements of this chapter;
b. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right
of the applicant; and
c. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property in the vicinity of the subject property.
2. Each application for an exception shall be referred to the village board for review.
3. The village board shall hold a public hearing on each application for exception, within thirty (30)
days after receiving application, in the manner provided with respect to appeals. After public
hearing, the village board may approve the site development permit application with the exceptions
and conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site development permit application
and exception application or it may take such other action as appropriate.
B. Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit: In the event any person holding a site development permit
pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site development in such a
manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 301/649
the neighborhood of the development site or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the village board may suspend or revoke
the site development permit.
1. Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work order issued by the village board and
delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person performing the work. The stop work order shall
be effective immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the village board at which the conditions of the subsections below can be met.
2. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by
the village board. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally
or by registered mail, and shall state:
a. The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation, in clear and concise
language; and
b. The time when and place where such hearing will be held. Such notice shall be served on the
permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the village board shall determine whether the permit shall
be suspended or revoked.
C. Violations And Penalties: No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed,
continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person,
partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required
to restore the site to the condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense
of such restoration.
D. Separability: The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be separable, and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-
1996)
Chapter 10
STREAM AND WETLAND PROTECTION
4-10-1: AUTHORITY:
The lowland conservancy overlay district is adopted by the board of trustees, pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-2: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MINOOKA LOWLAND CONSERVANCY OVERLAY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 302/649
DISTRICT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the present
and future residents of Minooka and downstream drainage areas by providing for the protection,
preservation, proper maintenance, and use of Minooka watercourses, lakes, ponds, floodplain and
wetland areas. This chapter is more specifically adopted:
A. To prevent flood damage by preserving storm and flood water storage capacity;
B. To maintain the normal hydrologic balance of streams, floodplains, ponds, lakes, wetlands, and ground
water by storing and providing for infiltration of wet period runoff in floodplains and wetlands, and
releasing it slowly to the stream to maintain in-stream flow;
C. To manage stormwater runoff and maintain natural runoff conveyance systems, and minimize the need
for major storm sewer construction and drainageway modification;
D. To improve water quality, both by filtering and storing sediments and attached pollutants, nutrients, and
organic compounds before they drain into streams or wetlands, and by maintaining the natural
pollutant assimilating capabilities of streams, floodplains and wetlands;
E. To protect shorelines and stream banks from soil erosion, using natural means and materials wherever
possible;
F. To protect fish spawning, breeding, nursery and feeding grounds;
G. To protect wildlife habitat;
H. To preserve areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific interest, including natural areas and
habitats of endangered species;
I. To maintain and enhance the aesthetic qualities of developing areas; and
J. To encourage the continued economic growth and high quality of life of the Village which depends in
part on an adequate quality of water, a pleasing natural environment, and recreational opportunities in
proximity to the Village.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of this Chapter, Village hereby designates the Lowland
Conservancy Overlay District which shall be considered as an overlay to the zoning districts created by
the Village zoning ordinances as amended. Any proposed development activity within the District must
obtain a special use permit as approved by the governing body of the Village. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 303/649
4-10-4: DEFINITIONS:
ARMORING: A form of channel modification which involves the placement of materials (concrete, riprap,
bulkheads, etc.) within a stream channel or along a shoreline to protect property above streams, lakes
and ponds from erosion and wave damage caused by wave action and stream flow.
BULKHEAD: A retaining wall that protects property along water.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent that periodically or continuously
contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two (2) bodies of water. It has a definite
bed and banks that serve to contain the water.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION OR CHANNELIZATION: To alter a watercourse by changing the physical
dimension or materials of the channel. Channel modification includes damming, riprapping (or other
armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or
woody vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of debris or trash from the
watercourse. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the
channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
CONTROL STRUCTURES: A structure designed to control the rate of stormwater runoff that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation.
CULVERT: A structure designed to carry drainage water or small streams below barriers such as roads,
driveways, or railway embankments.
DEPRESSION 1 AREA: Any area which is lower in elevation on all sides than surrounding properties (i.e.,
does not drain freely), or whose drainage is severely limited such as by a restrictive culvert. A
depressional area will fill with water on occasion when runoff into it exceeds the rate of infiltration into
underlying soil or exceeds the discharge through its controlled outlet. Large depressional areas may
provide significant stormwater or floodplain storage.
DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building, agricultural, or mining operation, or the making of any
change in the use or appearance of land, and the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. The
following activities or uses shall be taken, for the purposes of this Chapter, to involve development as
defined herein:
A. Any construction, reconstruction, or alteration of a structure to occupy more or less ground area, or
the on-site preparation for same;
B. Any change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units on
land, or a material increase in the site coverage of businesses, manufacturing establishments,
offices, and dwelling units, including mobile homes, campers, and recreational vehicles, on land;
C. Any agricultural use of land including, but not limited to, the use of land in horticulture, floriculture,
forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry, beekeeping, pisciculture, and all forms of farm products and farm
production;
D. The commencement of drilling, except to obtain soil samples, or the commencement of mining,
filling, excavation, dredging, grading or other alterations of the topography;
E. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
F. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction for agricultural, private residential, commercial or
industrial use;
G. Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land, or the storage of materials;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 304/649
H. Construction, excavation, or fill operations relating to the creation or modification of any road,
street, parking facility or any drainage canal, or to the installation of utilities or any other grading
activity that alters the existing topography;
I. Construction or erection of dams, levees, walls, fences, bridges or culverts; and
J. Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
DISTRICT: The Lowland Conservancy Overlay District as defined in Section 4-10-6-2 of this Chapter.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
FILTERED VIEW: The maintenance or establishment of woody vegetation of sufficient density to screen
developments from a stream or wetland, to provide for streambank stabilization and erosion control, to
serve as an aid to infiltration of surface runoff, and to provide cover to shade the water. The vegetation
need not be so dense as to completely block the view. Filtered view means no clear cutting.
FLOODPLAIN: That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the 100-
year frequency flood elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain (sometimes referred to as the base floodplain or special flood
hazard area) required to store and convey the base flood. The floodway is the 100-year floodway as
designated and regulated by the Illinois Department of Transportation/Division of Water Resources. The
remainder of the floodplain which is outside the regulatory floodway is referred to as the flood fringe or
floodway fringe.
HYDRAULIC CHARACTERISTICS: The features of a watercourse which determine its water conveyance
capacity. These features include but are not limited to: size and configuration of the cross-section of the
watercourse and floodway; texture and roughness of materials along the watercourse; alignment of
watercourse; gradient of watercourse; amount and type of vegetation within the watercourse; and size,
configuration, and other characteristics of structures within the watercourse. In low-lying areas the
characteristics of the overbank area also determine water conveyance capacity.
LAKE OR POND: Any inland waterbody, fed by spring or surface water flow.
LOT: An area of land, with defined boundaries, that is designated in official assessor's records as being
one parcel.
NATURAL: In reference to watercourses, means those stream channels, grassed waterways and swales
formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area
near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic
materials typical of the area with no alteration of the course or cross-section of the stream caused by
filling or excavating.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and
action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction
or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristics.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A person trained in one or more of the disciplines of biology, geology, soil
science, engineering, or hydrology whose training and experience ensure a competent analysis and
assessment of stream, lake, pond and wetland conditions and impacts.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered under the provisions of
"The Illinois Professional Engineering Act" and any act amendatory thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 305/649
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A facility that provides for storage of storm water runoff and
controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RUNOFF: The portion of precipitation on the land that is not absorbed by the soil or plant material and
which runs off the land.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground
surfaces or in water bodies or watercourses.
SETBACK: The horizontal distance between any portion of a structure or any development activity and
the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a lake
or pond, or the edge of a wetland, measured from the structure's or development's closest point to the
ordinary high water mark, or edge.
STREAM: A body of running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the
surface of the ground; 7.5 minute topographic maps of the U.S. Geological Survey are one reference for
identifying perennial and intermittent streams. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "stream" does not
include storm sewers.
STRUCTURE: Anything that is constructed, erected or moved to or from any premises which is located
above, on, or below the ground including, but not limited to roads, signs, billboards, and mobile homes.
Temporary recreational facilities including, but not limited to, tents, camper trailers, and recreation
vehicles are not considered structures when used less than one hundred eighty (180) days per year and
located landward of the minimum setback provided as a natural vegetation strip.
VEGETATION: All plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, mosses, and grasses.
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area,
slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, conduit, culvert, swale, grass waterway, gully, ravine, wash, or natural
or man-made drainageway, which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which stormwater
runoff and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently.
WETLAND: Those transitional lands between terrestrial and aquatic system where the water table is
usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. Classification of areas as wetlands
shall follow the "Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States" as published by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS/OBS-79/31). (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5: SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
To ensure that proposed development activity can be carried out in a manner which is compatible and
harmonious with the natural amenities of the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District and with surrounding
land uses, a request for a special use permit for such development activity must be submitted for approval
by the governing body of the Village.
No special use permit shall be issued unless the Village finds that:
A. The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural features such as ponds, streams,
wetlands, and forested areas, nor impair their natural functions, but will preserve and incorporate such
features into the development's site;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 306/649
B. The location of natural features and the site's topography have been considered in the designing and
siting of all physical improvements;
C. Adequate assurances have been received that the clearing of the site of topsoil, trees, and other
natural features will not occur before the commencement of building operations; only those areas
approved for the placement of physical improvements may be cleared;
D. The development will not reduce the natural retention storage capacity of any watercourse, nor
increase the magnitude and volume of flooding at other locations; and that in addition, the
development will not increase stream velocities; and
E. The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for excavation and site preparation, and the drainage is
designed to prevent erosion and environmentally deleterious surface runoff.
There shall be no development, including the immediate or future clearing or removal of natural ground
cover and/or trees, within the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District for any purpose, unless a special use
permit is granted subject to the provisions of this Chapter or the provisions of the Village Zoning
Ordinance1.
Dumping, filling, mining, excavating, dredging, or transferring of any earth material within the district is
prohibited unless a special use permit is granted.
No ponds or impoundments shall be created nor other alterations or improvements shall be allowed in the
district for recreational uses, storm water management, flood control, agricultural uses or as scenic
features unless a special use permit is granted. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-1: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
Application for a special use permit shall be made by the owner of the property, or his/her authorized
agent, to the Village on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and
address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant
together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each application shall include certification that any land
clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the
plans approved upon issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-2: SUBMISSIONS:
Each application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by the following information as specified
in the sections cited:
Section
General Provisions:
Site Development Plan 4-10-6-4
Geologic and Soil Report 4-10-6-5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 307/649
Drainage Control Plan 4-10-6-6
Site Grading and Excavation Plan 4-10-6-7
Landscape Plan 4-10-6-8
Justification for Watercourse
Relocation and Minor Modifications:
Stream Modification/Relocation Plan 4-10-7-2
Channel and Bank Armoring 4-10-7-3
Culverts 4-10-7-4
On-Stream Impoundments 4-10-7-5
Impact Assessment
(at option of the Village)
4-10-8
Where a proposed development activity is less than two and one-half (21/2) acres in area the Village,
upon approval of the Village Engineer, may waive or simplify any or all of the submission requirements
(Sections 4-10-6-4 through 4-10-6-8); provided, that the person responsible for any such development
shall implement necessary protection measures to satisfy the purpose and intent set forth in Section 4-10-
3 of this Chapter. (See Section 4-10-11-1, Variances.) (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-3: BONDS:
The applicant may be required to file with the Village a faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit,
or other improvement security satisfactory to the Village Attorney, in an amount deemed sufficient by the
Village to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, or maintenance of improvements and
landscaping, for such period as specified by the Village, and engineering and inspection costs to cover
the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-4: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Each application for a special use permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following
procedures:
A. The Village Board will review each application for a special use permit to determine its conformance
with the provisions of this Chapter. The Board may also refer any application to the Will County and/or
Grundy County Soil and Water Conservation District and/or any other local government or public
agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comments. Within thirty (30) days
after receiving an application, the Village Board shall in writing: 1) approve the permit application, if it
is found to be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter and issue the permit; 2) approve the
permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially
the objectives of this Chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 3) disapprove the
permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application
and/or submission.
B. No special use permit shall be issued for an intended development site unless:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 308/649
1. The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and planned unit developments, has
been approved by the Village where applicable; or
2. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the Village; or
3. The proposed development is coordinated with any overall development program previously
approved by the Village for the area in which the site is situated.
C. Failure of the Village to act on an original or revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt shall
authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed, unless such time is extended
by agreement between the Village and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a revised
plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by
the Village. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-5: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
A. Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property; when emergency work is performed under this
Section, the person performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the Village
within ten (10) days after commencement of the work and shall thereafter obtain a special use permit
and shall perform such work as may be determined by the agency to be reasonably necessary to
correct any impairment to the watercourse, lake, pond, floodplain or wetland (in terms of the purposes
of this Chapter, subsection 4-10-3A through J);
B. Work consisting of the operation, repair, or maintenance of any lawful use of land existing on the date
of adoption of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter;
C. Lands adjacent to farm ditches if:
1. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural stream or river; or
2. Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not streams before ditching; or
3. Such lands are maintained in agricultural uses without buildings and structures.
Where farm ditches are found to contribute to adverse environmental impacts or hazards to persons
or property, the Village may include designated farm ditches in the District. The Village may also
require that linings, bulkheads, dikes and culverts to be removed to mitigate hazards, or that other
mitigative measures be taken, such as the maintenance of a natural vegetation buffer strip. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-6: EFFECT ON OTHER PERMITS:
The granting of a special use permit under the provisions herein shall in no way affect the owner's
responsibility to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance, or regulation of any State
agency or subdivision thereof, or to meet other Village ordinances and regulations. Where State and/or
Federal permits are required, a special use permit will not be issued until they are obtained. (Ord. 1996-1,
1-9-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 309/649
4-10-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS; AREA AFFECTED:
This Chapter applies to development in or near streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands within the Village.
Streams, lakes, and ponds (including intermittent streams) are those which are shown on the United
States Department of the Interior Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5 minute quadrangle maps and those
additional streams, lakes, and ponds delineated on maps adopted as part of this Chapter. Those maps
are hereby made a part of this Chapter, and two (2) copies thereof shall remain on file in the office of the
Village Clerk for public inspection. Within the jurisdiction of the Village, those waterbodies and
watercourses that are named and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter are: (list of waterbodies
and watercourses). Wetlands are those designated in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Illinois
Department of Conservation wetland inventory and those additional wetlands delineated on maps
adopted as part of this Chapter.
If new drainage courses, lakes, ponds or wetlands are created as part of a development, the requirements
for setbacks and uses within setbacks, and the criteria for watercourse relocation and minor modification
shall apply. The District shall be amended as appropriate to include these areas. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-1: LOWLAND CONSERVANCY OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The Lowland Conservancy Overlay District shall be considered as an overlay to the zoning districts
created by the Village Zoning Ordinance as amended2. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter,
applicants for a special use permit within the District shall meet all requirements of the underlying zoning
districts. In the event of a conflict between the overlay district requirements and the underlying zoning
district requirements, the most restrictive requirements prevail. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-2: DISTRICT BOUNDARY:
The procedures, standards and requirements contained in this Chapter shall apply to all lots within
wetlands and streams, and all lots lying wholly or in part:
A. Within the special flood hazard area (SFHA) designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA); or
B. Within one hundred feet (100') of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM) of a perennial stream or
intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a lake or pond, or the edge of a wetland; or
C. Within depressional areas serving as floodplain or stormwater storage areas, as designated on the
Lowland Conservancy District Map.
The District is designated on a map labeled "Lowland Conservancy Overlay District Map", which is made
to be part of this Chapter and which has the same force and effect as if all the notations, references, and
descriptions shown thereon were set forth or described herein. Designated areas are shown on said Map
which shall be and remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and additional areas may be approved
from time to time and be made exhibits hereto. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-3: MINIMUM SETBACK OF DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY FROM STREAMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 310/649
A. Minimum Setback: Absolutely no development activity (except as provided below) may occur within the
minimum setback which is defined as seventy five feet (75') from the ordinary high water mark of
streams, lakes and ponds, or the edge of wetlands, or within a designated depressional area. In no
case shall the setback be less than the boundary of the 100-year floodway as defined by FEMA.
These setback requirements do not apply to a stream in a culvert unless the stream is taken out of the
culvert as part of development activity. If a culvert functions as a low-flow culvert, where water is
intended to periodically flow over it, the setback requirements apply.
B. Development Activities: The following development activities may be permitted, subject to issuance of
a special use permit, as set out in Section 5-10-9 of this Code, within the minimum setback areas only
if, as a practical matter, they cannot be located outside the setback area. Such development activities
will only be approved based upon a report, prepared by a qualified professional, which demonstrates
that they will not adversely affect water quality; destroy, damage or disrupt significant habitat area.
adversely affect drainage and/or stormwater retention capabilities; adversely affect flood conveyance
and storage; lead to unstable earth conditions, create erosion hazards, or be materially detrimental to
any other property in the area of the subject property or to the Village as a whole, including the loss of
open space or scenic vistas:
1. Minor improvements such as walkways, benches, comfort stations, informational displays,
directional signs, foot bridges, observation decks, and docks;
2. The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges,
electrical transmission and telecommunication lines, poles, and towers; and
3. The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor
education areas, historic natural and scientific areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife improvement
projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps.
C. Considerations: Review of the proposed development activity within the minimum setback area will
consider the following:
1. Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps,
swimming beaches, or the development of park shelters or similar structures is allowed. The
development and maintenance of roads, parking lots and other impervious surfaces necessary for
permitted uses are allowed only on a very limited basis, and where no alternate location outside of
the setback area is available.
2. Land surface modification within the minimum setback shall be permitted for the development of
stormwater drainage swales between the developed area of the site (including a stormwater
detention facility on the site) and a stream, lake or pond, or wetlands detention basins within the
setback are generally discouraged, unless it can be shown that resultant modifications will not
impair water quality, habitat, or flood storage functions.
3. No filling or excavating within wetlands is permitted except to install piers for the limited
development of walkways and observation decks. Walkways and observation decks should avoid
high quality wetland areas, and should not adversely affect natural areas designated in the Illinois
Natural Areas Inventory or the habitat of rare or endangered species.
4. Wetland area occupied by the development of decks and walkways must be mitigated by an equal
area of wetland habitat improvement.
5. Modification of degraded wetlands for purposes of stormwater management is permitted where the
quality of the wetland is improved and total wetland acreage is preserved. Where such modification
is permitted, wetlands shall be protected from the effects of increased stormwater runoff by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 311/649
measures such as detention or sedimentation basins, vegetated swales and buffer strips, and
sediment and erosion control measures on adjacent developments. The direct entry of storm sewers
into wetlands shall be avoided. Environmental impact analysis of wetland modification may be
required in accordance with Section 4-10-8 of this Chapter.
D. Applicants For Special Use Permit:
1. An applicant for a special use permit must stabilize areas left exposed after land surface
modification with vegetation normally associated with that stream or wetland. The planting of native
riparian vegetation is recommended as the preferred stabilization measure. Other techniques should
be used only when and where vegetation fails to control erosion. The preferred alternative is riprap,
using natural rock materials where practicable, installed on eroding bank areas in a manner that
provides interstitial space for vegetative growth and habitat for macroinvertebrates and other stream
organisms. Lining of the stream channel bottom is not permitted.
2. The applicant shall minimize access to the applicant's proposed development activity within all or
part of the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District where such access could adversely affect the
stream, lake, pond, wetland, or related environmentally sensitive areas. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A site development plan must be prepared for any proposed development within, or partly within, the
Lowland Conservancy Overlay District and must indicate:
A. Dimension and area of parcel, showing also the vicinity of the site in sufficient detail to enable easy
location, in the field, of the site for which the special use permit is sought, and including the boundary
line, underlying zoning, a legend, a scale, and a north arrow (this requirement may be satisfied by the
submission of a separate vicinity map);
B. Location of any existing and proposed structures;
C. Location of existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems;
D. Location of any perennial or intermittent stream, lake or pond, and its ordinary high water mark;
E. Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
F. Location of setback lines as defined in this Chapter;
G. Location of the 100-year floodway;
H. Location of existing or future access roads;
I. Specifications and dimensions of stream, wetland or other water areas proposed for alterations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 312/649
J. Cross-sections and calculations indicating any changes in flood storage volumes; and
K. Such other information as reasonably requested by the Village.
The applicant shall present evidence, prepared by a qualified professional, that demonstrates that the
proposed development activity will not endanger health and safety, including danger from the obstruction
or diversion of flood flow. The developer shall also show, by submitting appropriate calculations and
resource inventories, that the proposed development activity will not substantially reduce natural
floodwater storage capacity, destroy valuable habitat for aquatic or other flora and fauna, adversely affect
water quality or ground water resources, increase stormwater runoff velocity so that water levels on other
lands are substantially raised or the danger from flooding increased, or adversely impact any other natural
stream, floodplain, or wetland functions, and is otherwise consistent with the intent of this Chapter. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-5: GEOLOGIC AND SOIL CHARACTERISTICS; REPORT:
The site proposed for development shall be investigated to determine the soil and geologic
characteristics, including soil erosion potential. A report, prepared by a licensed professional engineer,
geoscientist, or soil scientist experienced in the practice of geologic and soil mechanics, shall be
submitted with every application for land development within the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District.
This report shall include a description of soil type and stability of surface and subsurface conditions. Any
area which the investigation indicates as being subject to geologic or soil hazards shall not be subjected
to development, unless the engineer or soil scientist can demonstrate conclusively that these hazards can
be overcome. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-6: HYDROLOGIC CONTROLS/DRAINAGE CONTROL PLAN:
A drainage control plan that describes the hydraulic characteristics of on-site and nearby watercourses as
well as the proposed drainage plan, prepared by a registered professional engineer experienced in
hydrology and hydraulics, shall be submitted with each application for land development within the
Lowland Conservancy Overlay District. Unless otherwise noted, the following restrictions, requirements
and standards shall apply to all development within the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District:
A. Natural open-channel drainageways shall be preserved; and
B. Runoff from areas of concentrated impervious cover (e.g., roofs, driveways, streets, patios, etc.) shall
be collected and transported to a drainageway (preferably a natural drainageway) with sufficient
capacity to accept the discharge without undue erosion or detrimental impact. Vegetated drainage
swales are preferred over conveyances constructed of concrete or other manufactured materials.
The drainage control plan shall identify appropriate measures, such as recharge basins and
detention/retention basins, which will limit the quantitative and qualitative effects of stormwater runoff to
pre-development conditions. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-7: SITE GRADING AND EXCAVATION PLAN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 313/649
Section 4-10-6-7 applies to the extent that grading and excavation and erosion control plans, which satisfy
the following requirements, are not already required by a jurisdiction.
A. Application; Contents Of Plan: A site grading and excavation plan, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, trained and experienced in civil engineering, shall be submitted with each
application for a special use permit and shall include the following:
1. Details of the existing terrain and drainage pattern with one foot (1') contours;
2. Proposed site contours at one foot (1') intervals;
3. Dimensions, elevation and contours of grading, excavation and fill;
4. A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil and other materials that is removed
from allowable grading and excavation sites, including location of the disposal site if on the property;
5. A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be completed, including the total area of soil
surface to be disturbed during each stage, and estimated starting and completion dates. The
schedule shall be prepared so as to limit, to the shortest possible period, the time soil is exposed
and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed
more than fifteen (15) days prior to initiation of the improvements; and
6. A detailed description of the revegetation and stabilization methods to be employed, to be prepared
in conjunction with the landscape plan per Section 4-10-6-8. This description should include
locations of erosion control measures such as sedimentation basins, straw bales, diversion swales,
etc.
B. Compliance With Chapter: The grading and excavation plan must be consistent with all the provisions
of this Chapter.
C. Restrictions And Requirements: Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the following restrictions,
requirements and standards shall apply to all development within the District:
1. Every effort shall be made to develop the site in such a manner so as to minimize the alteration of
the natural topography;
2. No grading, filling, cleaning, clearing, terracing or excavation of any kind shall be initiated until final
engineering plans are approved and the special use permit is granted by the Village; and
3. The depositing of any excavation, grading or clearing material within a stream, lake, pond or
wetland area (i.e., within the District) shall be prohibited.
D. Installation Of Physical Barrier: In addition to locating all site improvements on the subject property to
minimize adverse impacts on the stream, lake, pond, or wetland, the applicant shall install a berm,
curb, or other physical barrier during construction, and following completion of the project, where
necessary, to prevent direct runoff and erosion from any modified land surface into a stream, lake,
pond, or wetland. All parking and vehicle circulation areas should be located as far as possible from a
stream, lake, pond or wetland.
E. Limit Activity: The Village may limit development activity in or near a stream, lake, pond, or wetland to
specific months, and to a maximum number of continuous days or hours, in order to minimize adverse
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 314/649
impacts. Also, the Village may require that equipment be operated from only one side of a stream,
lake, or pond in order to minimize bank disruption. Other development techniques, conditions, and
restrictions may be required in order to minimize adverse impacts on streams, lakes, ponds or
wetlands, and on any related areas not subject to development activity. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-8: NATURAL VEGETATION BUFFER STRIP REQUIRED:
To minimize erosion, stabilize the stream bank, protect water quality, maintain water temperature at
natural levels, preserve fish and wildlife habitat, to screen manmade structures, and also to preserve
aesthetic values of the natural watercourse and wetland areas, a natural vegetation strip shall be
maintained along the edge of the stream, lake, pond or wetland. The natural vegetation strip shall extend
landward a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, lake or pond and the edge of a wetland.
Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may be selectively pruned or removed for harvest of
merchantable timber, to achieve a filtered view of the water body from the principal structure and for
reasonable private access to the stream, lake, pond or wetland. Said pruning and removal activities shall
ensure that a live root system stays intact to provide for stream bank stabilization and erosion control.
A landscape plan, prepared by a professional landscape architect, shall be submitted with each special
use permit application for development activity within the lowland conservancy overlay district and contain
the following:
A. A plan describing the existing vegetative cover of the property and showing those areas where the
vegetation will be removed as part of the proposed construction; and
B. A plan describing the proposed revegetation of disturbed areas specifying the materials to be used.
The vegetation must be planned in such a way that access for stream maintenance purposes shall not
be prevented. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-9: MITIGATION OF DIRECT IMPACTS:
Direct impacts to jurisdictional waters of the United States, including jurisdictional wetland, shall be
mitigated at a minimum replacement ratio of 1.5:1 (replacement area:impact area). Mitigation for the
impacts shall meet or exceed the quality of the area impacted based on a floristic evaluation of the
impacted area. Mitigation areas shall be managed and monitored for a period of five (5) years following
seeding of the mitigation area(s). The development of the mitigation area and its management and
monitoring program shall be described in a written document submitted as part of the special use permit
application. The document shall be based on the most current guidelines for mitigation available from the
Chicago district of the corps of engineers. (Ord. 2007-08, 1-23-2007)
4-10-7: WATERCOURSE RELOCATION AND MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
Watercourse relocation or modification is generally not permitted because these activities are not usually
consistent with the purposes of this chapter. Under certain circumstances, relocation and minor
modification may be permitted through a special use permit where certain problems can be mitigated by
relocation and/or minor modification, specifically when:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 315/649
A. Off site hydrologic conditions are causing erosion, flooding and related problems; or
B. On site soil and geologic conditions are resulting in unstable conditions that pose hazards to life,
health, and existing structures or property; or
C. The quality of previously modified or relocated streams can be improved through restoration; or
D. Officially adopted storm water management plans call for placement of detention or retention facilities
in a stream; or
E. Public utilities, including sanitary sewers, pipelines, and roadways require stream crossing or relocation
where there are not practical alternatives.
Modification of watercourses as a convenience for site design purposes is not permitted. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-
9-1996)
4-10-7-1: PERMITTING STREAM MODIFICATION:
Stream modification, when permitted, is subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
A. Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be significantly improved by the modification; no
significant habitat area may be destroyed;
B. The amount of flow and velocity of a stream is not to be increased or decreased as the stream enters
or leaves a subject property, unless this reflects an improvement over previous conditions in terms of
reduced flooding, reduced erosion, or enhanced low flow conditions;
C. Prior to diverting water into a new channel, a qualified professional approved by the village shall
inspect the stream modification, and issue a written report to the village that the modified stream
complies with the requirements of section 4-10-7-2 of this chapter; and
D. Stream channel enlargement, or other modifications that would increase conveyance, shall not be
permitted if the intended purpose is to accommodate development activities in the floodplain. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-7-2: CONTENT OF STREAM MODIFICATION/RELOCATION PLAN:
Stream relocation may be permitted in accordance with a stream relocation plan which provides for:
A. The creation of a natural meander pattern, pools, riffles, substrate;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 316/649
B. The formation of gentle side slopes (at least 3 feet horizontally per 1 foot vertically), including
installation of erosion control features;
C. The utilization of natural materials wherever possible;
D. The planting of vegetation normally associated with streams, including primarily native riparian
vegetation;
E. The creation of spawning and nesting areas wherever appropriate;
F. The reestablishment of the fish population wherever appropriate;
G. The restoration of water flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat areas, wherever appropriate;
H. The filling and revegetation of the prior channel;
I. A proposed phasing plan, specifying time of year for all project phases;
J. Plans for sediment and erosion control; and
K. Establishment of a low-flow channel which reflects the conditions of a natural stream. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-
9-1996)
4-10-7-3: ARMORING OF CHANNELS AND BANKS:
Armoring in the form of bulkheads, riprap or other materials or devices is not permitted except in
accordance with the following:
A. Significant erosion cannot be prevented in any other way and the use of vegetation and gradual bank
slopes has not sufficiently stabilized the shoreline or bank;
B. The bulkhead or other device is not placed within a wetland, or between a wetland and a lake or pond;
C. The bulkhead, riprap or other device will minimize the transmittal of wave energy or currents to other
properties; and
D. The exchange in the horizontal or vertical configuration of the land must be kept to a minimum.
Where permission to install bulkheads or other armoring devices is requested as part of the special use
permit application, documentation and certification pertaining to the items above must be submitted. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 317/649
4-10-7-4: USE OF CULVERTS:
Culverts are not permitted in streams except in accordance with the following:
A. Where a culvert is necessary for creating access to a property; use of culverts as a convenience, in
order to facilitate general site design, is not to be considered.
B. The culvert must allow passage of fish inhabiting the stream, and accommodate the 100-year flood
event without increasing upstream flooding, except where a restricting culvert is desirable as part of an
overall storm and floodwater management plan;
C. The culvert must be maintained free of debris and sediment to allow free passage of water, and if
applicable, fish; and
D. The stream bottom should not be significantly widened for the placement of a culvert as this increases
siltation; if multiple culverts must be installed, one culvert should be at the level of the bottom of the
stream and the others at or above normal water elevation. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-7-5: ON-STREAM IMPOUNDMENTS:
Impoundment of streams is not permitted except in accordance with the following:
A. The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing regional stormwater detention,
flood control, or public recreation;
B. The impoundment will not prevent the upstream migration of indigenous fish species;
C. A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects
of sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other
pollutants;
D. Impoundments without permanent low-flow pools are preferred except where a permanent pool is
necessary to achieve the intended benefits of the impoundment (e.g., recreation or water quality
mitigation); and
E. Impoundment design shall include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a
pre-sedimentation basin. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-8: IMPACT ASSESSMENT:
The Village may ask an applicant to submit a report prepared by a qualified professional, and approved by
the Village, in order to assess the potential impact of proposed development on a lake, stream or wetland
and associated environmentally sensitive areas, including loss of flood storage potential, loss of habitat,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 318/649
changes in species diversity and quantity, impacts on water quality, increases in human intrusion, and
impacts on associated streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands or downstream areas. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-9: STREAM MAINTENANCE EASEMENT:
The applicant shall grant an access easement for stream maintenance purposes to the Village over
twenty five feet (25') parallel to the stream bank. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-10: NONCONFORMING USES:
See Title 5, Chapter 10 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-11: BOARD OF APPEALS:
See Title 2, Chapter 1 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-11-1: VARIANCES:
See Section 5-11-6 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-11-2: APPEALS:
See Section 5-11-7 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-12: BONDS:
The Village may require the posting of a bond or surety to ensure compliance with any aspect of this
Chapter. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-13: LIABILITY:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the Village
which runs with the property, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, indemnifying the Village for any
damage resulting from development activity on the subject property which is related to the physical
condition of the stream or wetland. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-14: SEPARABILITY:
Every section, provision, or part of this Chapter is declared separable from every other section, provision,
or part; and if any section, provision, or part thereof shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other
section, provision, or part. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 319/649
4-10-15: RETROACTIVITY:
The requirements of this Chapter apply to all platted and unplatted lands within the jurisdiction of the
Village. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-16: ENFORCEMENT:
Authority for administration of this Chapter resides with the Village Board. Appeals regarding decisions of
the Village Board in granting special permits shall be made according to the provisions of Section 4-10-
11-2. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-16-1: STOP-WORK ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In the event any person holding a special use permit pursuant to this Chapter violates the terms of the
permit, or carries on-site development in such a manner so as to materially and adversely affect the
health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development site, or
so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the
neighborhood, the Village may suspend or revoke the special use permit.
A. Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop-work order issued by the Village and delivered to the
permittee or his agent or the person performing the work. The stop-work order shall be effective
immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which work
may be resumed. A stop-work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Village Board, at which the conditions of subsection B below can be met.
B. No special use permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Village
Board. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by
registered mail, and shall state:
1. The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation, in clear and concise language;
and
2. The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the
hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and may call
witnesses and present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the Village Board
shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-16-2: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
No person shall undertake or continue any development activity contrary to or in violation of any terms of
this Chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such
violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-4-1
of this Code for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this Section, any person,
partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be required to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 320/649
restore the site to the condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of
such restoration. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
Chapter 11
TRAILER COACHES AND TRAILER COACH PARKS
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
TRAILER COACH: Any vehicle or similar portable structure used or so constructed as to permit its being
used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy thereof
as a dwelling place for one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH PARK: An area of land on which two (2) or more occupied trailer coaches are harbored
either free of charge or for revenue purposes. (Ord. 1968-7, 8-16-1968)
4-11-2: LOCATION OF TRAILER COACHES:
No person shall locate a trailer coach on any property within the village; provided, that trailer coaches so
located on the effective date hereof shall be permitted to remain and should any such trailer coach be
removed, it may be replaced by another, but such replacement must be made within sixty (60) days after
such removal. No presently located trailer coach which may be moved to a different location on the
property, nor any trailer coach located as a replacement unit shall be located in the following manner:
Closer than ten feet (10') to a side lot.
Closer than thirty five feet (35') to a public street.
Closer than ten feet (10') to an alley. (Ord. 1968-7, 8-16-1968)
4-11-3: NEW TRAILER COACH PARKS PROHIBITED:
No person shall establish a new trailer coach park on any property within the village. Any such parks now
so located and licensed by the state of Illinois shall be permitted to continue operation so long as they
shall be so licensed, but should said license lapse or be revoked, it shall not be renewed. (Ord. 1968-7, 8-
16-1968)
4-11-4: STORAGE, TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY OF TRAILER COACHES:
No person shall store unoccupied trailer coaches, nor display the same for sale. Temporary occupancy of
travel or camping type trailer coaches for periods of not to exceed one week will be allowed. (Ord. 1968-7,
8-16-1968)
4-11-5: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 321/649
with any provision of this chapter shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Chapter 12
SATELLITE ANTENNA
4-12-1: DEFINITION:
SATELLITE ANTENNA: Any parabolic or spherical antenna which receives television or other signals
from orbiting satellites or other devices. The height of a ground mounted antenna shall be the total
maximum to which it is capable of being raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the
finished grade adjacent to the structure. The height of a roof mounted antenna shall be the total maximum
to which it is capable of being raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the finished grade of
the roof adjacent to the structure. A satellite antenna shall be considered as an accessory structure when
it is not part of a public utility. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985)
4-12-2: SATELLITE ANTENNA REGULATIONS:
A. In all zoning districts the following requirements apply:
1. Guywires and satellite antennas shall be considered an accessory structure and shall meet
setbacks for accessory structures except where it is a part of a public utility.
2. Satellite antennas shall meet all manufacturer's specifications. The mast or tower shall be of
noncombustible and corrosive resistant materials. The miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets,
turnbuckles, clips and similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion, shall be protected with a
zinc or cadmium coating by either galvanizing or sherardizing process after forming. These finishes
are selected to guard against corrosion and to protect the elements against electrolytic action due to
the use of adjoining dissimilar metals. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985)
3. Any part of the satellite antenna including, but not restricted to, the reflector, probe, guywires, and
signal transmission cable, shall have vertical and horizontal clearance from any electric lines which
conform to the latest edition of the national electrical code. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985; amd. Ord.
2005-39, 8-23-2005)
4. All signal transmission cable, control wires, and electrical lines shall be buried in accordance with
national electrical code. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985)
5. Every satellite antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of
lightning, with an adequate ground wire. Ground wires shall be of the type approved by the latest
edition of the national electrical code for grounding masts and lightning arrestors, and shall be
installed in a mechanical manner with as few bands as possible, maintaining a clearance of at least
two inches (2") from combustible materials. Lightning arrestors shall be used, which are approved
as safe by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and both sides of the line must be adequately
protected with proper arrestors to remove static changes accumulated on the line. When lead-in
conductors of polyethylene ribbon type are used, lightning arrestors must be installed in each
conductor. When coaxial cable or shielded twin lead is used for lead-in, suitable protection may be
provided without lightning arrestors by grounding the exterior metal sheath. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-
1985; amd. Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 322/649
6. Satellite antennas shall be nonreflective and their color shall blend in with the surroundings. (Ord.
1985-21, 11-25-1985)
7. The satellite antenna shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the
building code and the national electrical code. For satellite antennas larger than four feet (4') in
diameter, a building permit shall be required prior to construction. Permit is to cost twenty five dollars
($25.00). (Ord. 1996-26, 8-13-1996; amd. Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005)
B. In single-family residential zones the following requirements shall apply:
1. Satellite antennas are permitted only within the rear yard buildable area for a principal or accessory
structure. The locations shall be a fixed point on the ground.
2. Satellite antennas of three feet (3') in diameter are permitted on the roof. No satellite earth station
exceeding three feet (3') in diameter shall be mounted on any roof. Any dish of less than three feet
(3') in diameter may be mounted upon a roof of a primary or accessory structure on the lot but shall
not be mounted on chimneys, towers, trees, poles or spires. A roof mounted dish shall be mounted
directly to the part of the roof not visible from the street immediately in front of the structure or from
the side street in case of a corner lot. Roof mounted dishes may only be mounted on the rear
portion of any roof and not on the front side of any roof. Any roof mounted dish must be designed to
withstand a wind support of eighty five (85) miles per hour.
C. In mixed zoning districts, multi-family, B-1, office and commercial zoning districts the following
requirements shall apply:
1. Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the buildable area for a principal or
accessory structure; however, not in the area to the front of the main structure. The location shall be
at a fixed point on the ground or on a structure.
2. Satellite antennas are permitted on the roof subject to approval but shall be no higher than four
feet (4'), including base. The purpose of the review is to ensure contiguous uses are not visually
impacted by the satellite antennas.
3. No ground mounted satellite antenna shall be higher than twelve feet (12'), including base, and
there shall be no more than one satellite antenna per lot. The antenna shall be shielded from any
abutting single-family zoning district, residence, or public street by a six foot (6') high solid wall or
fence.
D. In zoning district B-2, the following requirements shall apply:
1. Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the buildable area for a principal or
accessory structure; however, not in the area to the front of the structure. The location shall be at a
fixed point on the ground or on a structure.
2. Satellite antennas are permitted on the roof subject to approval of the village board; but shall be no
higher than ten feet (10'), including base. The purpose of this approval is to ensure that contiguous
uses are not visually impacted by the satellite antennas. If the board is not satisfied with the
proposal, it shall be referred to the environmental development commission for action.
3. No ground mounted satellite antenna shall be higher than fifteen feet (15'), including base, and
there shall be no more than one satellite antenna per lot. The antenna shall be shielded from any
abutting single-family zoning district, residence, or public street by a six foot (6') high solid wall or
fence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 323/649
E. In industrial districts M-1 and M-2 the following requirements shall apply:
1. Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the buildable area for a principal or
accessory structure. The location shall be at a fixed point on the ground or on a structure.
2. Satellite antennas are permitted on the roof but shall be no higher than fifteen feet (15'), including
base.
3. No ground mounted satellite antenna shall be higher than twenty five feet (25'), including base. The
antenna shall be shielded from any abutting single-family zoning district, or residence by an eight
foot (8') high solid wall or fence.
F. Satellite antennas legally in existence at the time of the passage of this chapter shall be considered
"grandfathered" for a period of six (6) months from the effective date of this chapter. At the end of the
six (6) month period the antenna must be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
G. No variances may be granted which would allow satellite antennas in the required front yard setback.
(Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985; amd. Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
Chapter 13
SITE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
4-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for the review and approval of site
plans to ensure full compliance with all local, state and federal ordinances and regulations and to ensure
that a proposed land use or activity is compatible with the character of the surrounding area, the adjacent
uses of land, the natural environment, the capacities of public services and will protect the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-2: APPLICABILITY1:
A. This chapter shall apply to the following:
1. The construction of any new, nonresidential building or structure;
2. The expansion of any nonresidential building or structure;
3. The conversion, in whole or in part, of an existing building from residential to nonresidential use;
4. The construction of any new residential structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units;
5. The modification or expansion of an existing residential structure which results in an increase in the
number of dwelling units in the structure to three (3) or more;
6. Any development in any district for which a special use permit is required;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 324/649
7. The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access drives and parking lots, involving
an area of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet; or
8. The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no buildings or structures are proposed.
B. This chapter does not apply to the construction or modification of single-family detached homes, twofamily
homes, agricultural buildings or structures, or existing buildings or premises legally established
prior to the adoption of this chapter.
C. No land, building, or structure shall be erected or used and no building permit or sign permit shall be
issued for a development within the scope of this chapter unless and until a site plan has been
approved in accordance with this chapter. No land, building or structure shall be occupied or used and
no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements and conditions of the site plan
approval have been implemented and all improvements completed in accordance with an approved
site plan. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-3: CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS:
Any development or construction which is subject to the scope of this chapter shall be classified as either
a minor or major site plan. The determination of this classification shall be made by the zoning officer
according to the following criteria:
A. Minor Site Plan Review: A project requiring minor site plan review shall be any of the following:
1. An expansion of any nonresidential building or structure not exceeding one thousand (1,000) square
feet or ten percent (10%) of the existing floor area, whichever is less.
2. A change in use of an existing building that does not comply with current site design standards such
as, but not limited to, landscaping, lighting, parking, signs or drainage.
3. The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access drives and parking lots, involving
an area of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000)
square feet.
B. Major Site Plan Review: A project requiring major site plan review shall be any project which is not
classified as a minor site plan review. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-4: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES:
A. Application: Application for site plan approval may be made separate from or in conjunction with an
application for land subdivision. The village may approve a site plan prior to the platting, division, or
consolidation of land conditioned upon such platting, division or consolidations. Site plans for which
the proposed use requires a zoning map amendment shall only be acted upon by the village after a
map amendment has been approved according to the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance.
B. Preapplication Conference: Prior to submitting a site plan application, the applicants or agent should
schedule a preapplication conference with the zoning officer. The purpose of this meeting is to
familiarize the applicant with the review procedures and submission requirements and to familiarize
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 325/649
the village staff with the nature of the project. No decisions relative to the acceptability of the plan may
be made at this meeting. At this time the determination will be made, based on the presented
information, as to whether the project shall be considered a minor or major site plan. The applicant
should bring to this meeting any working drawings, plans, sketches, surveys, reports or other such
information that will aid the village staff in assessing the project.
C. Application Procedure:
1. Minor Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a formal application for review and approval of a site
plan to the village of Minooka. The application shall consist of the following:
a. A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit;
b. All information requested by the village staff that is deemed necessary to review the minor site
plan including drawings, sketches and calculations.
2. Major Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a formal application for review and approval of a site
plan to the village of Minooka. The application shall consist of the following:
a. A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit;
b. Ten (10) copies of the site plan and supporting documents as described in subsection D2a of this
section;
c. Upon receipt of the application the zoning officer shall review the completeness of the application
and upon determination that the application is complete, forward a copy of the application to the
village planner, village engineer, public works department, and any other department or agency
deemed necessary. If the application is incomplete, the zoning officer shall notify the applicant in
writing of this determination and specify what materials or information are required to complete
the application. No action will be taken on the application until the application has been
determined to be complete.
D. Submission Requirements: The site plan application shall include at a minimum the following:
1. Minor Site Plan:
a. As determined and requested by village staff.
2. Major Site Plan:
a. A drawing or drawings prepared at a scale of not less than one inch (1") to one hundred feet
(100') which shall include:
(1) General Information:
(A) Name, address and phone number of the developer.
(B) Name, address and phone number of the record owner if different from developer.
(C) Name, address and phone number of the architect, engineer, landscape designer, land
planner, surveyor or consulting firm responsible for preparing the plan(s).
(D) Seal and registration of any architect, engineer, or similar professional involved in the
preparation of the plan(s).
(E) Date of plan preparation/revision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 326/649
(F) North arrow and scale.
(G) Legal description of the property.
(H) If applicable, a site data table indicating the gross acreage, net acreage, site coverage
percentage, building area(s), floor to area ratio.
(2) Existing Conditions:
(A) Zoning and use of the property.
(B) Zoning and use of all adjacent properties.
(C) The bearings and distance of all property lines and the source of this information.
(D) Existing topography of the site shown at two foot (2') intervals and extending a minimum
of twenty five feet (25') beyond the property lines of the site.
(E) Building setback lines.
(F) Location and extent of any water bodies, wetlands, streams and flood plains or adjacent
to the site.
(G) Location and size of existing trees.
(H) Location of other notable natural features.
(I) Location and dimension of any existing easements.
(J) Copies of any applicable covenants or deed restrictions.
(K) Location, size and ground floor elevation of all existing buildings on the site.
(L) The location and dimension of any other structures or improvements on the site.
(M) Location, names and widths of existing streets and rights of way within or adjacent to the
site.
(N) Location and size of any existing storm sewer, water main, sanitary sewer, culverts,
drains, field tiles, on site disposal systems, wells, power or telephone poles, electrical lines,
telephone lines, and gas lines on the subject site or of any such entities off site that will serve
the subject site.
(O) The location, front view and dimension of existing signs.
(3) Proposed Development:
(A) Proposed use and zoning.
(B) A grading plan showing the proposed changes in the topography of the site at two foot
(2') intervals with spot grades provided at significant points.
(C) The location and dimensions of all provisions for water supply and sanitary sewer.
(D) A storm water detention/retention plan including storm water runoff and detention
calculation. The methods for computing such requirements shall be those specified in the
village's subdivision ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 327/649
(E) The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins, ditches, swales, retention basins and
storm sewers.
(F) An erosion control plan, the requirements for which shall be consistent with the village's
subdivision ordinance.
(G) The location, dimensions and foundation/floor elevations of all proposed buildings or
expansions on the site.
(H) The location and dimensions of proposed driveways, parking areas, loading areas and
sidewalks.
(I) The location, dimensions, front view and materials of proposed signs.
(J) The location and type of exterior lighting, including a point by point photometric plan if
required by the village.
(K) The location and nature of electrical, telephone, gas, cable or other utility services to be
installed at the site.
(L) Building plans showing at a minimum the floor plans and elevations of all proposed
principal and accessory buildings and a schedule of the type and color exterior surface
materials.
(M) Landscape plans including a schedule of all plantings by type and size as well as any
berming, fencing, screening, or other hardscape features proposed.
b. Supporting reports, documents, exhibits, etc.
E. Review Procedures:
1. Minor Site Plan:
a. The village staff shall review the information requested and either approve the minor site plan or
prepare a report to the applicant indicating any deficiencies in the site plan in meeting all
applicable requirements of this code. The applicant shall modify the site plan to correct any
deficiencies or apply for formal relief or variance for the deficiency if such application is available.
2. Major Site Plan:
a. Application Evaluation And Review: Within twenty (20) days of the application being determined
to be complete, the zoning officer shall schedule a meeting with the petitioner and the village staff
to review the application. The zoning officer will provide small scale copies of the plan to the
planning commissioners and village board members with a request for their comments and
concerns. The village staff shall evaluate the application's conformance with the approval criteria
and standards of this chapter and identify any areas in which there are deficiencies in meeting the
criteria and standards.
b. Conditions Of Approval: The village staff may impose conditions on the site plan. Any condition
imposed must relate directly to the approval criteria and standards and be necessary to meet the
intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 328/649
A. Staff Review Of Application: The village staff shall review the site plan application to ensure that it
complies with all of the criteria and standards below.
B. Criteria And Standards:
1. Site Configuration: Buildings and structures will meet or exceed setback standards, height and other
dimensional standards and be appropriately placed in relation to natural features of the site.
2. Buildings: Buildings shall be designed, situated and constructed so as to conform to any applicable
design criteria of the village. All buildings shall have a strong visual relationship and design
compatibility between the building, the site, and adjacent development. The exterior appearances
and mass of the building(s) shall complement the existing development and character within the
surrounding area.
3. Impact On Surrounding Land Uses And Zoning: The proposed site plan will be harmonious with and
not harmful or injurious to existing and planned uses in the immediate area. The proposed
improvements will be coordinated with improvements serving the site and other properties in the
area. The site plan shall meet the intent of this chapter and the intent of the village of Minooka
zoning ordinance.
4. Preservation Of Natural Features: The site plan shall demonstrate judicious effort to preserve the
integrity of the land, natural topography, drainage, wetlands, watercourses, flood plains, and existing
vegetation.
5. Public Services And Utilities: The site plans shall be served adequately with sanitary sewer, public
water, and storm sewer and such utilities shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations
of the village engineer.
6. Signs: Proposed signs shall meet the requirements of all applicable village regulations and shall be
generally complementary with surrounding properties and traffic operations. The size, location,
design and lighting of the signs shall be considered in relation to adjacent sites, glare, traffic safety,
and compatibility with adjoining properties.
7. Exterior Lighting: The site plan shall provide for exterior lighting that meets the following standards:
a. At the expense of the developer, all roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots and other common
areas and facilities in unsubdivided and other developments shall be sufficiently illuminated to
ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing
standards, the following minimum standards shall apply:
b. For residential uses, lights shall be installed in parking areas containing five (5) or more parking
spaces and shall be illuminated between dusk and dawn. For nonresidential uses, lights shall be
installed in all parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be illuminated
between dusk and dawn, whenever said premises is open for operation. "Open for operation"
shall be construed to mean any time that a retail business is open for the sale of goods or
services or a retail, office or industrial facility actually has employees working within or upon said
premises, other than guards or watchmen. Lights shall not be more than fifteen feet (15') in height
in residential zoning districts, and not more than thirty feet (30') in height in other zoning districts.
c. Where lighted areas are required, lighting shall be provided as follows:
Minimum1 Maximum1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 329/649
Residential zoning districts 1.0 2.0
Commercial zoning districts 1.0 3.0
Industrial zoning districts 2.5 5.0
Note:
1.Average ground level foot-candles.
Average foot-candles at property line shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candle as measured at the
property line.
d. All lighting shall be constructed, positioned and maintained in such a way so as not to reflect light
either directly or indirectly onto adjacent properties.
8. Parking And Loading: The number, location and dimensions of all parking and loading spaces and
the design of parking and loading areas shall meet the requirements of all applicable Village
regulations.
9. Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening on the site shall be provided in
accordance with the following requirements:
a. Landscaping and screening shall be provided along property lines between nonresidential uses
and residential uses, with a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) opacity six feet (6') above
grade.
b. All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots, stormwater detention areas,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall be maintained by
the property owner. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
c. Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one (1) 21/2-inch caliper shade tree (as
measured 6 inches above grade) for every thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of
trees is encouraged, as opposed to even spacing of trees. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-19-2017)
d. Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or tree for every ten feet (10') of
the principal building's nearest exterior wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged. (Ord. 2002-
03, 2-26-2002)
e. For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of twenty (20) square feet of interior
landscaped area per space shall be provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area,
said area shall be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the parking
area. Said areas shall include concrete curb or combination concrete curb and gutter. (Ord. 2017-
32, 12-19-2017)
f. All trash enclosure areas and containers shall be fully screened from streets and adjacent
properties with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence, wall or landscaped area placed around
said facility. All trash enclosures must be placed on a concrete pad sufficient to support said
enclosure to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
g. Except as otherwise permitted, overnight outdoor storage of goods, products, materials, supplies,
machinery, equipment or parking of commercial vehicles shall not be allowed in the front yard. In
the B2 Commercial District or manufacturing districts, permitted overnight outdoor storage and
permitted outdoor activities shall be screened as provided in section 5-7-2 or 5-8-2 of this Code.
The outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials capable of becoming airborne such as coal,
sand, sulfur, etc., is prohibited. (Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 330/649
10. Vehicular Access And Circulation: The site plan shall provide for the safe, convenient,
uncongested and well defined access and circulation of vehicles. Access to the site shall be
designed to minimize traffic conflicts. All streets and driveways shall be designed to meet all
applicable Village regulations. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
11. Nonmotorized Transportation Access And Circulation: Safe, convenient and aesthetically pleasing
pedestrian and bicycle circulation routes shall be provided within and accessing the site. Sidewalks
adjacent to parking stalls shall have seven foot (7') minimum width. Wheel stops will only be
permitted on privately maintained property and only when approved by the Village. (Ord. 2017-32,
12-19-2017)
12. Drainage And Stormwater Management: The site plan shall provide for site surface drainage and
stormwater management facilities that meet or exceed the applicable standards of the Village. (Ord.
2002-03, 2-26-2002)
13. Parking Lot Curbs: All parking lot pavement edges shall abut concrete barrier curbs or combination
concrete curb and gutter. Parking lots shall not extend within ten feet (10') of the right-of-way that
abuts a public street. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-19-2017)
4-13-6: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS:
A. Amendments: An applicant may request a change in an approved site plan. A change in an approved
site plan, which results in a major change, shall require approval of the staff. All amendments shall
follow the procedures and conditions herein required for original application submittal and review. A
change considered only a minor change shall require only the submission of a revised plan to the
Zoning Officer.
B. Determination Of Major And Minor Changes: A determination of whether a change in an approved site
plan is a major or minor change shall be made by the Zoning Officer according to the guidelines below.
The applicant may appeal the determination of a major change to the Village Administrator.
1. Guidelines For Major Changes:
a. A change in the original concept of the development.
b. A change in the original use or character of the development.
c. A change in the type of dwelling unit as identified on the approved site plan.
d. An increase in the number of dwelling units planned.
e. Rearrangement of lots, blocks or building tracts.
f. A change in the character per function of any street.
g. A reduction in the amount of land set aside for common open space.
h. An increase or decrease in any building area over five percent (5%).
i. An increase or decrease over five percent (5%) in any building height.
j. Significant variations in the design layout of the site plan, such as, but not limited to, the deletion,
relocation or addition or on site improvements such as drives, parking lots, structures, berms,
curbs, landscaping, utilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 331/649
2. Guidelines For Minor Changes:
a. Any minor variations in layout that does not constitute a major change.
b. An increase or decrease in any building area less than five percent (5%).
c. An increase or decrease less than five percent (5%) in any building height.
d. Changes in the species of required trees, shrubs or ground cover designated on the site plan.
(Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-7: FEES:
Fees for the review of site plans shall be covered by the professional fee agreement. No action on any
site plan application shall be taken by the Village until the application fee, professional fee agreement,
and deposit have been made. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
Chapter 14
SITE RUNOFF
4-14-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Findings Of Fact: It is hereby determined that:
1. Development projects alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition;
2. This stormwater runoff causes increased quantities of waterborne pollutants; and
3. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized
through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites.
Therefore, the village of Minooka establishes these policies applicable to all discharges to surface
waters within the village to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for
the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation
of stormwater runoff discharges from development projects and other construction activities in order
to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public
interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements
and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in
watersheds within this jurisdiction. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following
objectives:
1. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation,
increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream
channels;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 332/649
2. Minimize pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development that would otherwise degrade
local water quality;
3. Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff that flows from any specific site during and
following development to not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent
practicable; and
4. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and pollution, wherever possible, through
stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly
maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
C. Applicability: This chapter shall be applicable to all development applications for sites of 1.0 acre or
more, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the village under the specifications of
section 4-14-4 of this chapter. This chapter also applies to development activities that are smaller than
the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development
that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct development
activities may take place at different times on different schedules.
To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the village has developed a set of performance
standards that must be met at new development sites to the maximum extent practicable. The
following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: Repairs to any
stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the village.
When a development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in section
4-14-2 of this chapter, decisions on permitting shall be determined by the building and zoning officer
and the village engineer shall determine on site stormwater requirements. This determination shall be
dependent upon the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water
quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after review by the village
board.
D. Compatibility With Other Permit And Ordinance Requirements: This chapter is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of
this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCELERATED EROSION: Erosion caused by development activities that exceed the natural processes
by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm or governmental agency who has filed an application for a stormwater
management permit.
BUILDING: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the
shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of
area.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage,
slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a
definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 333/649
intermittently.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals
of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.
DETENTION FACILITY: A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary
storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
DEVELOPER: A person who undertakes development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Preparation of a plot of subdivision;
B. Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building;
C. Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days;
D. Construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
E. Redevelopment of a site;
F. Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving or other nonagricultural alterations of the
ground surface;
G. Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste; or
H. Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency, deviation, direction or velocity of
stormwater flows from a property.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private
land for stormwater management purposes.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated
erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
FEE IN LIEU: A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance
standards required by this chapter.
ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL: The "Illinois Urban Manual" developed by the USDA natural resources
conservation service and the Illinois environmental protection agency, current edition.
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT: A national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued to
a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on site pollution control strategies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 334/649
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Any activity that changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of
rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or
excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or
any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade
watercourse.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or
lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and
which provides for long term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined,
and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from construction,
subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
OFF SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary
described in the permit application for development activity.
OFFSET FEE: A monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load
reduction targets.
ON SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary
described in the permit application for development activity.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding 1.0 acre in areas where
existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
STOP WORK ORDER: An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.
STORM WATER TREATMENT PRACTICES (SWTPs): Measures, either structural or nonstructural, that
are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or
nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to
reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental
changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
STORMWATER RETROFIT: A stormwater management practice designed for an existing development
site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to
meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage
basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface
of the ground or are collected in channels or conduits.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 335/649
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQV): The storage needed to capture and treat ninety percent (90%) of the
average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically WQV will vary as a function of long term rainfall
statistical data.
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area,
slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, conduit, culvert, swale, grass waterway, gully, ravine, wash, or natural
or manmade drainageway, which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which stormwater
runoff and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-3: PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other
development permits required for land disturbance activities of 1.0 acre or more without first meeting
the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity.
B. Application Requirements: The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of section 4-14-5 of this chapter, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet
the requirements of section 4-14-9 of this chapter, and applicable fees. The stormwater management
plan need not consist of separate documents but may be incorporated into the drawings and
specifications for the project.
C. Application Procedure: Applications for land disturbance activity permits must be accompanied by four
(4) sets of drawings submitted to the building and zoning officer. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-4: WAIVERS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Waiver Eligibility Criteria: Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this
chapter unless this requirement is waived by the village planning and zoning commission.
The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part by the
village planning and zoning commission after a hearing, upon request of the applicant, provided that at
least one of the following conditions applies:
1. It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the
objectives of this chapter.
2. Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of stormwater discharges have been
established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the village and the
implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance.
3. Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off site facility. The off site facility is required to be
in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal
to or greater than that which would be afforded by on site practices and there is a legally obligated
entity responsible for long term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
4. The village finds that meeting the minimum on site management requirements is not feasible due to
the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site.
5. Nonstructural practices will be used on the sites that reduce: a) the generation of stormwater from
the site, b) the size and cost of stormwater storage and c) the pollutants generated at the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 336/649
These nonstructural practices are explained in detail in the "Illinois Urban Manual".
B. Assurances Required For Waiver: In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the village
may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as
the variance will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterway:
1. Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
2. Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
3. Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; or
4. Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-5: GENERAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Unless judged by the village to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be
addressed for stormwater management at all development sites one acre or greater:
A. All site designs shall, to the maximum extent practicable, establish stormwater management practices
to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and
reduce the generation of stormwater runoff and stormwaterborne pollutants. These practices should
seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from
driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical.
Preference should generally be given to stormwater detention facilities that incorporate wet or wetland
bottom detention facilities where practical. Where wet stormwater detention facilities are provided, all
flows shall be routed through the detention facility (i.e., low flows shall not be bypassed).
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, preference may be given to dry basins with low flow
bypass if the facility is proposed for multiple uses that require that the pond bottom be dry as much as
practical.
C. The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where practical, including, but not limited to,
open spaces, recreation, and wetlands. The applicant should avoid using the portions of the property
exclusively for stormwater management.
D. To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel protection criterion shall be provided
as prescribed in the "Illinois Urban Manual".
E. Development projects disturbing one acre or more of land cover shall submit a notice of intent (NOI) to
the Illinois environmental protection agency and comply with all the provisions of the national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit ILR10 or its equivalent and shall submit a copy
of the required storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the village.
F. Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement an SWPPP, and shall file a notice of
intent (NOI) under the provisions of the NPDES general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention
plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 337/649
G. Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the village building and zoning officer to
determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements.
H. The calculations for determining peak flows as required by chapter 8 of this title shall be used for sizing
all stormwater management practices where applicable. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-6: BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA:
A. Minimum Control Requirements: All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the
specific storm frequency storage volumes as required by the village are met, unless the village grants
the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements.
In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the
minimum control requirements, the village reserves the right to impose any and all additional
requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
B. Site Design Feasibility: Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the
physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered:
1. Topography;
2. Maximum drainage area;
3. Depth to water table;
4. Soils;
5. Slopes;
6. Terrain;
7. Head; and
8. Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas.
Applicants shall consult the "Illinois Urban Manual" for guidance on the factors that determine site
design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice.
C. Conveyance Issues: All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to
allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not
be limited to:
1. Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points;
2. Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
3. Elimination of erosive flow velocities; and
4. Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable.
The village design standards and the "Illinois Urban Manual" shall provide detailed guidance on the
requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 338/649
D. Treatment/Geometry Conditions: All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture
and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the "Illinois Urban Manual".
These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an
approved stormwater management practice.
E. Landscaping Plans Required: All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan
detailing both the vegetation to be in the approved stormwater management practice and how and
who will manage and maintain this vegetation. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-7: REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL:
A. Stormwater Management Plan Required For All Developments: No application for development will be
approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and
associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed, unless
granted a waiver. This plan must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on site or off site and, if
on site, the general location and type of practices.
The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies,
and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be
signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE) who will verify that the design of all stormwater
management practices meet the submittal requirements. No building, grading, or sediment control
permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall
have undergone a review and been approved by the village building and zoning officer after
determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Stormwater Management Concept Plan Requirements: A stormwater management concept plan shall
be required with all permit applications for sites 5.0 acres or greater in size, and will include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of
the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future,
on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for
managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to
determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and
ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To
accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan:
1. A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas,
utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also
clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses, drainage patterns, locations of utilities, roads and easements, the limits of clearing
and grading, a written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be required;
2. Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are
capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the specifications of
the "Illinois Urban Manual" or other criteria acceptable to the village;
3. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists
prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the
project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography,
wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for
development;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 339/649
4. A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed stormwater management
facility; and
5. The village may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a
site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site
to its maximum potential.
For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be
required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater
runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this chapter to the maximum
extent practicable.
C. Final Stormwater Management Plan Requirements: After review of the stormwater management
concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed necessary by the village, a final stormwater
management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition
to the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information required by this chapter.
This includes:
1. Contact Information: The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal
interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or
properties affected.
2. Topographic Base Map: A one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') scale, or larger, topographic
base map of the site which extends a minimum of one hundred feet (100') beyond the limits of the
proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds,
culverts, ditches, and wetlands, current land use including all existing structures, locations of
utilities, roads, and easements, and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown.
3. Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the predevelopment and
postdevelopment conditions for the design storms specified in this chapter. Such calculations shall
include:
a. A description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration;
b. Time of concentration;
c. Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients;
d. Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area;
e. Infiltration rates, where applicable;
f. Culvert capacities;
g. Flow velocities, data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms; and
h. Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
4. Soils Information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic
properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil
borings or soil sits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure.
5. Maintenance And Repair Plan: The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities
shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These
plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 340/649
maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or
additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan.
6. Landscaping Plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the
site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of
vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover
is preserved.
7. Maintenance Easements: The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at
the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed
on a permanent basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect
even with transfer of title to the property.
8. Maintenance Agreement: The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and
maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by any on site stormwater
management measure in accordance with the specifications of this chapter.
9. Erosion And Sediment Control Plans For Construction Of Stormwater Management Measures: The
applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control plan for all construction activities related to
implementing any on site stormwater management practices.
10. Other Environmental Permits: The applicant shall ensure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
D. Performance Bond/Security: The village may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance
security in the form of a letter of credit prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the
stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater
management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated
construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus twenty five
percent (25%). The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work
specified in the stormwater management plan.
The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built plans"
and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been
installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. The
village will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the
approved plan and the provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro rata release of the
performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be arranged at the
discretion of the village. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-8: CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION:
A. Notice Of Construction Commencement: The applicant must notify the village in advance before the
commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system
construction shall be conducted by the staff of the village or certified by a professional engineer or
their designee who has been approved by the village. All inspections shall be documented and written
reports prepared that contain the following information:
1. The date and location of the inspection;
2. Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
3. Variations from the approved construction specifications; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 341/649
4. Any violations that exist.
If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation
and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected
and all work previously completed has received approval by the Village.
B. Landscaping And Stabilization Requirements: Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover
has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be revegetated
within fourteen (14) days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The
following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
1. Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of
straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover
crop is established over ninety percent (90%) of the seeded area;
2. Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of
straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are
established and are capable of controlling erosion;
3. Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the
cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation; and
4. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy five percent (75%)
survival for one year is achieved.
In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design
describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after
construction is completed. This plan will explain how the site will be stabilized after construction, and
who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be
employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-9: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES:
A. Stormwater Drainage System Easements: Prior to the issuance of any permit that requires a
stormwater drainage system or stormwater management facility as defined in section 4-8-11 of this
title, the applicant or owner of the property must execute and provide to the Village a written
maintenance easement or include the maintenance easement on the final plat of subdivision
(hereinafter the "easement") that shall run with the land and will be binding on all subsequent owners
of the land served by the stormwater drainage system or stormwater management facility. The
easement shall allow and provide for Village access to the stormwater management facility at
reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Village or its contractor or agent, and for regular or
special assessments against property owners to insure that the stormwater drainage system or
stormwater management facility is maintained in proper working condition, and that it continues to
meet design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The easement shall be
executed by the property owner and shall be recorded by the Village at the owner or applicant's cost.
B. Annual Maintenance Schedule: As required by section 4-8-11 of this title, maintenance of all
stormwater management facilities and stormwater drainage systems shall be ensured by an annual
written maintenance schedule to be provided not less than annually to the Village upon the Village's
written request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 342/649
C. Annual Maintenance Requirements: All stormwater management facilities and stormwater drainage
systems may be inspected at least annually by the Village, which will document maintenance and
repair needs and ensure compliance including but not limited to the requirements of this chapter. The
annual maintenance may include, but not be limited to, removal of silt, litter and other debris from the
stormwater and drainage systems, catch basins, inlets, and drainage pipes as well as grass cutting
and invasive vegetation removal, and the necessary replacement of any landscape vegetation. In the
event that the annual maintenance plan as prepared by the property owner and approved by the
Village is not adhered to, the Village has the right to enter onto the property pursuant to the easement
referenced in subsection A of this section and shall notify the property owner of violations and any and
all required maintenance. Within thirty (30) calendar days of said notice, the property owner shall
perform the specified maintenance at its own expense. Within thirty six (36) hours of notice, the
property owner shall perform any specified emergency maintenance as may be required by the Village
pursuant to written notice.
D. Failure To Maintain: In the event that the property owner does not operate and maintain the stormwater
drainage system or stormwater management facility as required by the Village pursuant to this
chapter, the Village shall be authorized to take one or more of the following actions (or a combination
of the same):
1. The Village or its agents may go onto the property and maintain the stormwater and drainage
system. Not less than ten (10) days before taking such action, the Village shall provide to the
property owner (as determined by reference to the tax rolls maintained by the respective County
Treasurer) by certified return receipt requested mail, notice of its intention to do so. The Village,
pursuant to the easement referred to in subsection A of this section will carry out the provisions of
this subsection and will invoice the cost of the specified maintenance to the property owner, who
shall pay the amount of the invoice within thirty (30) days of the Village's mailing by certified return
receipt requested mail. If the property owner fails to pay the amount of the invoice, all costs, fees or
expenses incurred by the Village in maintaining the stormwater drainage system or stormwater
management facility pursuant to this subsection may be, without further notice, assessed as a lien
on the property and the property served by the stormwater drainage system to be collected in any
manner as provided by law.
2. Require the owner to provide a letter of credit in an amount sufficient to ensure maintenance of the
stormwater drainage system or stormwater management facility in a form satisfactory to the Village.
The owner shall provide the requested letter of credit within fifteen (15) business days of receiving
such request from the Village. The letter of credit shall provide that the payment to the Village shall
be assured upon submission by the Village of notice of a demand on the letter of credit to the
respective issuer certifying that the property owner has not maintained the stormwater drainage
system as required by this chapter.
E. Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities: Property owners responsible for the operation and
maintenance of a stormwater drainage system or stormwater management facility shall make records
of the installation and all maintenance and repairs available for inspection by the Village upon
reasonable written notice, and shall retain all such records for a period of at least eight (8) years. Said
records shall also be made available to the Village during any inspection of the facility or other
reasonable times upon request. (Ord. 2017-26, 10-24-2017)
4-14-10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations: Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter may
be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 343/649
B. Notice Of Violation: When the Village determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
1. The name and address of the owner or applicant;
2. The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the
violation is occurring;
3. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
4. A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance
with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
5. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom
the notice of violation is directed; and
6. A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Village Administrator by filing
a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) days of service of notice of violation.
C. Stop Work Orders: Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction
activities. This "stop work order" will be in effect until the Village confirms that the development activity
is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of
violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the
enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
D. Civil And Criminal Penalties: In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law,
any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more than as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this Code. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
E. Restoration Of Lands: Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the
event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Village may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
F. Holds On Occupation Permits: Occupation permits will not be granted until all corrections to all
stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the Village. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
Chapter 15
VACANT BUILDINGS AND VACANT LOTS
4-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING: Any business or commercial structure or any single-family or multi-family residential structure
occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 344/649
BUILDING OFFICER: The building officer or designee.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would
lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not
limited to, the following:
A. Substantially all lawful residential or business activity has ceased.
B. The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied space or the overall
number of occupied and unoccupied units.
C. The building is substantially devoid of contents.
D. The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building.
E. Lack of utility services (water, sewer, electric or natural gas).
F. The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
G. The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
H. Overgrown and/or dead vegetation.
I. Accumulation of newspapers, circulars, fliers and/or mail.
J. Abandonment by owner.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the
property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or village as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court; or any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent.
PERSON: A corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an individual.
UNOCCUPIED: Any business or commercial structure or any single-family or multi-family residential
structure which is vacant, lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the
premises, and is not maintained pursuant to the minimum standards as set forth in the property
maintenance code.
VACANT BUILDING: Any business or commercial structure or any single-family or multi-family residential
structure which is:
A. Unoccupied and unsecured;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 345/649
B. Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means;
C. Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;
D. Unoccupied and condemned by the building officer pursuant to applicable law;
E. Unoccupied and has multiple code violations;
F. Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of unlawful activity within the previous
six (6) months;
G. Condemned by the building officer and unlawfully occupied;
H. Unoccupied for over ninety (90) days and during which time the building officer has issued an order
to correct public nuisance conditions and said conditions have not been corrected in a code
compliant manner;
I. Unoccupied for more than six (6) consecutive months; or
J. Abandoned by persons who surrender their claim, right, or interest in the property.
A vacant building shall not include unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction,
renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable village ordinances,
codes, and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding
diligently to completion, or a building that has been used as a residence by a person entitled to
possession for a period of at least three (3) months within a previous nine (9) month period and a
person entitled to possession intends to resume residing at the property.
Vacant building shall encompass an entire strip store, shopping plaza, shopping center, mini-mall, or
industrial condo, even though some of which may contain multiple divisible units that may be
occupied or unoccupied, or vacant or partially vacant, so long as the building is under one roof,
owned by the same person or owner, and otherwise meets the definition of a vacant building or is
declared to be a vacant building.
The building officer may evaluate buildings in the village which do not meet the definition of a vacant
building as set forth above and, based on evidence of vacancy factors, make a declaration of a
vacant building.
VACANT LOT: A lot on which there are no permanent buildings or a lot in the process of constructing a
permanent building but has had no building activity or construction for at least one consecutive month
prior. A vacant lot shall not include lots for which construction on the lot is proceeding diligently to
completion or a lot on which a majority of the lot is utilized for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-
2012)
4-15-2: DECLARATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 346/649
A. Evaluation: The building officer may evaluate buildings in the village which do not meet the definition of
a vacant building and, based on evidence of vacancy factors, make a declaration of a vacant building.
The notice of declaration shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis.
B. Notice: Within seven (7) days of making a declaration, the building officer shall send notice of
declaration with the factual findings to the owner. The notice of declaration shall be served by certified
mail, return receipt requested, by personal or substitute service, or posted in a conspicuous location
on the building if the owner is unknown. The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the
owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the vacant building/lot registration
application, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the building officer's declaration.
C. Appeal Of Declaration: An owner of a building deemed by the building officer to be a vacant building as
provided for in this section may appeal the declaration. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be
filed with the village clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of service of the notice of declaration. The
filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register the building. The appeal shall contain a
complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the declaration, shall set forth specific facts in
support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The appeal
shall be based on the evidence submitted by the owner in the appeal and the building officer's written
declaration and evidence presented at a hearing if the owner affirmatively requests a hearing. If the
owner does request a hearing, the village clerk shall set a hearing date and notify the owner.
D. Grounds For Appeal: An appeal shall be based solely on whether the building is deemed to be a
vacant building.
E. Decision: The village clerk shall send written notice of the decision to the owner within fifteen (15) days
after a decision. (Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012)
4-15-3: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT BUILDING AND VACANT LOT:
A. An owner of any vacant building or vacant lot shall, within thirty (30) days after the building becomes
vacant or declared vacant, or within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, whichever is
later, complete a vacant building/lot registration application and register the vacant building or vacant
lot with the building officer.
B. Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances,
and shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes,
legislation, and regulations which prescribe standards other than as provided in this chapter.
C. If multiple individual units meet the definition of a vacant building in a strip store, shopping plaza,
shopping center, mini-mall, or industrial condo, and are owned by separate persons or owners, each
individual unit shall be considered a separate registration. (Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012)
4-15-4: APPLICATION FOR VACANT BUILDING AND VACANT LOT:
A. Each vacant building/lot registration application shall be made in writing to the building officer on a form
provided for that purpose, and shall contain:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 347/649
1. The property identification number (PIN), common address, and lot number, and if applicable,
physical description of the vacant building, including, but not limited to, construction materials and
color.
2. The name, street address, and telephone number of a person twenty one (21) years of age or older,
designated by the owner, as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations, for
receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of
such owner, and in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. By designating an authorized
agent pursuant to this section, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered building or lot and all process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding brought to enforce this code concerning the registered building or lot by
service of the notice or process on the authorized agent.
3. An emergency contact name and telephone number.
4. The case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the vacant building or
lot, including bankruptcy or foreclosure cases.
5. The name, street address, and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the
building or lot.
6. Type and location of any toxic, flammable or hazardous materials stored or used at said location, if
applicable.
7. Any other relevant information about the vacant building for police, paramedics, the fire department,
or other emergency responders, if applicable.
B. Any owner who fails to register a vacant building or vacant lot under the provisions of this chapter shall
further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at the building, any and all notices of code
violations and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the building or lot. (Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012)
4-15-5: FEE:
A. There shall be no fee to register a vacant building.
B. There shall be no fee to register a vacant lot.
C. An owner shall be required to annually reregister the vacant building or vacant lot on the anniversary of
the date of registration as long as the building remains a "vacant building" or remains a "vacant lot" as
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012)
4-15-6: CHANGES IN REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
An owner shall notify the building officer within twenty one (21) days of any change in the registration
information by filing an amended registration statement on an application provided by the building officer.
A new registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever. The registration statement shall
be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the village against the owner of the building. (Ord. 2012-09,
4-24-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 348/649
4-15-7: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OWNER:
A. An owner of any vacant building shall, within thirty (30) days of the building becoming vacant, enclose
and secure the building and maintain the building in a secure and closed condition until the building no
longer meets the definition of a vacant building. A building shall be deemed secured and closed if the
building is maintained pursuant to the minimum standards as set forth in the property maintenance
code and as follows:
1. Building Openings: Doors, windows, areaways and other openings are weathertight and secured
against entry by birds, vermin and trespassers. Missing or broken doors, windows and opening
coverings are covered with at least one-half inch (1/2") of plywood or structural wood panel, weather
protected, tightly fitted to the opening and secured by screws or bolts.
2. Roofs: The roof and flashings are sound, tight, will not admit moisture, and drained to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior.
3. Drainage: The building gutters and downspouts are watertight and entire storm drainage system is
adequately sized, installed in an approved manner, functional and discharged in an approved
manner.
4. Building Structure: The building is maintained in good repair; structurally sound; free from debris,
rubbish and garbage; and sanitary; and interior floors, walking surfaces and stairs are structurally
sound; and interior walls and ceilings are free of loose or hanging plaster and finishes, so as not to
pose a threat to the public health or safety.
5. Structural Members: The structural members are free of deterioration and capable of safely bearing
imposed dead and live loads.
6. Foundation Walls: The foundation walls are plumb, free from open cracks and breaks, and ratproof.
7. Exterior Walls: The exterior walls are free of holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials. Exposed
metal and wood surfaces are protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
8. Decorative Features: The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features are safe, anchored, and in good repair. Exposed metal and wood surfaces are
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
9. Structure Extensions: All balconies, porches, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, cornices,
stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar features are in good repair, anchored,
safe and sound. Exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
10. Chimneys And Towers: Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances are
structurally safe. Exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
11. Sidewalk Openings: Yardwalks, steps, and openings in sidewalks are safe for pedestrian travel.
12. Accessory And Appurtenant Structures: Accessory and appurtenant structures such as garages,
sheds, and fences are free from safety, health, and fire hazards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 349/649
B. An owner of any vacant building shall also:
1. Keep the premises on which a building is located clean, safe and sanitary, village code compliant
with respect to weeds, keep the lot free of dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials,
junk cars, furniture, clothing, appliances and litter, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of
newspapers, circulars and fliers.
2. Keep the property maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings.
3. Keep the yard landscaped and maintained.
4. Keep pools and spas in working order so the water is not stagnant and remains clear and free of
pollutants and debris, or drained and kept dry.
5. Disconnect water at the buffalo box.
6. Maintain an operable sump pump, if applicable.
7. Provide and maintain winterization of the building between November 1 and March 31.
C. An owner of any vacant lot shall keep yardwalks, steps, and openings in sidewalks safe for pedestrian
travel, keep the lot safe and sanitary, village code compliant with respect to weeds, keep the lot free of
dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, junk cars, furniture, clothing, appliances and
litter, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of newspapers, circulars and fliers, and keep the
property maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings. (Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012)
4-15-8: PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The building officer may issue rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter. These rules may
designate materials and methods which must be used to secure a building. (Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012)
4-15-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. The village shall send a notice to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, by personal or
substitute service, or posted in a conspicuous location on the building if the owner is unknown, for the
failure to complete a vacant building/lot registration application or register the vacant building or vacant
lot. The owner shall have fourteen (14) days in which to complete a vacant building/lot registration
application or register the vacant building or vacant lot as set forth in the notice. If the violation is not
resolved within fourteen (14) days, in addition to all other remedies, any person who fails to complete
a vacant building/lot registration application or register the vacant building or vacant lot, shall be
sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. However, fines and penalties
shall not be imposed for failure to comply until May 1, 2013, and thereafter.
B. In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any other provision of this chapter shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code for each offense. However, fines and penalties shall not be imposed for failure to comply until
May 1, 2013, and thereafter. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief,
application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation, contracting
for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the village may have thereon.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 350/649
C. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the village from condemning a vacant building as provided by
applicable law or taking other actions upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or
poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012)
4-15-10: DISCHARGE OF OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT BUILDING OR
VACANT LOT:
A. Prior to the removal of a vacant building from the registration requirement, or the occupancy of a
vacant building, the condition(s) which initially compelled registration of the vacant building must be
resolved, and payment in full of all village fees, fines, and costs, is required.
B. Prior to the removal of a vacant lot from the registration requirement, the condition(s) which initially
compelled registration of the vacant lot must be resolved, and payment in full of all village fees, fines,
and costs, is required. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-26-2012)
Chapter 16
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND TOWERS
4-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunication facilities
and towers. The goals of this chapter are to: a) protect residential areas and land uses and commercial
areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of telecommunications facilities and towers; b)
minimize the total number of telecommunications facilities and towers throughout the community; c)
strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than
construction of additional single use towers; d) encourage users of telecommunications facilities and
towers to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is
minimal; e) encourage users of telecommunications facilities and towers to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the telecommunications facilities and towers through careful
design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; f) enhance the ability of the
providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively,
and efficiently; g) consider the public health and safety with respect to telecommunications facilities and
towers; and h) avoid potential damages to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and
careful siting of tower structures. The village of Minooka shall give due consideration to the village's
comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites for the location of telecommunications facilities and towers. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
ANTENNA: A device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Any commercial facility, excepting governmental agencies,
established for the purpose of providing wireless voice, data and image transmission within a designated
service area. A "telecommunications facility" consists of one or more antennas attached to a support
structure together with related equipment for buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 351/649
TOWER: A structure and any support thereto such as a self-supporting mast, pole, lattice tower, guy
tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other
permanent structure or equipment on which one or more antennas is located. The term "tower" includes
radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers and cellular
telephone towers. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-3: EXCLUSIONS:
A. Governmental agencies are excluded telecommunications facilities and tower restrictions as stated in
this chapter.
B. Satellite antennas as defined in section 4-12-1 of this title. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-4: RESTRICTIONS ON CONSTRUCTION:
Telecommunications facilities and towers essential to the operation of the exchange are required to be in
the interest of public convenience and necessity, and only permitted as conditional permitted uses on
property with an M1 and M2 zoning classification.
No new telecommunications facilities and towers shall be constructed or erected within the corporate
limits of the village except as conditional permitted uses on property with an M1 or M2 zoning
classification, upon passage, approval and publication of this chapter as required by law. (Ord. 2015-18,
6-23-2015)
4-16-5: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. Height of a tower is the distance from the base of the tower to the top of the structure.
B. Freestanding or guyed tower shall be limited to a height not exceeding two hundred feet (200').
C. Tower and/or antenna mounted on a building or structure other than a freestanding or guyed
communications tower must not extend more than thirty feet (30') above the highest part of the
structure. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-6: SETBACKS:
A. A tower must have a minimum setback distance of five hundred feet (500') from any residential zoning
district boundary or land use.
B. A tower must have a minimum setback distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') from any commercial
zoning district boundary or land use.
C. A tower must otherwise comply with the setbacks in the M1 and M2 districts. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-
2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 352/649
4-16-7: LOCATION PREFERENCE; OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Order Of Preference: The order of preference for locating new telecommunication facilities and towers
shall be as follows:
1. First Preference: Use of such facilities by the village of Minooka and placement of antennas and
towers on property owned by the village of Minooka and which comply with the requirements of this
chapter including:
a. The facilities will not interfere with the purpose for which the village owned property is intended;
b. The facilities will have no significant adverse impact on surrounding private property;
c. The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and commit to a lease agreement
which includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions
and safeguards. The village shall establish fees after considering comparable rates in other cities,
potential expenses, risks to the village, and other appropriate factors;
d. The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to the
village to cover the costs of removing the facilities increased by twenty five percent (25%) to
account for contingencies and inflation;
e. The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who have a higher priority as discussed
in this chapter;
f. Unless otherwise agreed, the applicant must agree that upon the occurrence of issues affecting
public health, safety, or welfare, and following reasonable notice, the village may require the
applicant to remove the facilities at the applicant's expense;
g. The applicant must reimburse the village for any related costs, such as attorney expenses, which
the village incurs because of the presence of the applicant's facilities;
h. The applicant must obtain all necessary land use approvals; and
i. The applicant must cooperate with the village's objective to promote collocations and thus limit the
number of cell sites requested, or camouflage the site.
2. Second Preference Location; Other Public Agencies: The order of preference after village usage
shall be as follows:
a. Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and ambulance services, which are not
part of the village and private entities with a public safety agreement with the village;
b. Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to public safety except parks and
schools;
c. Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), radio and television services, specialized mobilized
radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), data internet, paging, and similar
services that are marketed to the general public.
3. Other Preference Locations: The order of preference after placement on publicly owned property
shall be as follows:
a. Place telecommunications facilities on appropriate rights of way and existing structures, such as
buildings, towers, water towers, and smokestacks located in the M1 or M2 manufacturing districts
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 353/649
that do not adjoin or adversely impact residential or commercial areas and otherwise satisfy the
setback requirements;
b. Place antennas and towers in districts zoned M1 and M2 which do not adjoin residential and
commercial districts and in locations that otherwise satisfy the setback requirements;
c. Place antennas and towers in districts zoned M1 and M2 in locations that otherwise satisfy the
setback requirements.
B. Application Requirements: The following requirements shall apply for all applications:
1. An applicant that wishes to locate a new telecommunications facility or tower shall demonstrate that
a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed communications facilities on a government
facility, a private institutional structure, or other appropriate existing structures within an M1 or M2
zone in compliance with the requirements in this chapter, and that due to valid considerations
including physical constraints, and economic or technological feasibility, no appropriate location is
available.
2. Applicants are required to demonstrate by providing proof of certified mailings or other reasonable
means: a) that they have contacted the owners of reasonably suitable structures which are within a
one-fourth (1/4) mile radius of the site proposed and which from a location standpoint could provide
part of a network for transmission of signals; b) have asked for permission to install the antenna on
those structures; and c) were denied for reasons other than economic feasibility.
3. The information submitted by the applicant shall include: a) a map of the area to be served by the
tower or antenna, b) its relationship to other cell sites in the applicant's network, and c) an
evaluation of existing buildings taller than thirty five feet (35') within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the
proposed tower or antenna which from a location standpoint could provide part of a network to
provide transmission of signals.
C. Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
1. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the
federal aviation administration, be painted a neutral color or such shades as are appropriate and
compatible with the surrounding environment, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, be
screened with live plantings and include evergreen vegetation with a minimum height of six feet (6'),
at the time of planting, placed densely as to form a screen, subject to the village's approval and
sufficient to reduce the visual obtrusiveness of said structures. Landscaping shall be compatible with
other nearby landscaping and shall be kept healthy and well maintained.
3. If a telecommunications facility is installed on a structure other than a tower, the telecommunications
facility and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the
antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
4. Fencing for equipment enclosures must be of residential quality such as wood privacy fencing or if
chainlink is used, must be screened with evergreen vegetation that will reach a height of six feet (6')
within one year of its planting.
D. Lighting: Towers and telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
federal aviation administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 354/649
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
E. State Or Federal Requirements: All towers and telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the federal aviation administration, the federal communications
commission, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate
towers and telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and telecommunications facilities governed by this chapter shall bring such
towers and telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations,
within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers
and telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or telecommunications facilities at the owner's
expense.
F. Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower and
telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in
applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers and
telecommunications facilities that are published by the Electronic Industries Association And Building
Codes, as amended from time to time, whichever is more stringent. If, upon inspection, the village of
Minooka concludes that a tower or telecommunications facility fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower or telecommunications facility, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such
tower or telecommunications facility into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower
or telecommunications facility into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for
the removal of the tower or telecommunications facility at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-
2015)
4-16-8: TOWER REQUIRED SUBMITTALS:
In addition to any information required for applications for conditional permitted uses pursuant to section
5-11-9 of this code, applicants for a conditional permitted use for a tower shall submit the following
information:
A. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower or
telecommunications facility, on site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including
when adjacent to other municipalities), master plan classification of the site and all properties within
the applicable separation distances set forth in this chapter, adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower or telecommunications
facility and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the zoning
administrator or his or her designee to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.
B. Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel or subdivision or survey plat (if applicable).
C. The setback distance between the proposed tower or telecommunications facility and the nearest
residential unit and boundary for residential zoning district, and the nearest commercial use and
boundary for commercial zoning district.
D. The separation distance from other towers shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The
applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 355/649
the existing tower(s), if known.
E. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
F. Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.
G. A description of compliance with this chapter and all applicable federal, state, or local laws.
H. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate
collocation of additional antennas for future users.
I. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application
and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
J. One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antenna including description of design
characteristics and materials.
K. A report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a
certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA222 (latest
revisions) standards.
L. Written authorization from the property owner for the application.
M. Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued.
N. Additional information required by the building and zoning officer for determination that all applicable
zoning regulations are met. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-9: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
A. "Abandonment" shall be defined as follows: 1) to cease operation for a period of sixty (60) or more
consecutive days; or 2) to reduce the effective radiated power of an antenna by seventy five percent
(75%) for sixty (60) or more consecutive days; or 3) to relocate an antenna at a point less than eighty
percent (80%) of the height of an antenna support structure; or 4) to reduce the number of
transmissions from an antenna by seventy five percent (75%) for sixty (60) or more consecutive days.
B. Any telecommunications facility or tower that is abandoned as defined herein shall be removed within
one hundred eighty (180) days of receipt of notice from the village of Minooka notifying the owner of
such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned telecommunications facility or tower within said
one hundred eighty (180) days shall be grounds for the village to cause removal of the tower or
telecommunications facility at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower
or telecommunications facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using
the tower or telecommunications facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 356/649
C. The owner of any approved telecommunications facility or tower shall submit a letter of credit,
performance bond, or other security acceptable to the village to cover the costs of removing the
facilities increased by twenty five percent (25%) to account for contingencies and inflation in the event
said owner is unable or unwilling to remove an abandoned telecommunications facility or tower in
conformance with the provisions hereof. The village of Minooka will have the right, at intervals no more
often than every three (3) years, to require that the bond amount be increased to reflect changes in the
Chicago metropolitan area consumer price index (all consumers) during the prior three (3) year period.
(Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
Chapter 17
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
4-17-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
Minooka through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to
comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The superintendent of public works or his representatives
(SPW).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general
good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices,
operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five (5) acres or more. Beginning in March 2003,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 357/649
NPDES stormwater phase II permits will be required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance
of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except
as exempted in section 4-17-6 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection defined as either of the following: a) any drain or
conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm
drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the village, or b) any drain or
conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR section
122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by the EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC section
1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity
recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not
limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or
conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs,
inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the best management
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 358/649
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a
facility. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-
22-2016)
4-17-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The superintendent of public works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be
delegated in writing by the superintendent of public works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the agency. Hereinafter, the superintendent of public works or his/her
designee is referred to as the "SPW". (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards;
therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be
no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or
waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is
prohibited except as described as follows:
1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter:
a. Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated
pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of
vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (of dechlorinated - typically
less than 1 ppm chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing
pollutants.
b. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 359/649
c. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the public works
department prior to the time of the test.
2. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain
system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-7: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The SPW may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the village may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States,
or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation
of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The village will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the village for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this section, without the prior approval of the SPW. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the SPW prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
A. Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity, including construction activity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 360/649
B. Access To Facilities:
1. The representatives of the SPW shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to
allow access to representatives of the SPW.
2. Facility operators shall allow the representations of the SPW ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be
kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The representatives of the SPW shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices
as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
4. The representatives of the SPW have the right to require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices
used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
representatives of the SPW and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the representatives of the SPW access to a permitted facility is a
violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a
facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the representatives of the SPW reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
7. If the representatives of the SPW have been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community,
then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-10: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER
POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The village will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system,
or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at
their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and
nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the
discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 361/649
compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevent
plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-
2016)
4-17-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep
and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation,
and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation,
or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such
a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials,
said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later
than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the SPW within three (3) business days of the notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of
such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-
2016)
4-17-13: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the SPW finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet
a requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration
of any affected property; and
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
B. The Implementation Of Source Control Or Treatment BMPs: If abatement of a violation and/or
restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 362/649
fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord.
2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the SPW. The notice of appeal
must be submitted in writing to the village president within five (5) days from the date of the notice of
violation. Hearing on the appeal before the village board shall take place at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the village board from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the village
board shall be final. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or,
in the event of an appeal, within seven (7) days of the decision of the village board upholding the decision
of the SPW, then representatives of the SPW shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the village or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord.
2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-16: COST ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within fifteen (15) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the
cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount of the assessment within seven (7) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which
to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute
a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of
such violation. The liability shall be paid within one year of the first day following discovery of the violation.
(Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-17: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the SPW may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create
further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord.
2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the village may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 363/649
impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-19: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to
exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare,
and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may
be taken. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-20: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be
imprisoned for not more than six (6) months. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-21: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or
paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall
be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. (Ord.
2016-14, 3-22-2016)
Title 5
ZONING
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
5-1-1: PLAN AND MAP ADOPTED:
The proposed official comprehensive plan recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Village, including the official map and subdivision regulations as set forth in Title 6 of this Code, be and
they are hereby adopted as the official comprehensive plan of the Village.
Said official comprehensive plan, including the official map and subdivision regulations set forth in Title 6
of this Code, shall be placed on file with the Village Clerk and shall be available at all times during
business hours for public inspection. (Ord. 1974-2, 5-13-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 364/649
Chapter 2
ZONING PURPOSE, INTENT, DEFINITIONS
5-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. This Title is adopted for the purpose of:
1. Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare;
2. Securing adequate natural light, pure air and safety from fire and other dangers;
3. Lessening or avoiding the hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the
accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters;
4. Lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways;
5. Conserving the value of land and buildings throughout the Village; and
6. Preserving and enhancing aesthetic values throughout the Village.
B. To these ends this Title is intended to establish and accomplish certain standards and objectives by:
1. Dividing the entire Village into districts and regulating therein the location, construction,
reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land, whether for agriculture,
residence, business, manufacturing or other specified uses;
2. Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets by adequate requirements for off-street
parking and loading facilities;
3. Preventing the overcrowding of land by regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected;
4. Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines along streets, alleys and property
lines;
5. Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and regulating and determining the area
of open spaces surrounding buildings;
6. Establishing standards to which buildings or structures therein shall conform;
7. Permitting in each zoning district only those uses, buildings and structures that are compatible with
the character of each district;
8. Preventing additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures, in such a
way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed under this Title;
9. Providing controls governing the continuation of those existing uses, buildings and structures, which
are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are located;
10. Providing for the gradual elimination of structures and uses which are incompatible with the
character of the districts in which they are located;
11. Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided in this Title;
and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 365/649
12. Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Title, or of any amendment thereto.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-2-2: INTERPRETATION:
In their application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare,
and the provisions shall be interpreted in accordance with the following:
A. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Title are either more restrictive or less restrictive
than comparable standards imposed by any other provision of this Title or of any other law, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose
higher standards or requirements, shall govern;
B. This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement; provided,
that where the regulations of this Title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements
than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this Title shall
govern; and
C. No building, structure or use not lawfully existing on the effective date hereof shall become or be made
lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this Title; and to the extent that, and in any manner that said
unlawful building, structure or use are in conflict with the requirements of this Title, said building,
structure or use remains unlawful under the provisions of this Title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-2-3: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Trustees that the several provisions of this Title
are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this Title or amendments thereto to
be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Title or amendments thereto not
specifically included in said judgment; and
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Title or
amendments thereto to a particular property or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application
of said provision to any other property or structure not specifically included in said judgment. (Ord., 5-
15-1974)
5-2-4: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Title, the rules and definitions contained in this Section shall be observed and
applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense and the future the present; words used
in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular; where the context
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 366/649
requires.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; and the word "may" is permissive.
C. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel" and "tract"; and the phrase "used for" shall
include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
D. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot.
E. Any words not defined as follows shall be construed in their generally accepted meaning as defined in
the most recent publication of Webster's Dictionary. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-2-5: DEFINITIONS1:
ABUTS, ABUTTING: To have a common property line or district line.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or a portion of a principal building, the use of which is
incidental and customary to that of the principal building. Where an accessory building is attached to and
made a part of the principal building such accessory building shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of this Title applicable to the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE: See Use, Accessory.
ADJACENT: To lie near or close to; in the neighborhood or vicinity of.
ADJOINING: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
AGRICULTURE: Land; or land, buildings and structures, the principal uses of which are growing of farm
or truck garden crops and one or more of the following: dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture or animal and poultry husbandry, and accessory uses customarily incidental to
agricultural activities including, but not limited to, the farm dwelling, dwellings for tenants and full time
hired farm workers and dwellings or lodging rooms for seasonal workers.
ALLEY: A right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION: A change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a building or structure.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation or treatment
of domestic animals.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two (2)
motor vehicles, using production line methods.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A building or portion thereof or lot used or offering for sale at retail to
the public, fuels, oils and accessories for motor vehicles; where repair service is incidental, where no
storage or parking space is offered for rent and where no motor vehicles or boats are offered for sale or
rent. When such dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the
premises are classified as a public garage.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: An area of land where three (3) or more motor vehicles, or vehicles,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 367/649
machinery or equipment drawn or operated by attaching to motor vehicles or mechanical unit (not in or
being restored to running or operable condition) or parts thereof are stored in the open and any land,
building or structure used for wrecking or storing prior to wrecking of such motor vehicles, vehicles,
machinery or equipment or parts thereof.
AWNING: A roof like mechanism, retractable in operation, which projects from the wall of a building.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to clear ceiling height below
grade. When a basement is used for storage, or garages for use of occupants of the building, or other
facilities common for the operation and maintenance of the entire building, it shall not be counted as a
story.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, railroad rights
of way, or other lines of demarcation.
BOARDING HOUSE: A residential building or portion thereof (other than a motel, apartment hotel or
hotel) containing lodging rooms for accommodation of three (3) but not more than ten (10) persons who
are not members of the keeper's family and where lodging or meals or both are provided.
BODY PIERCING: To make a hole in the body or oral cavity in order to insert or allow the insertion of any
ring, hoop, stud, or other object for the purpose of ornamentation of the body. Body piercing does not
include tongue splitting or ear piercing, and shall not be construed in any way to prohibit any injection,
incision, acupuncture, or similar medical or dental procedure performed by a licensed healthcare
professional or other person authorized to perform that procedure.
BUILDABLE AREA, FRONT, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That portion of a lot
bounded by the front building lines, side yard lines, front yard line, and the front of the principal building.
Adjustments to area may be required due to setbacks for the type of accessory use, public utility
easements, drainage easements, and overland flow routes.
BUILDABLE AREA, PRINCIPAL BUILDING: That portion of a lot bounded by the required rear yard, side
yards and front yard, for construction of the principal building.
BUILDABLE AREA, REAR CORNER, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That
portion of a lot bounded by the rear building lines, corner, side lot line abutting another lot, required side
yard setback where abutting a street, and the rear of the principal building. Adjustments to area may be
required due to setbacks for the type of accessory use, public utility easements, drainage easements, and
overland flow routes.
BUILDABLE AREA, REAR INTERIOR, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That
portion of a lot bounded by the rear building lines, interior, side lot lines, rear lot line, and the rear of the
principal building. Adjustments to area may be required due to setbacks for the type of accessory use,
public utility easements, drainage easements, and overland flow routes.
BUILDABLE AREA, SIDE, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That portion of a lot
bounded by the front building line, side yard line, rear building line, interior/corner, and the principal
building. Adjustments to area may be required due to setbacks for the type of accessory use, public utility
easements, drainage easements, and overland flow routes.
BUILDING: A structure built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels
or property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. When any portion thereof is
completely separated from every other portion by a party wall, then such portion shall be deemed to be a
separate building.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory Building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 368/649
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space,
or from other buildings or structures by a permanent roof and by exterior or party walls, pierced only by
windows and normal entrance and exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open spaces on the same lot.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof
or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip
or gambrel roofs. Chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses, cooling towers and similar projections
other than signs shall not be included in calculating building height.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building officer and inspector of the village or his duly authorized
representative.
BUILDING LINE, FRONT: The line or lines parallel or nearly parallel to the front lot line, measured from
the front corners of the principal building to the required side yard lines.
BUILDING LINE, REAR CORNER: The line or lines parallel or nearly parallel to the front lot line,
measured from the rear corners of the principal building to the required side yard line and side lot line.
BUILDING LINE, REAR INTERIOR: The line or lines parallel or nearly parallel to the front lot line,
measured from the rear corners of the principal building to the side lot lines.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located at the place where it is,
or where it is intended to be temporarily placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setback of buildings or structures, and the location of same
with respect to one another, and includes the following: a) size and height of buildings; b) location of
exterior walls; c) floor area ratio; d) open space allocated to buildings; and e) lot area and lot width
provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor and materials;
or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold or where services are offered.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A structure, or lot used in whole or in part as a place of business, the
ownership or management of which is separate and distinct from the ownership or management of any
other place of business located on the same or another lot.
CANDLEPOWER: The luminous intensity, as evaluated in effectiveness of stimulating visual sensation, of
any radiation in a given direction. The international candle has been adopted in 1940 as 1/60 of the
brightness of platinum.
CARGO CONTAINER FACILITY: A facility that temporarily and/or permanently stores large standardized
containers (or tanks) that are used for holding, storing or shipping by truck, railroad, aircraft, ship or other
mode of transportation.
CARPORT: A roofed automobile shelter, with two (2) or more open sides.
CELLAR: An area having more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to clear ceiling height below grade and which
is not counted as a story.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for offices of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 369/649
physicians or dentists or both, for the examination and treatment of persons on an outpatient basis.
CLOSED CUP FLASHPOINT: The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid under prescribed
conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will propagate a flame. The Tag closed cup tester shall be
authoritative for liquids having a flashpoint below one hundred seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F).
The Pensky-Martens tester shall be authoritative for liquids having flashpoints between one hundred
seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F) and three hundred degrees Fahrenheit (300°F).
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members and whose
facilities are restricted to members and their guests. Food and alcoholic beverages may be served on its
premises provided they are secondary and incidental to the principal use.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A motor vehicle designed to transport passengers or property if:
A. The vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more
or such a lesser gross vehicle weight rating as subsequently determined by federal regulations or
the secretary of state; or any combination of vehicles with a gross combination weight rating of
twenty six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more, provided the gross vehicle weight rating of any
vehicle or vehicles being towed is ten thousand one (10,001) pounds or more; or
B. The vehicle is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more persons; or
C. The vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded in accordance with
49 CFR part 172, subpart F.
Pursuant to the interpretation of the commercial motor vehicle safety act of 1986 by the federal
highway administration, the definition of "commercial vehicle" does not include:
A. Recreational vehicles, when operated primarily for personal use;
B. United States department of defense vehicles being operated by noncivilian personnel. This
includes any operator on active military duty; members of the reserves; national guard; personnel
on part time training; and national guard military technicians (civilians who are required to wear
military uniforms and are subject to the code of military justice); or
C. Firefighting and other emergency equipment (including, without limitation, equipment owned or
operated by a HAZMAT or technical rescue team authorized by a county board under section 5-
1127 of the county's code), with audible and visual signals, owned or operated by or for a
governmental entity, which is necessary to the preservation of life or property or the execution of
emergency governmental functions which are normally not subject to general traffic rules and
regulations.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure which: a) complies with all the
regulations of this title or of any amendments thereto governing bulk of the district in which said building
or structure is located; or b) is designed or intended for a permitted or conditional permitted use as
allowed in the district in which it is located.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any childcare facility which regularly provides daycare for less than twenty four (24)
hours per day for more than three (3) children in a facility other than a family home. The term does not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 370/649
include:
A. Programs operated by: 1) public or private elementary school systems or secondary level school
units or institutions of higher learning that serve children who shall have attained the age of three (3)
years or 2) private entities on the grounds of public or private elementary or secondary schools and
that serve children who have attained the age of three (3) years;
B. Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or service, religious services, or other
similar facility, where transient children are cared for temporarily while parents or custodians of the
children are occupied on the premises and readily available;
C. Any type of daycare center that is conducted on federal, state or local government premises; or
D. Special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instruction and similar activities conducted on
an organized and periodic basis by civic, charitable and governmental organizations.
DECORATIVE FENCE: A fence used mostly for aesthetics which adds to the visual beauty of the
property. This fence may not exceed forty two inches (42") in height, excluding posts, when the fence is
installed in a front or corner side yard. Forty percent (40%) of the square footage of the overall
dimensions of the fence shall be open. (A woven wire or cyclone type fence is not considered a
decorative fence.)
DISPLACEMENT (EARTH): The amplitude or intensity of an earthborn vibration measured in inches. The
displacement or amplitude is one-half (1/2) the total earth movement.
DISTRICT: A section or part of the village within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment or part thereof in which are provided facilities where
serving or consuming commodities or both are intended to occur primarily in patrons' automobiles parked
on the premises.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: Any building or structure or portion thereof that is designed, intended or
used to transact business with customers located in a motor vehicle, which is usually left running during
such business transactions. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, banks, financial
institutions, or any business having drive-up or curb service.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including
single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including mobile homes or other trailers, or
lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units
connected primarily vertically, generally but not necessarily, with a common entrance.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more
single-family dwelling units connected primarily horizontally with each unit having an exclusive entrance.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit in a detached building
unless otherwise specified.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 371/649
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building consisting of two (2) dwelling units either attached side by side or
one above the other, with each dwelling unit having a separate entrance.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are used for living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family, shall always be
included within each "dwelling unit".
EARTHBORN VIBRATIONS: A cyclic movement of the earth due to the propagation of mechanical
energy.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen,
hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal room.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the
transmission system and is delivered to the distribution system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system
and is delivered to other elements of the transmission system and, generally, to the local distribution
system.
EQUIVALENT OPACITY: The shade on the Ringelmann chart that most closely corresponds to the
density of smoke, other than black or gray.
FALLOUT SHELTER: An accessory building and use which incorporates the fundamentals for fallout
protection (shielding mass, ventilation and space to live) and which is constructed of such materials and in
such a manner as to afford to the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fallout.
FAMILY: One person or two (2) or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage or legal
adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons not all so related, together with his or their
domestic servants, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. A family may include, in addition
thereto, not more than two (2) roomers, boarders or permanent guests, whether or not gratuitous.
FENCE: Any structure, partition or enclosure of wood, stone, iron, metal or other material enclosing or
dividing a piece of land for the purpose of this title. A fence shall not include naturally growing shrubs,
bushes and other foliage.
FLOOD CREST ELEVATION: The elevation of the highest flood level that has been or may be
subsequently designed by the village engineer. The flood crest elevation designated by the village
engineer shall be based upon a storm water drainage map showing flood crest elevations at appropriate
locations as approved by the board of trustees.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA: That continuous area adjacent to a stream or streambed, or any storm water
retention area and its tributaries, whose elevation is equal to or lower than the flood crest elevation
including also land having an elevation higher than flood crest elevation but less than ten (10) acres in
area and surrounded by land in a floodplain area or an area of such elevation secured by landfill
projecting into a floodplain area.
Any point shall be deemed to be within the floodplain area if it falls below the elevation of a high
water mark, as the elevation of the mark is projected in horizontal directions perpendicular to the
flow of the stream and thence to intersections at an equal elevation with the land on either side of
the stream. Any point between the aforedescribed projections of any two (2) high water marks shall
be deemed within the floodplain area if it is at an elevation equal to or lower than similar projections
of the interpolated flood crest elevation. The interpolated flood crest elevation is the calculated
elevation of the flood crest at the centerline of the stream between two (2) known flood crests of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 372/649
nearest upstream and downstream high water marks and the difference in elevation between the
flood crest at this location and at either of the high water mark projections is directly proportional to
the difference in stream centerline distance between the two (2) high water mark projections.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors including also the basement floor of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls, or from the centerlines of walls separating two (2) buildings. The "floor area" shall also include the
horizontal areas on each floor devoted to: a) elevator shafts and stairwells; b) mechanical equipment,
except if located on the roof, when either open or enclosed (i.e., bulkheads, water tanks and cooling
towers); c) habitable attic space as permitted by the building code of the village, as adopted in title 4,
chapter 2 of this code; d) interior balconies and mezzanines; e) enclosed porches; and f) accessory uses.
The "floor area" of structures used for bulk storage of materials (i.e., grain elevators, petroleum tanks)
shall also be included in the "floor area" and such "floor area" shall be determined on the basis of the
height of such structures with one floor for each ten feet (10') of structure height and if such structure
measures less than ten feet (10') but not less than five feet (5') over such floor height intervals, it shall be
construed to have an additional floor.
The horizontal area in each floor of a building devoted to off street parking and off street loading
facilities and the horizontal area of a cellar floor shall not be included in the "floor area".
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading Requirements): "Floor area"
when prescribed as the basis of measurement for off street parking spaces and off street loading spaces
for any use shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building, excluding
areas used for accessory off street parking facilities and the horizontal areas of the basement and cellar
floors that are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the entire building. All horizontal
dimensions shall be taken from the exterior of the walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the "floor area" within a building or
buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area ratio as designated for each district when
multiplied by the lot area in square feet shall determine the maximum permissible "floor area" for the
building or buildings on the lot.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination, equivalent to the illumination at all points which are one foot (1')
distant from a uniform point source of one candle power.
FOOT-LAMBERT: A unit of brightness, usually of a reflecting surface. A diffusion surface of uniform
brightness reflecting or emitting the equivalent of the light from one candle at one foot (1') distance over
one square foot has a brightness of one foot-lambert.
FREE BURNING: The rate of combustion of a material which burns actively, and easily supports
combustion.
FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck or railroad freight cars is
assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor trucks or railroad freight cars.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles owned
and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory and in which no occupation or business
for profit is carried on. Not more than one of the motor vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more
than one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof other than a private or storage garage, designed or used
for equipping, servicing or repairing motor vehicles. Hiring, selling or storing of motor vehicles may be
included.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 373/649
GARAGE, STORAGE OR OFF STREET PARKING: A building or portion thereof designed or used or land
used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles, and in which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and motor
vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
GRADE: The established grade of the street or sidewalk. Where no such grade has been established, the
grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk at the property line. Where no sidewalks exist, the grade shall
be the average elevation of the street adjacent to the property line, except in cases of unusual
topographic conditions as determined by the building inspector, grade shall be the average elevation of
the finished surface of the ground adjoining the exterior walls of a building at the base of a structure.
GROSS DENSITY: The ratio between total number of dwelling units on a lot and total lot area in acres.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a principal building, measured at highest ground
grade, adjacent to building, from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, but excluding open porches or
terraces, and garages or carports.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging house, rooming
house, boarding house, hotel, apartment hotel or motel accommodation as his domicile and place of
permanent residence.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful business, occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling unit by
a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit which is incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling unit for dwelling purposes.
HOTEL: An establishment containing lodging rooms, for occupancy by transient guests in
contradistinction to a lodging house, boarding house or a rooming house and which provides customary
hotel services such as: maid, telephone, bellboy and desk services; and the use and upkeep of furnishing
and laundry of linens.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: A hotel in which at least eighty percent (80%) of the hotel accommodations are
occupied by permanent guests.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the area of a lot which is
occupied or covered by any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater by
the area of such lot. Impervious surfaces shall include, but not be limited to, the ground area covered by
buildings and other structures, as well as concrete, brick, asphalt, gravel, and similarly paved surfaces
and areas of permanently standing water.
IMPULSIVE: Discrete vibration pulsations occurring no more often than one per second.
INCOMBUSTIBLE: A material which will not ignite nor actively support combustion during an exposure for
five (5) minutes to a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F).
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a not for profit corporation wholly for public or semipublic use.
INTENSE BURNING: The rate of combustion described by a material that burns with a high degree of
activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples: sawdust, magnesium (powder, flaked or strips) and rocket
fuels.
JUNKYARD: An open area of land and any accessory building or structure thereon which is used primarily
for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling or handling waste or scrap
materials, including vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition or parts thereof, and
other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junkyard" includes an automobile wrecking yard, but
does not include an establishment located in the applicable manufacturing district, engaged exclusively in
processing of scrap iron or other metals to be sold only to establishments engaged in manufacturing of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 374/649
steel or metal alloys.
KENNEL: Any premises or portion thereof on which more than three (3) dogs, cats or other household
domestic animals are kept, or on which more than two (2) such animals are maintained, boarded, bred or
cared for, in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LABORATORY: See definition of Research Laboratory.
LAMBERT: Defined as 1/929 of a foot-lambert, usually used to designate intrinsic brightness of light
sources.
LANDING STRIP, PRIVATE: A strip of land used or intended for use for the landing and take-off of the
private aircraft of the owner or lessee of the landing strip and his guests and such accessory structures
customarily incidental to the operations which may include one building for the storage and maintenance
of not more than two (2) such private aircraft.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin-operated self-service type washing, drying, dry cleaning
and ironing facilities, providing that: a) not more than four (4) persons, including owners, are employed on
the premises; and b) no pick-up or delivery service is maintained.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the principal building
providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and with access to a street or alley.
LODGING HOUSE: A building originally designed for and used as a single or two-family dwelling, all or a
portion of which contains lodging rooms which accommodate persons who are not members of the
keeper's family. Lodging or meals, or both are provided for compensation for three (3) or more but not
more than ten (10) persons.
LODGING ROOM: A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking
facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms, each room which provides
sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one "lodging room" for the purpose of this Title.
LOT: A single parcel of land which is legally described and recorded as such, or which is one or more
numbered lots or parts of such lots legally described and recorded as a part of a recorded subdivision
plat, and in any case is located within a single block and having its principal frontage on a street or an
easement or other common-use right of way, and which is designated by the owner at the time of
application for a building permit as the site to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single
ownership or control. Therefore, a lot may or may not coincide with a single lot of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full length upon streets;
provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or
structures.
LOT DEPTH: The mean distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot measured within
the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot that is not a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The property lines bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE: That boundary of a corner lot which abuts a street, but is not the front lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 375/649
LOT LINE, FRONT: The only boundary of a lot which abuts a street or, for a corner lot, the front lot line is
the shortest boundary of the lot abutting a street or, in the event that the boundaries of a lot abutting a
street are of equal length, then the front lot line is the lot line designated as such on a plat of dedication or
a plat of subdivision.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line which does not abut a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: An interior lot line which is most distant from and is almost parallel to the front lot line,
and in the case of an irregular, or triangular, shaped lot at a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, which
is parallel to and maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Grundy and/or Will County, Illinois.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of
the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel streets, and
which is not a corner lot. Both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The minimum distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the narrowest point
within the front thirty feet (30') of the buildable area.
MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing,
fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing or testing of materials, goods or
products.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a
building.
MICRON: A unit of length, equal to one-thousandths part of one millimeter (.001 millimeter).
MOBILE HOME: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes which contains cooking,
sanitary and electrical facilities and has a gross floor area of two hundred forty (240) square feet or more.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot, parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for accommodating two (2) or
more mobile homes, provided each mobile home contains a kitchen, flush toilet and shower or bath. It
shall not include a sales lot in which automobiles or unoccupied mobile homes or other trailers are parked
for the purpose of inspection or sale, except mobile homes located on a site in the mobile home park
which are occupied or vacant for not more than ninety (90) days after occupancy may be sold or offered
for sale.
MODERATE BURNING: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material which supports combustion
and is consumed slowly as it burns. Examples: wood, timber and logs.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached lodging rooms with bathrooms,
and where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are used for occupancy by transient
automobile tourists. Cooking facilities shall not be included in any of the lodging rooms, but one dwelling
unit may be included for occupancy by the owner or manager of the motel.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled or
stored for routing in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 376/649
MOTOR VEHICLE: A passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by
mechanical power.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof,
and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NO-ACCESS STRIP: A strip of land within and along a rear lot line of a through lot adjoining a street
which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or property deed as land over which motor vehicular
travel shall not be permitted.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure lawfully established which:
a) does not comply with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment hereto governing bulk of the
district in which such building or structure is located; or b) is designed or intended for a nonconforming
use.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or structure and the use thereof or the use of land that does not
conform with the regulations of this title or any amendment thereto governing use in the district in which it
is located but which conformed with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements applicable
at the time such building or structure was erected, enlarged or altered, and the use thereof or the use of
land was established.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL: A material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects of the physical or economic well being of
individuals.
NURSERY SCHOOL: Educational institution for children who are preelementary school age.
NURSING HOME: A home for aged, chronically ill, care of children, infirm or incurable persons, or a place
of rest for those persons suffering bodily disorders, in which three (3) or more persons not members of the
family residing on the premises are received, and provided with food, shelter and care, but not including
hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or
injury, maternity cases or mental illness.
ODOR THRESHOLD: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will produce an olfactory
response in a human being. Odor thresholds shall be determined in accordance with ASTM method D
1391-57, "standard method for measurement of odor in atmospheres (dilution method)".
ODOROUS MATTER: Any material that produces an olfactory response among human beings.
OFF STREET PARKING AREA OR LOT: Land which is improved and used or a structure which is
designed and used exclusively for the storage of passenger motor vehicles, either for accessory off street
parking spaces or commercial off street parking spaces when permitted herein by district regulations.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or renting merchandise
stored or displayed out of doors prior to sale. Such merchandise includes automobiles, trucks, motor
scooters, motorcycles, boats or similar commodities.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, reserved for the parking of one motor
vehicle and which is accessible to and from a street or alley.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material other than water which is suspended in or discharged into the
atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at outdoor ambient conditions.
PARTY WALL: A common wall which extends from its footings below grade to the underside of the roof
and divides buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 377/649
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criteria established to control smoke and particulate matter, noise,
odorous matter, toxic matter, vibration, fire and explosion hazards, glare and radiation hazards generated
by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land under single ownership
or unified control and which is approved for development as a single, cohesive entity planned and
designed in conformance with the purposes and standards of the planned unit development regulations
as specified in title 6, chapter 7 of this code.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The village's planning and zoning commission. References in
this code to "plan commission" or "planning commission" shall be deemed to mean the village's planning
and zoning commission.
POULTRY: Any domesticated fowl including chickens, turkeys, geese, and ducks.
PYROPHORIC DUST: A dust in a finely divided state that is spontaneously combustible in air.
RADIATION HAZARDS: The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing radiation, which shall include
all radiation capable of producing ions in their passage through matter. Such radiations shall include, but
are not limited to, electromagnetic radiations such as X-rays and gamma rays and particulate radiation
such as electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons and alpha particles.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land containing railroad tracks and auxiliary facilities for track
operations, but not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or
locomotive shops or car yards.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A transportation vehicle, self-propelled or capable of being towed by a
passenger car, station wagon or small pickup truck, of such size as not to require any special highway
movement permits, and primarily designed or constructed to provide temporary, movable living quarters
for recreational, camping or travel use, or to carry such equipment, but not for profit nor commercial use.
Included as a recreational vehicle, but not to the exclusion of any other types not mentioned are: trailers,
trailer coaches, camping trailers, motor homes, pickup (side in) campers, chassis mounts, converted
vans, chopped vans, mini-motor homes, fifth wheel trailers of recreational vehicle type, construction and
design, boat trailers, with and without boats mounted thereon, snowmobile trailers, with and without
snowmobiles mounted thereon and truck caps.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific
research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESERVOIR PARKING SPACES: Those off street parking spaces allocated for temporary standing of
automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular establishment.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY: The area connecting the traveled portion of the public way and the motor
vehicle entrance to a garage or the front of a house.
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart described in the U.S. bureau of mines information circular 6888, on
which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke
(smoke density).
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area of the Ringelmann chart that coincides most nearly
with the visual density or equivalent opacity of the emission of smoke observed.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the travel of motor vehicles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 378/649
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a street line and the nearest wall of a building or
side of a structure facing such street line, or edge of the area of operation of a principal use when no
building or structure is involved.
SETBACK, ESTABLISHED: When forty percent (40%) or more of the lots fronting on one side of a street
within a block are improved, the existing setbacks of such improved lots shall be the "established setback"
for determining the depth of the required front yards for the remainder of the lots along such street
frontage, as regulated in this title.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, illustration, display or device which is affixed to, painted or
represented upon a building, structure or land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity,
person, institution or business. For purpose of definition, a sign structure may be single face or double
face. However, a sign shall not include any display of any court, public or official notice, nor shall it include
the flag, emblem, insignia of a nation, political unit, school, religious or charitable institution or
organization. A sign shall also include a permanent sign located within an enclosed building in such a
manner as to be viewed or intended for view primarily from the exterior of the building.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A structure including a billboard on which is portrayed information which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment or other activity not related to use on the lot
upon which the sign structure is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or
other activity conducted on the lot upon which such sign is located.
SIGN, FLASHING: An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained constant or stationary
in intensity or color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this title, a revolving sign, or
any advertising device which attracts attention by moving parts, operated by mechanical equipment or
movement is caused by natural sources, whether or not illuminated with artificial lighting, shall be
considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the
extreme limits of a sign.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign which is affixed to any building wall or structure and extends beyond the
building wall or parts thereof or structure more than twelve inches (12").
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected, constructed and maintained above the roof of any building.
SIGN, WALL: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall of any building, when sign shall project not more
than twelve inches (12") from the building wall or parts thereof.
SMOKE: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or combustion process which is
made up of particulate matter.
SMOKE UNIT: The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann number is multiplied by
the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this calculation: a) a Ringelmann density reading shall
be made at least once a minute during the period of observation; b) each reading is then multiplied by the
time in minutes during which it is observed; and c) the various products are then added together to give
the total number of "smoke units" observed during the entire observation period.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A building or structure which is located on a lot on which a dwelling is located, and
which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for housing horses for the private use of
occupants of the dwelling, but in no event for hire.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 379/649
STABLE, PUBLIC: A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it. The floor of a story may have split levels, provided that there are not more than four
feet (4') difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A basement shall be counted as a
story, except when used for storage, garages for use of occupants of a building or other facilities common
for the rest of the building. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers over one-third
(1/3) the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor
next above it is twenty four feet (24') or more.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two
(2) opposite exterior walls are not more than three feet (3') above the floor of such story, except that any
partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family, or by a family
occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story.
STREET: A public or private right of way or easement which is designated as a permanent right of way or
easement for common use as the primary means of vehicular access to properties abutting on it.
STREET, FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets, or in the case of a dead end street, all of the property along one side of the street between an
intersecting street and the end of such dead end street.
STREET LINE: The street right of way line abutting a property line of a lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting
such repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including,
but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, backstops for tennis courts and
pergolas.
TATTOO, TATTOOED, TATTOOING: To insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being, by
pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin.
TAVERN: An establishment where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises but not including
restaurants where the principal business is the serving of food.
THREE-COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM: Instruments which measure simultaneously earthborn
vibrations in horizontal and vertical planes.
TOURIST HOME: A building which contains a single dwelling unit and in which meals or lodging or both
are provided or offered to transient guests for compensation. "Tourist home" does not include a hotel,
apartment hotel or motel.
TOURIST PARK: A parcel or tract of land containing facilities for locating three (3) or more travel trailers
or mobile homes, and for use only by transients remaining less than three (3) months, whether or not a
charge is made. An open sales lot in which automobiles or unoccupied trailers are parked for the
purposes of inspection or sale is not included in a tourist park.
TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL: Those materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms
by chemical means.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 380/649
TRAILER: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof for lodging or
dwelling purposes or for the use as an accessory building or structure in the conduct of business, trade or
occupation, and which may be used as a conveyance on streets and highways, by its own or other motive
power.
TRAILER, CAMPING: A trailer designed and constructed for temporary dwelling purposes which does not
contain certain built-in sanitary facilities and has a gross floor area of less than one hundred thirty (130)
square feet.
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes which may contain cooking,
sanitary and electrical facilities, and has a gross floor area of one hundred thirty (130) square feet or
more, but less than two hundred forty (240) square feet.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or
for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with
respect to the performance standards of this Title.
USE, ACCESSORY: An accessory use is one which is incidental to the dominant use of the premises.
USE, CONDITIONAL PERMITTED: A use that has unusual operational, physical or other characteristics
that may be different from those of the predominant permitted uses in a district, but which is a use that
complements and is otherwise, or can be made, compatible with the intended over-all development within
a district. Compliance with special standards not necessarily applicable to other permitted uses or
conditional permitted uses in the district shall be required for a conditional permitted use, as regulated in
this Title.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building, structure or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this
Title or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal
requirements, as existing at the time of the effective date hereof or any amendment thereto, for the
structure or land that is being examined.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts,
provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and when applicable, performance standards of
this Title for the district in which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory use.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to be operated by the
customer.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at designated frequency (cycles per
second).
YARD: An open area on a lot which is unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise
provided in this Title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line and the front yard line.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which adjoins another lot or an alley separating such side yard from
another lot.
YARD, LINE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the applicable yard extends and
which is not nearer to such lot line at any point than the required depth or width of the applicable yard. A
building, structure or other obstruction shall not encroach into the area between the "yard line" and such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 381/649
adjacent lot line, except for such permitted obstruction in yards as are set forth in this Title.
YARD, REAR: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot line and the rear yard line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line, side yard line and side lot line.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the front yard line, corner side yard line, rear yard
line and corner side lot line.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: References in this Code to the "Zoning Board of Appeals" or the "Board
of Appeals" shall be deemed to be references to the Village's Planning and Zoning Commission.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the Village has been divided for zoning regulations and
requirements as set forth on the Zoning District Map.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICE: The Zoning Enforcement Office is the office of the Building Officer
and Inspector of the Village from which the Building Officer and Inspector, and such deputies or assistants
as may be duly appointed by the Board of Trustees, shall administer and enforce the provisions of the
Zoning Title and to make such determinations, interpretations and orders as are necessary therefor, and
require such plats, plans and other descriptive material in connection with applications for permits as are
necessary for him to judge compliance with this Title in accordance with regulations set forth in this Title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 382/649
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 383/649
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 384/649
ILLUSTRATION NO. 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 385/649
ILLUSTRATION NO. 4
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993; Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996; 1997 Code; Ord. 1997-08,
5-27-1997; Ord. 2000-46, 10-10-2000; Ord. 2003-26, 5-27-2003; Ord. 2005-41, 9-13-2005; Ord. 2006-01,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 386/649
1-10-2006; Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-2006; Ord. 2006-38, 10-10-2006; Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006; Ord. 2007-
31, 6-26-2007; Ord. 2009-26, 6-23-2009; Ord. 2013-14, 5-28-2013; Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
Chapter 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
5-3-1: CONTROL OVER USE:
A. The uses of land and the erection, alteration and use of buildings or structures shall be limited to:
1. Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date hereof, except uses lawfully established
and existing on the effective date hereof and rendered nonconforming by the provisions herein shall
be subject to the regulations of chapter 10 of this title; and
2. Uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the zoning district in which the land, building or
structure is to be located.
B. Where a use which is classified as a conditional use by this title exists on the effective date hereof, it
shall be considered to be a lawful conditional use.
C. Where the construction of a building or structure has begun prior to the effective date hereof and is
being prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be completed and occupied.
D. Where plans for the construction of a building or structure have been filed with the village clerk within
ten (10) days after the effective date hereof or any amendment hereto, said building or structure may
be constructed and occupied if construction is commenced within six (6) months and completed within
one year of the filing date. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. 1997 Code)
5-3-2: CONTROL OVER BULK:
A. New buildings or structures shall conform with the bulk regulations established by this title for the
district in which each such building or structure is located. Existing buildings or structures shall not be
enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in such a manner as to conflict or
to increase any existing conflict with the bulk regulations of this title for the district in which such
structures are located.
B. However, a lot of record at the time of the effective date hereof in a residence district which is unable to
meet the requirements of this title as to area and yard requirements may be used for a single-family
detached dwelling, provided it shall meet all the other requirements of this title and other applicable
village ordinances, regulations and codes. A lot of record existing on the effective date hereof, referred
to above, shall be as follows:
1. In residence districts, a lot, parcel or tract of land which was recorded in the office of the recorder of
deeds of Grundy, Kendall and Will Counties prior to the effective date hereof; and
2. In residence districts, a lot in a subdivision which was so recorded after the effective date hereof,
provided a preliminary plat for such subdivision had been given tentative approval, as required by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 387/649
the subdivision regulations1 prior to the effective date hereof and a final plat had been submitted
and approved by the village board and thereafter recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of
Grundy County within the time periods required by such subdivision regulations for filing and
application for final plat approval and for recording after approval.
C. The zoning officer shall issue a zoning certificate for erecting a single-family detached dwelling on a lot
of record upon compliance with all of the foregoing provisions. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-3: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON LOT:
In any residence district, every single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered
shall be located on a lot, and there shall be not more than one such dwelling on a lot. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-4: LOT DIVISION:
No lot containing a structure or use shall hereafter be divided in order to secure one or more additional
lots for transfer of ownership and establishment of a principal use thereon, unless each lot, including also
the lot containing the structure or use, resulting from such division, shall have the minimum lot area, lot
width and yards as required in this title for the district in which the lot is located. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-5: YARDS:
A. Yards and other open spaces as required by this title shall be located on the same lot as the principal
building, structure or use.
B. On through lots, the front lot line shall be along the street right of way designated by the zoning officer,
except that when a front lot line has been established on one or more lots in the same block, the street
right of way line designated as the front lot line for such lot or lots shall be the front lot line on all
vacant through lots in such block. Only those obstructions permitted in this title in front yards shall be
located in that part of a rear yard adjoining a street that is equivalent in depth to a required front yard,
except where a no access strip has been provided for such lots on the recorded plat.
C. No legally required yards, open space or lot area for any use or structure shall be used to satisfy yard,
open space or lot area requirements for any other structure or use.
D. No yards allocated to a building, structure or use existing on the effective date hereof shall be
subsequently reduced or further reduced below the yard requirements of this title, except a yard
adjoining a street may be reduced in depth in the event the right of way width of such street is
subsequently increased. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-6: SETBACKS ALONG STREETS:
Minimum setbacks on lots abutting a street or thoroughfare shall be the distance required for a front yard,
or side yard adjoining a street, in the districts where such lots are located, measured from the existing
right of way line of the street or thoroughfare, or from the proposed right of way line as designated on the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 388/649
official map of the village, and as duly established by other ordinances of the village or as established by
county or state highway authorities, whichever has the greatest right of way width requirements. (Ord., 5-
15-1974)
5-3-7: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible with the principal use, shall not be
erected or altered in required yards except those that are herein permitted as obstructions in yards,
and shall not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
B. Accessory uses shall not include the keeping, propagation, or culture of pigeons, poultry, rabbits, bees,
livestock or other nonhousehold animals except as follows:
1. The keeping, propagation, or culture of pigeons, poultry, rabbits, bees, livestock or other
nonhousehold animals shall be permitted on such lots where the pursuit of agriculture is a permitted
principal or accessory use; and
2. The keeping of poultry shall be permitted on lots in districts zoned R1, R1A, and R2 pursuant to
chapter 6 of this title, subject to the following conditions:
a. Any poultry kept on such a lot must be kept, at all times, within a fully enclosed and secured
poultry enclosure. Said enclosure must be constructed within the rear yard of the lot and must be
located not less than five feet (5') from the edges of the lot;
b. No male poultry (including, but not limited to, roosters, ganders, and drakes) shall be permitted;
c. No more than eight (8) female poultry (including, but not limited to, geese, hens, and ducks),
regardless of species, shall be permitted on a single lot;
d. Waste must be regularly removed from the poultry enclosure and the poultry enclosure must be
maintained in a reasonably clean and sanitary manner. (Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
C. Except as herein otherwise required for a specific accessory use, detached accessory buildings, as
herein permitted as obstructions in required rear yards, shall:
1. Be not more than one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, whichever is lower;
2. Cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the rear yard; and
3. Be located not less than five feet (5') from a lot line of adjoining lots, except:
a. On corner lots, not nearer to the side street lot line than the distance required in the district in
which the lot is located for a side yard adjoining a street.
b. On through lots that do not have a rear lot line adjoining a no access strip, not nearer to the rear
lot line adjoining a street than the distance required for a front yard.
c. On lots which abut a public alley, not nearer to the centerline of the alley than eleven feet (11').
D. No detached building accessory to a single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or altered at
any location on a lot, shall be more than one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, whichever is lower, nor
shall it be nearer than ten feet (10') from the principal building on the lot. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 389/649
5-3-8: PERMITTED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES IN REQUIRED
YARDS:
The following accessory buildings, structures and uses are permitted and may be obstructions in yards as
follows:
F
Denotes permitted obstructions in the buildable area, front, accessory buildings, structures
and uses.
S
Denotes permitted obstructions in the buildable area, side, accessory buildings, structures and
uses.
R
Denotes permitted obstruction in the buildable area, rear, accessory buildings, structures and
uses.
Air conditioning equipment shelters. R
Arbors or trellises - where trellises are attached to the principal building, they may also
project into front yards and side yards.
R
Awnings or canopies - projecting not more than 3 feet into a required yard. F
S
R
Balconies. R
Bay windows - projecting not more than 3 feet into a yard. F
R
Chimneys, attached - projecting not more than 2 feet into a yard. F
S
R
Eaves and gutters - projecting not more than 4 feet into a front and rear yard and not
more than 2 feet into a side yard.
F
S
R
Fallout shelters, attached or detached. R
Fences - not more than 8 feet in height in business districts, not more than 8 feet in
manufacturing districts, and not more than 6 feet in height in residence districts unless
otherwise specified.
S
R
Fire escapes, open or enclosed projected into a front yard or side yard adjoining a street
not more than 5 feet, and into an interior side yard, not more than 3 feet.
F
S
R
Flagpoles. F
S
R
Growing of garden crops in the open. S
R
Lawn furniture, such as benches, sundials, birdbaths and similar structures. F
S
R
Open off street loading spaces. R
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 390/649
Open off street parking spaces _ not less than 5 feet from a lot line or not less than 10
feet from a building wall or a greater distance if required herein and in all business
districts open off street parking spaces may be in a required front yard or side yard
adjoining a street as hereinafter regulated.
F
S
R
Playground and laundry drying equipment. R
Playhouses and open sided summerhouses. R
Poultry enclosure. R
Sheds and storage buildings for garden equipment and household items. R
Signs, nameplates and light standards. F
S
R
Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the principal buildings,
projecting not more than 18 inches.
F
S
R
Steps, open - necessary for access to and from the dwelling or an accessory building,
provided there are no more than 8 steps for access to and from a principal or accessory
building.
F
S
R
Swimming pools, private. R
Tennis courts, private. R
Terraces, patios and outdoor fireplaces. *
R
Trees, shrubs and other plants. F
S
R
Other accessory buildings, structures and uses as herein permitted in district regulations
as accessory to a specific permitted use.
Not
allowed
in yards
Note:
* = Patios (and decks) are permitted obstructions in the side yard for single-family detached dwellings and
two-family (duplex) dwellings, subject to the following conditions:
A. The single-family detached dwelling or two-family (duplex) dwelling has a door that accesses the side
yard and does not have a door that accesses the rear yard,
B. The side yard patio or deck shall not exceed 225 square feet and shall be constructed adjacent to the
door that accesses the side yard,
C. No fencing of any height shall be constructed as part of patios or decks constructed in side yards that
face a street, and
D.The patio or deck shall not be constructed in a utility or drainage easement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 391/649
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 1984-10, 11-12-1984; Ord. 2007-31, 6-26-2007; Ord. 2013-20, 6-
25-2013; Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
5-3-9: VISION CLEARANCE FOR CORNER LOTS:
On corner lots within that part of a yard located within a radius of twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection of the two (2) street right of way lines forming the lot corner, no structures or shrubs as herein
permitted as obstructions in front yards or side yards adjoining a street shall be erected, altered or planted
which have a height more than thirty inches (30") above the ground grade in this area, and trees planted
in such areas shall be maintained in a manner that trees shall not have branches lower than eight feet (8')
above the ground grade elevation in this area. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-10: PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, BOATS,
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, AND MOTOR VEHICLES2:
A. Recreational Vehicle Parking Restricted: The parking of recreational vehicles such as boats,
snowmobiles, personal watercraft on trailers, travel trailers, campers, motor homes, other recreational
vehicles and their trailers in residential areas within the village of Minooka is hereby restricted, as
described in this section.
B. Parking In Public Roadway: None of said items as set forth in subsection A of this section shall be
parked or stored on the roadway or right of way.
C. Parking On Private Land: Only one said item as set forth in subsection A of this section shall be parked
on any lot or parcel of land by the resident of the subject lot or parcel of land, provided:
1. Said item shall be parked in an interior side yard, rear yard or a fully enclosed building or structure.
It shall not be parked in the front yard or corner side yard, except as provided for in subsection D of
this section.
2. In any zoning district, the wheels or any similar transporting devices shall not be removed, except
for repairs.
3. It shall not be permanently affixed to the ground in a manner that would prevent its removal.
4. It shall not be located closer than five feet (5') to any rear or interior side lot line.
D. Parking In Residential Driveway: If the side yard or rear yard is not accessible, the said items as set
forth in subsection A of this section may be parked in the residential driveway, if:
1. It is used daily and it is the owner's principal means of transportation; or
2. It is parked in a manner so as to not block the sidewalk or block the view of the street for safe
exiting;
3. Only one said item as set forth in subsection A of this section may be parked in the residential
driveway, if permitted pursuant to subsection D1 or D2 of this section, during its normal season that
it would be used (i.e., watercraft and campers from May 1 to October 30; snowmobiles from
December 1 to March 1).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 392/649
E. Temporary Parking: Said items as set forth in subsection A of this section may be parked temporarily in
the residential driveway, if:
1. It is the property resident's second such item and it is being repaired and will not be on the property
longer than forty eight (48) hours; or
2. Said item is owned by a guest of the resident of the property, and is only to be parked on the
property no longer than fourteen (14) consecutive days at a time and a temporary parking permit as
set forth in subsection F of this section is approved.
F. Permit: It will be the responsibility of the resident of the property to obtain a temporary parking permit
from the village office for any nonresident.
G. Parking Restrictions For Motor Vehicles In Residence Districts:
1. On residential lots within the village of Minooka, the parking of motor vehicles is restricted to: a) the
residential driveway; b) fully enclosed building or structure; or c) the side yard or rear yard, so long
as the area where the motor vehicle is parked is open, impervious, and constructed of a hard
dustless material, such as concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, slate, or stamped concrete, with a
surface capable of supporting the weight of the vehicle, and otherwise complies with all of the
provisions of this code.
H. Penalty: Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every
day on which a violation continues or is permitted to exist. In addition, the village shall have all such
other rights and remedies as may be available to it at law or equity. (Ord. 2009-26, 6-23-2009)
5-3-11: SEWERAGE AND WATER SYSTEMS:
A. A lot that was not a lot of record on the effective date hereof which is to be used for a single-family
detached dwelling served with an individual sewerage disposal system shall have an area of not less
than one acre and a width of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') or a greater area or width if
required to conform with regulations contained in subsection B of this section.
B. Installation of individual sewage disposal systems and private wells or community sewerage and water
systems shall be in accordance with standards and specifications set forth in applicable laws of the
county, state and the village.
C. All buildings other than single-family detached dwellings located on lots less than one acre in area may
be served with individual sewage disposal systems and individual wells when on lots having areas and
widths conforming with minimum or greater lot area and lot width requirements for the districts where
such uses are located, provided:
1. Greater lot areas and widths shall be required when it is necessary to provide areas of adequate
size, that are not covered by buildings, structures and pavements, to conform with state and county
standards for installation of individual sewage disposal systems and individual wells; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 393/649
2. The board of trustees may require, in specific cases, that such uses shall be served with public or
community sewerage systems and/or water systems when it is found practical to make connections
with nearby public or community sewerage and/or water systems or to install such systems. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
5-3-12: FLOODPLAIN AREA:
The main floor shall have an elevation of not less than two feet six inches (2'6") above flood crest, with the
lowest point of the lowest window opening of the foundation to be not less than six inches (6") above flood
crest, or the distance above flood crest level that may be required by the building officer and inspector for
specific locations. (Code change, 1980)
5-3-13: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the
height limit herein established for the district in which the building is located, except that penthouses or
roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required
to operate and maintain the building and fire or parapet walls, skylight, towers, steeples, flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, radio and television aerials, wireless masts, water tanks, silos, storage hoppers,
elevators or similar structures may be erected above the height limits when recommended by the planning
commission and approved by the board of trustees. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-14: EXEMPTIONS:
The regulations of this title shall not be exercised so as to:
A. Deprive the owner of any existing property of its use or maintenance for the purpose to which it is
lawfully devoted at the time of enactment of this title or subsequent amendments thereto.
B. Impose regulations or require permits (except as herein outlined) with respect to land used or to be
used for agricultural purposes or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair, alteration,
remodeling or extension of buildings used or to be used for such agricultural purposes upon such land
except that such building for agricultural purposes may be required to conform to building or setback
lines.
C. Specify or regulate the type or location of poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or any other
similar distributing equipment of a public utility as defined in "an act concerning public utilities" enacted
by the general assembly of the state of Illinois. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-15: DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY:
A. Setbacks: All drive-through facilities adjoining residential property shall locate the drive-through lanes
(including the bypass lane and the required stacking space requirements) not less than forty feet (40')
from the residential property, measured as the distance between the residential property line and the
nearest curb of the drive-through lane(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 394/649
B. Bypass: A minimum of ten feet (10') shall be provided adjacent to the drive-through lane(s) in order for
vehicles to bypass the drive-through lane(s).
C. Drive-Through Lane And Stacking Space Requirements:
1. All drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide.
2. Drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall not cross off street parking areas or pedestrian
walkways.
3. All drive-through lanes shall be sized to hold at least the minimum stacking spaces required for
each use.
4. All drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall be separated from the site access (public street,
neighboring lots, etc.) and parking.
D. Minimum Standards For Stacking: There shall be provided for each building, structure and use
hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged with a drive-through lane, the minimum number of
stacking spaces as set forth in a traffic analysis, which shall be evaluated and approved by the village
engineer. (Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-2006)
Chapter 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
5-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and intent of this title, the village is hereby divided into the following
districts:
A Agricultural district
R1 Single-family detached residence district
R1A Single-family detached residence district
R2 Single-family detached residence district
R3 Single-family attached and multiple-family residence district
R4 Two-family (duplex) residence district
R4A Two-family (duplex) residence district
R5 Single-family attached residence district
R6 Multiple-family residence district
B1 Business district
B2 Commercial district
M1 Manufacturing district
M2 Manufacturing district
Lowland conservancy overlay district
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
5-4-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP; BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 395/649
A. Zoning District Map: The zoning districts and their boundaries are as shown upon the zoning district
map entitled "zoning district map, village of Minooka, Illinois", dated 1974, which map and all
amendments thereto and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby
incorporated into and made a part of this title, with the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this
title. The original zoning district map, properly attested to, shall be filed with the village clerk.
B. Boundaries Of Districts: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts
as shown on the zoning district map, the following rules apply:
1. District boundary lines are either: a) the centerlines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys,
easements or waterways; b) the boundary lines of sections, quarter sections and divisions of
sections; c) property lines of record on the effective date hereof for tracts and lots; or d) such lines
extended unless otherwise indicated.
2. Wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, and the
boundaries are not located as set forth in subsection B1 of this section, the depth of such strips shall
be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map measured at right angles from the centerlines
of the street or highway, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown
on the map from section, quarter section or division lines, or centerlines of streets, highways or
railroad rights of way unless otherwise indicated.
3. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the regulations for either portion of
the lot may, in the owner's discretion, extend to the entire lot, but not more than forty feet (40')
beyond the boundary line of the district. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
4. Questions concerning the exact locations of zoning district boundary lines shall be resolved by the
board of trustees after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning commission. (Ord.,
5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
5-4-3: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
On land hereafter annexed to the village, no structures shall be erected, enlarged or moved and no
change in use of land or existing structures shall be made until an amendment to this title designating the
zoning district classification of such annexed land is duly adopted by the board of trustees; provided, that
if no such ordinance has been so adopted within one hundred twenty (120) days after such land is
annexed, the annexed land shall be automatically classified as R1 single-family detached residence
district. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
Chapter 5
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
5-5-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations of the agriculture district are designed to regulate the use of land, buildings and structures
within the areas of the village where soil and topographic conditions are best adapted to the pursuit of
agriculture and utilization of other natural land resources, and preservation of land for further agricultural
uses. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 396/649
Permitted uses of the A agricultural district shall be as follows:
Agriculture, on a lot not less than twenty (20) acres in area. After the effective date hereof, the following
uses, either as a dominate or accessory use in the pursuit of agriculture, shall not be established, and
existing structures shall not hereafter be structurally altered or enlarged.
A. Commercial livestock feedlots located nearer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320')
from an existing dwelling or a residence district boundary line.
B. Land used for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish or offal.
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums, provided no buildings shall be located less than
three hundred thirty feet (330') from a lot line.
Churches, temples or synagogues.
Dog kennels, provided no buildings or structures are located less than one hundred feet (100') from a lot
line.
Energy plant water storage pond, including all fencing, pumps, aeration, and other mechanical equipment
related to the development and operation of the energy plant water storage pond, which is accessory to a
power plant or related energy use located within an M2 manufacturing district.
Golf courses, regulation size, but not including "par 3" golf courses, commercially operated driving ranges
or miniature golf courses; and provided, that no clubhouse or accessory building shall be located less
than two hundred feet (200') from a lot line.
Greenhouses, wholesale or retail.
Home occupations.
Hospitals, on a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area.
Milk depots.
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and operated.
Private recreational areas or camps, when not operated for profit.
Railroad rights of way and trackage.
Rest homes, nursing homes, sanitariums and institutions for children and the aged.
Schools, public or private, day or nursery, elementary, junior high and high.
Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious institutions.
Single-family detached dwelling on a lot not less than three (3) acres in area and two hundred thirty one
feet (231') in width.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction and when
located on the same lot where such construction is being undertaken or on a contiguous lot thereto.
Accessory uses. Uses, buildings and structures, accessory to agricultural uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 397/649
A. Those customarily accessory to the pursuit of agriculture; provided, that buildings and structures for
the shelter of farm animals set back no less than one hundred feet (100') from a property line.
B. Roadside stands for the sale of farm products grown and raised on the farmer's land, but not
including live animals, and provided that such stand shall contain not more than six hundred (600)
square feet of floor area. The stand, and items on sale, shall not be located nearer than fifty feet
(50') from a street or highway right of way line, except a temporary roadside stand may be within ten
feet (10') of a street or highway right of way line, provided the stand shall be at such location only
during the selling period. There shall be provided with each roadside stand facilities approved by the
building inspector for vehicular ingress and egress and adequate off street parking facilities for the
customers. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2006-10, 2-28-2006)
5-5-3: CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES1:
Airports, public or private, on a lot not less than five (5) acres in area.
Animal feed, storage, preparation, grinding and mixing; and fertilizer and seed sales, including bulk
storage and mixing; provided, no building or structure is located nearer than one thousand three hundred
twenty feet (1,320') from an existing dwelling or a residence district boundary line.
Community centers and fairgrounds for such uses as: agricultural fairs, exhibits conducted by rural and
agricultural organizations and other public or semipublic voluntary organizations; provided, that no
commercial race tracks shall be erected or operated. The operations of all uses shall conform with
performance standards set forth in this title for the M1 manufacturing district. The setback areas bordering
the property lines shall be landscaped and so maintained as permanent open areas but may contain
driveways, walks, fences and buildings or structures at entrances for admission controls.
Colleges, junior colleges and universities including fraternity and sorority houses, dormitories and other
accessory structures and facilities necessary to the operation of a college or university, on a lot not less
than ten (10) acres in area and provided no buildings, structures or use of land, including off street
parking and loading spaces shall be located nearer than one hundred feet (100') from a lot line.
General uses. Each of the conditional permitted uses hereunder shall be on a lot which is located no
nearer than five hundred feet (500') from a residence district boundary line. On such lots no building,
structure or use of land, including off street parking and loading spaces, but not including growing of farm
crops, floriculture or horticulture, shall be located nearer than one hundred feet (100') from a lot line
except as hereinafter set forth for excavations.
A. Landfills, public or private, including sanitary landfills and dry waste dumps; application for a
conditional use permit shall also include an agreement between the village and the operator of the
landfill, in the form approved by the state's attorney, binding the operator and his successors to
comply with scope and method of operation in accordance with standards and specifications set
forth therein. A bond, other security or guarantee in the form approved by the state's attorney and as
required by the board of trustees shall be filed with the village in the amount established by the
board of trustees to cover the estimated cost of improvements to the landfill area upon completion of
filling operations. The above mentioned bond shall not apply to a public body.
B. Mining, loading and hauling of coal, clay, sand, gravel, topsoil or other aggregate or minerals, and
oil or gas well drilling, including equipment, buildings or structures for screening, crushing, mixing,
washing or storage; provided, that 1) no excavation shall take place within forty feet (40') of any
property line fronting upon a public road or a greater distance if required by Illinois statutes; 2) the
entire property is fenced in by a stationary fence; 3) a plan of development for the reclamation of the
land is provided as part of the application for a conditional use permit; 4) buildings, structures,
equipment and operations for processing on the premises of material secured by such uses shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 398/649
allowed only when authorized by the board of trustees for a specified period of time, and provided
the operations shall conform with performance standards set forth in the M2 manufacturing district
measured at the lot line.
Grain storage when not accessory to the pursuit of agriculture.
Heliports, public or private, on a lot not less than one acre in area.
Marinas, including boat storage and incidental service facilities and clubhouses or recreation buildings, on
a lot not less than one acre in area.
Outdoor recreational areas, private, used for one of the following uses: equestrian sports, horse shows
and hunter trails; dog shows and field trials; hunt clubs and gun clubs; conservation clubs; archery
ranges; fishing ponds; swimming clubs and tennis clubs; picnic and camping grounds; and accessory
buildings, structures or uses such as off street parking and loading spaces, administration, maintenance
and clubhouse buildings, including sale of food and beverages, provided that such accessory buildings
and uses are located not less than two hundred feet (200') from a lot line.
Public service uses.
A. Filtration plant, pumping station, well and water reservoir.
B. Sewage treatment plant.
C. Police and fire stations.
D. Other governmental uses.
Resorts, privately owned and operated containing dwelling units and lodging rooms for guests and
employees of the resort; indoor recreation facilities for use only by guests of the resort and when located
in the principal building or a detached recreation building or clubhouse; and outdoor recreation facilities,
on a lot not less than twenty (20) acres in area and provided no building or structure is located less than
two hundred feet (200') from a lot line. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-4: LOT AREA:
The lot area requirement shall be not less than five (5) acres, except as otherwise regulated herein for a
specific permitted or conditional permitted use. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-5: LOT WIDTH:
The required lot width shall be not less than three hundred thirty feet (330') except as otherwise regulated
herein for a specific permitted or conditional permitted use. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-6: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.1. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-7: YARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 399/649
Except as may be herein otherwise required, yards shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Front Yard: Not less than fifty feet (50').
B. Side Yards: Not less than thirty feet (30') for an interior side yard and not less than fifty feet (50') for a
side yard adjoining a street.
C. Rear Yard: Not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-8: SIGNS:
Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-5-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
The off street parking and loading requirements shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in
chapter 9 of this title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 6
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
5-6-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations for residence districts are designed to conserve existing residential areas and to regulate
the efficient use and orderly development of vacant land designated for residential uses. It is essential
that areas be designated and regulations imposed for the various kinds of residential developments in
order that the village and other governing bodies can plan ahead for services, future schools, parks,
streets and utilities. (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
5-6-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Unless otherwise provided in the regulations of this title, the following provisions shall apply to all
residence districts: (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
A. Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
B. Home Occupations: In all residence districts, any customary home occupation shall be permitted,
provided:
1. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling and only by members of the family residing in the
dwelling, and when such home occupation is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 400/649
purpose.
2. It is not conducted from a detached or attached accessory building or does not require internal or
external alteration, or involve construction features or use of equipment not customary in a dwelling,
and the entrance to the space devoted to such occupation shall be from within the dwelling and not
more than one-fourth (1/4) of the floor area of a story (including also a cellar of the dwelling) shall be
devoted to such home occupation.
3. There is no display or activity that will indicate from the interior of a dwelling that is being used for
any use other than a dwelling, except one nameplate, no more than one square foot in area which
contains only the name of the occupant of the dwelling and the home occupation conducted therein
and is attached to the dwelling and not illuminated shall be permitted.
4. No mechanical equipment is used, except such as is customarily used for purely domestic or
household purposes.
5. Stock in trade, including that which is produced on the premises, shall not require receipt or delivery
of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than United States letter carrier mail, similar parcel
delivery service or by private passenger automobile.
6. A home occupation conducted by a professional person shall be only for consultation or
performance of religious rites, but not for the general practice of the professional.
C. Temporary Buildings: In all residence districts, temporary buildings for construction purposes are for a
period not to exceed such construction.
D. Accessory Uses: In all residence districts, accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a principal or conditional use may be permitted provided
that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the
permitted use and do not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry.
E. Off Street Parking And Loading: In all residence districts, off street parking and loading is permitted in
accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
5-6-3: R1 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
Accessory poultry husbandry, subject to the requirements of subsection 5-3-7B of this title.
Agriculture on a tract of land twenty (20) acres or more in area.
Public parks, forest preserves and public recreational areas.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
Cemeteries on a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area and provided no building shall be located less
than three hundred feet (300') from a lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 401/649
Churches, temples, synagogues or other places of religious worship on a lot not less than two (2)
acres in area.
Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto, provided on a lot not less than forty (40) acres in
size.
Golf courses, public or private, but not including par 3 courses, commercially operated driving ranges
or miniature golf courses; and provided that no clubhouse or accessory building shall be located less
than two hundred feet (200') from a property line.
Hospitals.
Planned unit developments.
Public libraries on lots having areas, widths, yards and other conditions as approved by the village
board.
Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas, widths, yards and other conditions
as approved by the village board, including, but not limited to:
Electrical substations and booster stations.
Filtration plant, pumping station, well and water reservoir.
Police and fire station.
Sewage treatment plant.
Telephone exchange and microwave relay tower.
Other government and utility uses.
Schools, public or private, elementary, junior high or high.
C. Site And Structure Requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Area:
Single-family detached dwelling 1 acre
Nonresidential uses, unless
otherwise specified
5 acres
2. Minimum Lot Width:
Single-family detached dwelling 150 feet
Nonresidential uses, unless
otherwise specified
300 feet
3. Minimum Lot Depth:
Single-family detached dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses 375 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 402/649
4. Yards: Except as may be herein otherwise required, yards shall be in accordance with the following
regulations:
Front Not less than 50 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 25 feet
Corner side Not less than 50 feet
Rear Not less than 50 feet
5. Building Height:
Single-family detached dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
6. Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not more than 0.25. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-
26-2003)
7. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Exclusive Of Basement And/Or Garage Area:
One-story dwelling Not less than 1,500 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 2,200 total square feet
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003)
5-6-4: R1A SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
Accessory poultry husbandry, subject to the requirements of subsection 5-3-7B of this title.
Public parks, forest preserves, and public recreational areas.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
As in the R1 district.
C. Site And Structure Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 403/649
1. Minimum lot area:
Single-family detached dwelling 12,500 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless
otherwise specified
5 acres
2. Minimum lot width:
Single-family detached dwelling 100 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
3. Minimum lot depth:
Single-family detached dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses 375 feet
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
4. Yards:
Front Not less than 35 feet
Side, except corner lots
Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side Not less than 25 feet
Rear Not less than 40 feet
(Ord. 2006-04, 1-24-2006)
5. Building height:
Single-family detached dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
6. Floor area ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not more than 0.25. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-
2003)
7. Minimum ground floor area per dwelling exclusive of basement and/or garage area:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 404/649
One-story dwelling Not less than 1,700 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 2,400 total square feet
(Ord. 2006-04, 1-24-2006)
5-6-5: R2 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
Accessory poultry husbandry, subject to the requirements of subsection 5-3-7B of this title.
Public parks, forest preserves, and public recreational areas.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
As in the R1 district.
C. Site And Structure Requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Area:
Single-family detached dwelling 10,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise
specified
5 acres
2. Minimum Lot Width:
Single-family detached dwelling 80 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
3. Minimum Lot Depth:
Single-family detached dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses 375 feet
4. Yards:
Front Not less than 30 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 405/649
Side, except corner lots
Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 40 feet
5. Building Height:
Single-family detached dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
6. Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not more than 0.25. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-
26-2003)
7. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Exclusive Of Basement And/Or Garage Area:
One-story dwelling Not less than 1,300 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 1,900 total square feet
(Ord. 2006-04, 1-24-2006)
5-6-6: R3 SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT:
There shall be no application for any zoning map amendment to the R3 zoning district after December 10,
1996. No land annexed into the village after December 10, 1996, shall be zoned for the R3 district.
A. Permitted Uses:
Any of the permitted uses in the R2 single-family residence district.
Multiple-family dwellings, provided that the minimum gross area of the development is one acre.
Single-family attached dwellings.
Single-family attached dwellings but not more than six (6) such dwellings in addition to the two (2)
single-family semidetached dwellings shall be contained within a detached building.
Two-family detached dwellings.
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
Any of the conditional permitted uses permitted in the R2 single-family residence district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 406/649
Mobile home parks on a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area, and each mobile home site shall have
a minimum area of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet and a width of not less than fifty
feet (50'). The mobile home park shall have front, side and rear yards having a depth or width of no
less than forty feet (40'), and containing no obstructions except trees and shrubs. Municipal type
sanitary sewerage, storm sewers and water systems; paved service drives, off street parking of no
less than one and one-half (11/2) spaces for each mobile home; grading and landscaping; building
containing recreational, laundry and office facilities; and other improvements shall be constructed in
accordance with the development plans and specifications approved by the planning and zoning
commission.
Tourist homes not having more than five (5) rooms for transient guests, on a lot not less than one acre
in area.
C. Lot Area Per Dwelling:
1. Single-family detached dwelling, not less than nine thousand six hundred (9,600) square feet.
2. Single-family semidetached dwelling, (duplex building), not less than five thousand five hundred
(5,500) square feet per dwelling unit.
3. Single-family semidetached dwelling having a party wall common with a single-family attached
dwelling, single-family attached dwelling and multiple-family dwelling as follows:
Type Of Dwelling Unit
Minimum Lot Area
Per Dwelling Unit
In Square Feet
4 bedroom and over 4,500
3 bedroom 3,500
2 bedroom 2,500
1 bedroom 2,000
4. Two-family detached dwellings, not less than eleven thousand (11,000) square feet.
5. Nonresidential uses, not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet unless otherwise specified.
6. All residential uses permitted in this district shall be served by public or community water and
sanitary sewer systems.
D. Lot Width:
1. Single-family detached dwelling, not less than eighty feet (80').
2. Two-family detached dwelling, not less than eighty feet (80').
3. Single-family semidetached dwelling (duplex building), not less than seventy feet (70') and not less
than thirty five feet (35') for each dwelling.
4. Two (2) single-family semidetached dwellings and one single-family attached dwelling (row house
building), not less than eighty eight feet (88'), plus not less than twenty feet (20') of additional lot
width for each additional single-family attached dwelling in a building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 407/649
5. Multiple-family dwelling, not less than one hundred feet (100').
E. Floor Area Ratio:
1. Single-family detached dwelling, not applicable.
2. Multiple-family dwelling and nonresidential uses:
a. For one-story structures, not more than 0.3; and
b. For structures having two (2) stories or more, not more than 0.5.
F. Building Height:
1. Single-family detached, attached and semidetached dwellings and permitted nonresidential
buildings and structures, as in the R1 district.
2. Two-family detached dwellings shall not exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty feet (30'),
whichever is lower.
3. All other dwelling types, not more than two (2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower.
G. Ground Floor Area Per Single-Family Dwelling: As in the R2 district.
H. Yards: Except as may be herein otherwise required, yards shall be in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. For Single-Family Detached Dwellings:
a. Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that in any block in the village which is
developed with buildings erected prior to the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the
building setback shall conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be
set back twenty five feet (25').
b. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than ten percent (10%) of the lot
width except where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum width shall be not less than twenty
five feet (25').
c. Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25').
2. For Two-Family Detached Dwellings:
a. Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that in any block in the village which is
developed with buildings erected prior to the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the
building setback shall conform to the adjacent setbacks and shall not be required to be set back
twenty five feet (25').
b. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than ten percent (10%) of the
lot, except where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum width shall be not less than twenty five
feet (25').
c. Rear Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
3. For Multiple-Family Dwellings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 408/649
a. Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that in any block in the village which is
developed with buildings erected prior to the adoption of these regulations having front yard, the
building setback shall conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be
set back twenty five feet (25').
b. Side Yards: Two (2) side yards each not less than twelve feet (12') in depth, except a side yard
adjoining a street shall not be less than twenty five feet (25') in depth and for structures more than
thirty feet (30') in length, measured perpendicular to the front lot line, an interior side yard shall be
increased in depth by one-half foot (1/2') for each foot the building exceeds thirty feet (30') in
length.
c. Rear Yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
4. For Single-Family Semidetached Dwellings:
a. Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that in any block in the village which is
developed with buildings erected prior to the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the
building setback shall conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be
set back twenty five feet (25').
b. Side Yards: One yard but not less than ten feet (10') in width, except a side yard adjoining a street
shall not be less than twenty five feet (25').
c. Rear Yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
5. For Single-Family Attached Dwellings;
a. Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that in any block in the village which is
developed with buildings erected prior to the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the
building setback shall conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be
set back twenty five feet (25').
b. Side Yards: Not applicable.
c. Rear Yards: Not less than forty feet (40').
I. Spacing Between Structures: When two (2) or more structures which contain single-family detached
dwellings, single-family attached dwellings, single-family semi-detached dwellings or two (2) or more
multiple-family dwelling structures, or combinations thereof are on a lot or on contiguous lots
comprising a unified development under the same ownership or control, the distance between the
structure walls shall be as follows:
1. When the front wall of a structure faces the front wall or rear wall of the nearest structure, the
distance between the two (2) structure walls shall be not less than sixty feet (60').
2. When the rear wall of a structure faces the rear wall of the nearest structure, the distance between
the two (2) structure walls shall be not less than fifty feet (50').
3. When the side wall of a structure faces the front or rear wall of the nearest structure, the distance
between the two (2) structure walls shall be not less than forty feet (40'), except when the side wall
contains more than two (2) windows on a floor that are not from bathrooms or storage rooms, such
distance between structures shall be not less than fifty feet (50'), or sixty feet (60') if a main entrance
doorway is in such side wall.
4. When the side wall of a structure faces the side wall of the nearest structure, the distance between
the two (2) structure walls shall be not less than twenty feet (20'), except when facing side walls of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 409/649
either of such structures contain more than two (2) windows on a floor that are not from bathrooms
or storage rooms, such distance between the two (2) structures shall be not less than fifty feet (50'),
or sixty feet (60') if a main entrance doorway is in such side wall.
5. A wall of a structure forming the end of a court shall be not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest
wall of a structure forming the sides of the court, and a structure forming the end of the court may be
attached to one or both of the structures forming the sides of the court, providing the distance
between facing walls of the structures forming the sides of the court is not less than the applicable
requirements as set forth above.
6. Where structures are not parallel to each other the required spacing shall be measured at the
midpoint of the distance along which they face each other, however, the spacing between the
structures at the narrowest point shall in no event be less than one-half (1/2) the required distance.
(Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
5-6-7: R4 TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
There shall be no application for any zoning map amendment to the R4 zoning district after August 26,
2003. No land annexed into the village after August 26, 2003, shall be zoned for the R4 district. (Ord.
2003-34, 8-26-2003)
A. Permitted Uses:
Public parks, forest preserves, and public recreational areas.
Two-family dwelling.
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
As in the R1 district.
C.Site And Structure Requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Area:
Two-family dwelling 12,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise
specified
5 acres
2. Minimum Lot Width:
Two-family dwelling 80 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
3. Yards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 410/649
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 30 feet
4. Building Height:
Two-family dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
5. Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not more than 0.25. (Ord. 1996-33, 12-
10-1996)
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement And/Or Garage Area: Not
less than one thousand (1,000) square feet for one-story dwellings and not less than seven hundred
twenty (720) square feet for dwellings greater than one-story. (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996; amd. Ord.
2003-41, 10-28-2003)
5-6-8: R4A TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
Public parks, forest preserves, and public recreational areas.
Two-family dwellings.
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
As in the R1 district.
C. Site And Structure Requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Area:
Two-family dwelling 15,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise
specified
5 acres
2. Minimum Lot Width:
Two-family dwelling 120 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 411/649
3. Minimum Lot Depth:
Two-family dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses 375 feet
4. Yards:
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 12 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 40 feet
5. Building Height:
Two-family dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
6. Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not more than 0.25. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-
26-2003)
7. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement And/Or Garage Area:
One-story dwelling Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 1,500 total square feet
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003)
5-6-9: R5 SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted independently or collectively in the R5 district
provided that they are planned so as to create a cohesive and unified development. All R5 residential
developments must be planned unit developments planned and approved in conformance with title 6,
chapter 7 of this code:
Single-family attached dwellings.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
The following uses are permitted in the R5 district as part of a planned unit development or may, if
they are the sole use of the property, be permitted without need of a planned unit development:
Public parks, forest preserves, and public recreational areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 412/649
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
As in the R1 district.
C. Site And Structure Requirements:
1. Minimum Total Lot Area:
Single-family detached 10,000 square feet
Two-family 15,000 square feet
Single-family attached 20,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise
specified
5 acres
2. Minimum Gross Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
Single-family detached 10,000 square feet
Two-family 7,500 square feet
Single-family attached 7,250 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise
specified
5 acres
3. Minimum Lot Width:
Single-family detached 80 feet
Two-family 120 feet
Single-family attached 120 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
4. Yards:
Single-family detached
dwelling:
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is
greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 40 feet
Two-family dwelling:
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 12 feet, whichever is
greater
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 413/649
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 40 feet
Single-family attached
dwelling:
Front Not less than 25 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 15 feet
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 30 feet
5. Building Height:
Residential dwellings Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
6. Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not more than 0.25.
7. Number Of Dwelling Units Per Structure: There shall be no more than six (6) dwelling units attached
in a single-family attached structure. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
8. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement And/Or Garage Area:
Single-family detached dwelling:
One-story Not less than 1,200 total square feet
Greater than one-story Not less than 1,800 total square feet
Two-family dwelling:
One-story Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story Not less than 1,500 total square feet
Single-family attached dwelling: Not less than 900 total square feet
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003)
5-6-10: R6 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted independently or collectively in the R6 district
provided that they are planned so as to create a cohesive and unified development. All R6 residential
developments must be planned unit developments planned and approved in conformance with title 6,
chapter 7 of this code:
Multiple-family dwellings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 414/649
Single-family attached dwellings.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
The following uses are permitted in the R6 district as part of a planned unit development or may, if
they are the sole use of the property, be permitted without need of a planned unit development:
Public parks, forest preserves, and public recreational areas. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997; amd. Ord.
2003-34, 8-26-2003)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
As in the R1 district.
C. Site And Structure Requirements:
1. Minimum Total Lot Area:
Single-family detached 9,600 square feet
Two-family 12,000 square feet
Single-family attached 20,000 square feet
Multiple-family 30,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise
specified
5 acres
2. Minimum Gross Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
Single-family detached 9,600 square feet
Two-family dwelling 6,000 square feet
Single-family attached 7,250 square feet
Multiple-family 3,750 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise
specified
5 acres
3. Minimum Lot Width:
Single-family detached 80 feet
Two-family 80 feet
Single-family attached 120 feet
Multiple-family 120 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
4. Yards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 415/649
Single-family:
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 30 feet
Two-family:
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 30 feet
Attached single-family:
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear Not less than 30 feet
Multiple-family:
Front Not less than 30 feet
Side Not less than 15 feet
Corner side Not less than 30 feet
Rear Not less than 30 feet
5. Building Height:
Single-family attached or detached,
two-family dwellings
Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Multiple-family dwellings Not more than 2 stories
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
6. Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not more than 0.25.
7. Number Of Dwelling Units Per Structure: There shall be no more than six (6) dwelling units attached
in a single-family attached structure and no more than eight (8) units in a multiple-family structure.
(Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996; amd. Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
8. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement And/Or Garage Area:
Single-family detached dwelling:
One-story Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story Not less than 1,800 total square feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 416/649
Two-family dwelling:
One-story Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story Not less than 1,440 total square feet
Single-family attached dwelling: Not less than 900 total square feet
Multiple-family dwelling: Not applicable
(Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003)
9. Spacing Between Buildings: When two (2) or more structures which contain attached single-family
or multiple-family dwellings, or combinations thereof, are on a lot or on contiguous lots comprising a
unified development under the same ownership or control, the distance between the exterior
structure walls shall be as follows:
a. When the front wall of a structure faces any wall of another structure, the distance between the
two (2) structure walls shall be not less than sixty feet (60').
b. When the rear wall of a structure faces the rear wall of the nearest structure, the distance
between the two (2) structure walls shall not be less than fifty feet (50').
c. When the side wall of a structure faces the side wall of the nearest structure, the distance
between the two (2) structure walls shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
d. Where structures are not parallel to each other, the required spacing shall be measured at the
midpoint of the distance along which they face each other; however, the spacing between the
structures at the narrowest point shall in no event be less than one-half (1/2) the required
distance. (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996; amd. Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
Chapter 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
5-7-1: PREAMBLE:
Business district regulations are intended to govern the locations and uses of a full range of business and
commercial establishments needed to serve the citizens of the village and its trade area. The regulations
of the various business districts are designed to provide for groupings of business and commercial
establishments that are compatible in scope of services and method of operations. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-7-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Unless otherwise provided in the regulations of this title, the following provisions shall apply to all
business districts:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 417/649
A. Dwelling Units: Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted on the ground floor level in any
business district except in a permitted hotel, motel or as a nonconforming use existing on the effective
date hereof. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
B. Enclosure Of Operations: All business servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings except:
1. Off street parking or off street loading;
2. Drive-in type of operations when conducted as a conditional permitted use in the B2 commercial
district;
3. Open sales and rental lots when operated as a use in the B2 commercial district; and
4. Truck and boat storage, building material storage, and landscaping materials such as landscaping
rocks and bulk wood chips for sale at greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries, when operated
as a use in the B2 commercial district. Provided, that the area for storage shall be completely
surrounded by a uniformly painted solid fence or wall not over eight feet (8') in height and no storage
shall project higher than the height of the fence or wall. (Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006)
C. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established for the
M1 manufacturing district; provided, that performance standards shall in every case be applied at the
boundaries of the lot on which any such activities take place.
D. Parking Limitations: Parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a permitted use shall be
limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity, except for pick up or delivery
services during normal business hours.
E. Scope Of Operations: All business establishments shall be retail trade or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers, and all goods produced on the premises shall be sold on the
premises where produced except for specific uses in the B2 commercial district where wholesale sales
or processing and fabricating are permitted. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-7-3: B1 BUSINESS DISTRICT:
The B1 business district regulations are designed to accommodate prime retail trade activities of the
village and environs significant thereto as designated by the official zoning map. Regulations provide for a
wide variety of related shopper type business establishments along with personal service and other
complementary uses. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
A. Permitted Uses:
Art and school supply stores.
Art galleries and antique shops.
Automobile accessory stores.
Bakeries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 418/649
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Book; stationery; and office supply stores.
Business machine sales and service.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Candy and ice cream stores.
Catalog sales stores and mail order service stores.
Catering establishments.
China and glassware stores.
Clothing stores.
Clubs or lodges, when located above the ground floor.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Currency exchange.
Department stores.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving stations, including self-service coin operated equipment.
Dry goods stores.
Flower and gift shops.
Fraternal, philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions, when located above the ground floor.
Frozen food stores, including locker rental in conjunction therewith.
Furniture stores, including upholstering when conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary
to the principal use.
Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
Garden supply store with no outdoor storage or display of merchandise.
Grocery stores, supermarkets, meat and fish markets and delicatessens.
Hardware stores, retail and wholesale.
Hobby shops.
Household appliance stores, including radio and television sales with incidental repair facilities.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies, slipcovers and other similar
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 419/649
articles when conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use.
Jewelry stores.
Laboratories, medical, dental or optical, when located above the first story or as accessory to a
principal use occupying the first story.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Libraries, public and private.
Liquor stores, package.
Loan offices.
Locksmith shops.
Magazine and news stores.
Medical and dental clinics.
Millinery shops.
Music stores - phonographs, phonograph records, sheet music, musical instrument sales and repair.
Newspaper offices, including printing.
Newsstands.
Offices, professional or business.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Pawnshops.
Pet service, domestic (no overnight boarding).
Photography studios, including developing and printing of photographs when conducted on the
premises as part of the retail business.
Picture framing.
Post offices.
Radio and television broadcasting studios.
Restaurants, including entertainment, dancing and serving of alcoholic beverages.
Shoe and hat repair stores.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Tailor shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 420/649
Taverns.
Telephone booths, outdoor.
Theaters.
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Travel bureaus and ticket offices.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
Vending machines.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, including, but not limited to, off
street parking, off street loading and business signs as herein regulated and dwelling units or lodging
rooms when above the first story. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2009-19, 5-12-2009)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses1:
Other uses similar to permitted uses in this district.
Animal hospitals, on a lot not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
Automobile sales establishments for only authorized new passenger automobile sales agencies and
accessory open sales lots and public garages, provided vehicular access to open sales lots and public
garages is from an alley or service drive at the rear lot line.
Automobile service stations, on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area.
Bakeries, including sale of bakery products to restaurants, clubs, hotels, institutions and similar
establishments.
Battery and tire sales and service establishments.
Catering establishments, when located above the ground floor or not less than fifty feet (50') from the
front lot line on the ground floor.
Daycare center.
Drive-in establishments, except theaters.
Drive-through facilities.
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, provided that not more than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of floor area shall be devoted to dry cleaning, pressing or laundering processes
other than self-service coin operated facilities.
Garages, storage or off street parking lots or structures, commercial or governmental.
Laboratories, medical, dental, optical.
Medical cannabis cultivation center, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis cultivation center
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 421/649
operates in strict conformance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act2,
as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; and 2) the medical cannabis cultivation
center is not located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of a preexisting
public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group
daycare home, part day childcare facility; public park; church or other place of worship; or an area
zoned for residential use or designated for residential use on the Village's comprehensive plan.
Medical cannabis dispensing organization, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis dispensing
organization operates in strict conformance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act3, as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 2) the medical cannabis
dispensing organization is not located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of a
preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare
home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility; public park; or church or other place of worship;
and 3) drive-throughs are prohibited.
Meeting halls.
Nursery school.
Pet service, domestic and overnight boarding services.
Pet shops.
Plumbing, electrical or heating, fixture and equipment - sales, service and repair establishments.
Printing, publishing or lithography establishments, maximum gross floor area of six thousand (6,000)
square feet.
Restricted production and repair, limited to the following: needlework; clothing, such as custom
manufacturing and alterations; jewelry from precious metals; watches, dentures and optical lenses.
Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dancing, business, commercial or
technical subjects when operations do not involve danger of fire and explosion, and objectionable
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat or other similar influences.
Self-service car washes, coin operated, on a lot not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in
area. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1986-8, 7-14-1986; Ord. 1988-20, 12-12-1988; Ord. 2005-41, 9-13-
2005; Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-2006; Ord. 2009-19, 5-12-2009; Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014; Ord. 2018-26, 8-
28-2018)
C. Lot Area: Minimum lot area shall be in accordance with bulk and off street parking and loading
requirements of the district and as specifically required for a conditional permitted use.
D. Yards:
1. Front yard: No yard requirements.
2. Side yards: No yard requirements, except if a yard is provided, it shall not be less than five feet (5')
in width, except where the side lot line adjoins a residence district a side yard not less than ten feet
(10') in width shall be provided, and be maintained as a landscaped area.
3. Rear yard: No yard requirement, except where the rear lot line adjoins a residence district, a rear
yard not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth shall be provided, and be maintained as a
landscaped area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 422/649
E. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.0.
F. Building Height: No height limitations. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
G. Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
H. Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-7-4: B2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
The B2 Commercial District classification is established to accommodate a wide range of specialized
commercial uses including highway oriented service and commercial types of establishments to serve the
needs of the motorists. In addition, those shopper and personal service types of business establishments
permitted in the B1 District are also permitted uses in the B2 Commercial District. The B2 Commercial
Districts may be located adjacent to the B1 Business Districts to form a complete business center, or may
be commercial areas consisting entirely of specialized commercial activities.
A. Permitted Uses:
Uses permitted in the B1 District.
Amusement establishments - bowling alleys, billiard parlors, gymnasiums, swimming pools and clubs
and recreation centers containing one or more of the above uses and other recreation uses as
approved by the Board of Trustees.
Auction rooms.
Automobile and truck sales establishments.
Automobile service stations.
Bakeries, including sale of bakery products to restaurants, clubs, hotels, institutions and similar
establishments.
Battery and tire sales and service establishments.
Boat sales, rentals, storage and repair including sales and service of marine motors, boat parts and
accessories and boat fuels.
Building material sales with outdoor storage.
Catering establishments.
Clubs or lodges, private, fraternal or religious.
Contractors' offices and shops.
Drive-in establishments, except theaters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 423/649
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, provided that not more than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of floor area shall be devoted to dry cleaning, pressing or laundering processes
other than self-service coin operated facilities.
Feed fertilizer and seed stores.
Fraternal, philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions.
Frozen food lockers.
Fruit and vegetable stands.
Fuel and ice retail sales establishments with no outside storage and liquid fuels are stored in
underground tanks.
Garages, including painting, body and fender work and motor rebuilding.
Greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries, retail and wholesale sales.
Highway maintenance shops and yards.
Laboratories, medical, dental, optical.
Linen, towel or diaper service establishments.
Live bait stores.
Machine, sheet metal or welding shops; provided, a building for such a use shall contain not more than
five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area, and operations are within the enclosed building, and
glare from welding operations is not visible from outside the building.
Machinery and equipment sales establishments, construction and agriculture.
Mail order houses, order and service centers.
Meat markets, including sale of meats to restaurants, clubs, hotels, institutions and similar
establishments.
Medical and dental clinics.
Meeting halls, convention or exhibition halls.
Mobile homes and trailer sales establishments.
Model homes or garage display and sales.
Monument sales.
Motels and hotels.
Newspaper distribution agencies, for home delivery and retail trade.
Newspaper offices, including printing.
Open sales lots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 424/649
Packing and crating establishments.
Parcel delivery stations.
Parks, athletic fields, stadiums, arenas or recreation buildings.
Pet service, domestic (no overnight boarding).
Pet shops.
Plumbing, electrical or heating, fixture and equipment - sales, service and repair establishments.
Printing, publishing or lithography establishments, maximum gross floor area of six thousand (6,000)
square feet.
Public utility and governmental service uses.
Radio and television stations and towers, transmitting and receiving.
Religious institutions - churches, chapels, temples and synagogues, convents, monasteries and
theological schools.
Research laboratories.
Restaurants, including entertainment, dancing and serving of alcoholic beverages.
Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dancing, business, commercial or
technical subjects when operations do not involve danger of fire and explosion, and objectionable
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat or other similar influences.
Self-service stores, coin operated vending machines.
Taverns.
Taxidermists.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the duration of construction.
Training centers, engineering or sales.
Wholesale and warehouse establishments, except for the sales or storage of flammable liquids,
materials or gases, except those that are in the original sealed containers.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses including, but not limited to, off
street parking, off street loading and signs as herein regulated and dwelling units or lodging rooms
customarily accessory to religious institutional uses and clubs and lodges. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord.
2006-44, 11-28-2006; Ord. 2018-26, 8-28-2018)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses4:
Other uses similar to the above permitted uses.
Amusement establishments, outdoor - par 3, miniature or pitch and putt golf courses, golf driving
ranges and similar recreation facilities, on a lot not less than one acre in area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 425/649
Animal hospitals, on a lot not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
Automobile laundries, on a lot not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
Cartage, express and parcel delivery establishments, not including motor freight terminals, on a lot not
less than one acre in area.
Daycare center.
Drive-through facilities.
Medical cannabis cultivation center, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis cultivation center
operates in strict conformance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act5,
as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; and 2) the medical cannabis cultivation
center is not located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of a preexisting
public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group
daycare home, part day childcare facility; public park; church or other place of worship; or an area
zoned for residential use or designated for residential use on the Village's comprehensive plan.
Medical cannabis dispensing organization, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis dispensing
organization operates in strict conformance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act6, as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 2) the medical cannabis
dispensing organization is not located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of a
preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare
home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility; public park; or church or other place of worship;
and 3) drive-throughs are prohibited.
Nursery school.
Pet service, domestic and overnight boarding services.
Radio and television towers, receiving or transmitting.
Railroad rights-of-way.
Rebound tumbling (trampoline) centers and go-kart tracks.
Single-family dwellings when designed as an integral part of a building, the principal use of which is a
permitted or conditional permitted use, and when occupied by the proprietor of such use.
Theaters, outdoor, provided that vehicular entrance and exit driveways intersect with a secondary or
primary thoroughfare and traffic signal lights or other means of traffic control are provided. Reservoir
parking spaces for temporary parking of automobiles of patrons awaiting entrance shall be provided on
the lot, in the amount of not less than the number of parking spaces equivalent to ten percent (10%) of
the vehicular capacity of the theater. No building or structure shall be located nearer than one hundred
feet (100') from a residence district boundary line. Artificial illumination shall be arranged in such a
manner that direct rays of light shall not beam upon adjoining properties and streets.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above conditional permitted uses including, but not
limited to, off street parking, off street loading and signs as herein regulated. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd.
Ord. 2005-41, 9-13-2005; Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-2006; Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014; Ord. 2018-26, 8-28-
2018)
C. Lot Area And Lot Width: Except as may herein otherwise be required for a specific permitted or
conditional permitted use, not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area and one hundred
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 426/649
feet (100') in width. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
D. Yards: No yards are required unless the lot abuts a residential district, and then the following shall
apply:
1. Front Yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
2. Side Yard: Two (2) side yards, neither of which is less than ten feet (10') in width, except: a) a side
yard adjoining or across the alley from a residence district shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in
width; and b) a side yard adjoining a street shall be not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
3. Rear Yard: Not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. 1997 Code)
E. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.0. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
F. Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
G. Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 8
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
5-8-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations for manufacturing districts are designed to provide for the establishment of a full range of
industrial and allied activities and to govern their operations in a manner that will not have a deleterious
effect on agricultural, residential and business areas. It is essential that there are adequate provisions for
the expansion of industry, both those existing today and for attracting a diversification of new industry.
Adequate industrial sites and industrial expansion will create growth and development of the village's
economic and tax base and provide a variety of employment for its labor force. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-8-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Prohibited Uses: No activities involving the manufacture of materials or products which decompose by
detonation shall be permitted in the M1 and M2 districts. Such materials shall include, but shall not be
limited to, all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all high
explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and components thereof such
as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and
fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives
such as dynamite and nitroglycerin; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles and
ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates and
hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 427/649
B. Operations Within Enclosed Buildings, Outdoor Storage And Screening:
1. M1 Manufacturing District: All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
assembling, disassembling, repairing, cleaning, servicing and testing of materials, products and
goods shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Truck and boat storage, fuel and ice
storage, the overnight parking of commercial vehicles, building material storage, and landscaping
materials such as landscaping rocks and bulk wood chips for sale at greenhouses, garden centers
and nurseries, when operated as a use in the M1 manufacturing district, shall be screened as
provided in subsection B3 of this section.
2. M2 Manufacturing District: Within five hundred feet (500') of any residence district, all activities
involving the manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling, disassembling, repairing, cleaning,
servicing and testing of materials, products and goods shall be within completely enclosed buildings,
or if outdoors, effectively screened as provided in subsection B3 of this section. Truck and boat
storage, fuel and ice storage, the overnight parking of commercial vehicles, the dock areas of all air,
rail or motor truck freight terminals, cartage facilities, railroad switching and classification yards,
repair shops and roundhouses, building material storage, and landscaping materials such as
landscaping rocks and bulk wood chips for sale at greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries,
when operated as a use in the M2 manufacturing district, shall be screened as provided in
subsection B3 of this section.
3. Screening: The area for permitted overnight outdoor storage and permitted outdoor activities, in the
M1 manufacturing district as provided in subsection B1 of this section and in the M2 manufacturing
district as provided in subsection B2 of this section, shall be screened by either or both of the
following methods:
a. A wall extending from and immediately adjacent to the primary building of sufficient height and
width sufficient to screen by an opacity of one hundred percent (100%) constructed:
(1) Of the same material of the exterior building facade facing the public street if the exterior
building facade is constructed of masonry or tilt-up concrete panels; or
(2) Of masonry or tilt-up concrete panels if the exterior building facade is not constructed of
masonry or tilt-up concrete panels.
b. A height not less than eight feet (8') and an opacity of not less than seventy five percent (75%)
using any one or a combination of the following methods:
(1) Trees having a combination of sixty percent (60%) evergreen and overstory trees with fences
having structural components though which only twenty five percent (25%) of the storage area
is visible on a year round basis;
(2) Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed to a height where only twenty five percent
(25%) of the storage area is visible; or
(3) Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed having a width or design where only
twenty five percent (25%) of the remaining horizontal storage area is visible. (Ord. 2006-44, 11-
28-2006)
C. Performance Standards: Any use established in the manufacturing districts after the effective date
hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing:
1. Noise
2. Vibration
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 428/649
3. Smoke and particulate matter
4. Toxic matter
5. Odorous matter
6. Fire and explosive hazards
7. Glare
8. Radiation hazards
as set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located.
Uses already established on the effective date hereof shall be permitted to be altered, enlarged,
expanded or modified, provided that the additions or changes comply with said performance
standards. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
1. Noise: The definitions and measurement procedures of 35 Illinois administrative code, titled
"environmental protection", subtitle H, titled "noise", chapter 1, titled "pollution control board", parts
900, titled "general provisions", 901, titled "sound emission standards and limitations for property
line noise sources", and 910, titled "measurement procedures for the enforcement of 35 Illinois
administrative code 900 and 901" are adopted in full and incorporated, and as such may be
subsequently amended, and such provisions will be incorporated in this section in their entirety.
(Ord. 2013-30, 11-26-2013)
2. Vibration: In all manufacturing districts, no activity or operation shall cause or create earthborn
vibrations in excess of the displacement values given below.
Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest residence district
boundary line, as described below. Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument or
complement of instruments capable of simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular
directions. The maximum vector resultant shall be less than the vibration displacement permitted.
The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined in each district by the following formula:
D = K
f
where D = Displacement in inches
K = A constant to be determined by reference to the tables below.
f = The frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground, cycles per second.
a. M1 Manufacturing District: The maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described in
the following table shall be determined by use of the formula in this subsection C2 and the
appropriate K constant shown in table 1 of this section.
TABLE 1
VALUES OF K TO BE USED IN VIBRATION FORMULA
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 429/649
Location K
In any neighboring lot:
Continuous 0.008
Impulsive 0.015
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period 0.037
In any residence district:
Continuous 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period 0.015
b. M2 Manufacturing District: The maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described
below shall be determined by use of the formula in subsection C2 and the appropriate K constant
shown in Table 2.
Table 2
Values of K to be Used in Vibration Formula
Location K
In any neighboring lot
Continuous 0.030
Impulsive 0.060
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.150
In any residence district
Continuous 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.015
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 430/649
3. Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or
quantity as to endanger or be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall not be permitted in the manufacturing districts.
For the purpose of grading the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart
described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888 shall be employed. The emission of
smoke or particulate matter of a density or equivalent opacity greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann
Chart is prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided hereinafter.
Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards,
roads and the like within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
paving, oiling, fencing, wetting or other acceptable means.
The open burning of refuse, paint, oil, debris and any other combustible material is prohibited in all
manufacturing districts.
No operation shall cause or allow to be emitted into the open air from any process or control
equipment or to pass any convenient measuring point in a breaching or stack, particulate matter in
the gases that exceeds six-tenths (0.60) pounds per thousand pounds of gases during any one
hour.
Particulate matter loadings in pounds per acre described below shall be determined by selecting a
continuous four (4) hour period which will result in the highest average emission rate.
a. M1 Manufacturing District: The emission of smoke having a density or equivalent opacity in
excess of Ringelmann No. 1 is prohibited. However, for two (2) minutes in any four (4) hour
period, smoke up to and including Ringelmann No. 2 shall be permitted.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all vents and stacks within the boundaries of any
lot shall not exceed five-tenths (0.5) of a pound per acre of lot area per hour.
b. M2 Manufacturing District: The emission of smoke having a density or equivalent opacity in
excess of Ringelmann No. 2 is prohibited. However, for two (2) minutes in any four (4) hour
period, smoke up to and including Ringelmann No. 3 shall be permitted.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all stacks and vents within the boundaries of any
lot shall not exceed three (3) pounds per acre of lot area per hour.
4. Toxic Matter:
M1 And M2 Manufacturing Districts: The release of airborne toxic matter (including radioactive
matter) shall not exceed one-thirtieth (1/30) of the maximum permissible concentration allowed an
industrial worker when measured by any point beyond the lot line, either at ground level or habitable
elevation, whichever is more restrictive. Concentrations shall be measured and calculated as the
highest average that will occur over a continuous twenty four (24) hour period.
If a toxic substance is not contained in the most recent listing of threshold limit values published by
the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, the applicant shall satisfy the
Grundy County Health Department that the proposed levels will be safe and not detrimental to the
public health or injurious to plant and animal life.
5. Odorous Matter: The release of materials capable of becoming odorous, either by bacterial
decomposition or chemical reaction, shall meet the standards of the district in which the odor is
created.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 431/649
a. M1 Manufacturing District: When odorous matter is released from any operation, activity or use in
the M1 Manufacturing District, the concentration of such odorous materials shall not exceed the
odor threshold when measured beyond the lot line, either at ground level or habitable elevation.
b. M2 Manufacturing District: When odorous matter is released from any operation, activity or use in
the M2 District, the concentration of such odorous materials shall not exceed the odor threshold
when measured beyond the M2 District boundary line.
6. Fire And Explosion Hazards: All flammable solid, liquid and gaseous substances shall be
manufactured, stored and utilized in accordance with all applicable codes.
In all manufacturing districts the storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
In the M1 and M2 Manufacturing Districts, the storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials
or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted, provided either of the
following conditions is met:
Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed
buildings having no less than two (2) hour fire resistant exterior walls and protected with an
automatic fire extinguishing system, or
Said material, if stored outdoors, will be no less than fifty feet (50') to the nearest lot line.
a. M1 Manufacturing District: The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids shall be
permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in
original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted. Flammable liquid and gas storage tanks
shall not be less than fifty feet (50') from all lot lines.
Total Capacity Of Flammable Materials Permitted
(In Gallons)
Above Ground Within
Enclosed Building
Underground
Materials having a closed
cup flash point over 187°F
but less than 300°F
20,000
100,000
From and including 105°F
to and including 187°F
10,000
100,000
Materials having a closed
cup flash point of less
than 105°F
3,000
100,000
When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in
cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed
above.
b. M2 Manufacturing District: The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids shall be
permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in
original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted. Flammable liquid and gas storage tanks
shall not be less than fifty feet (50') from all lot lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 432/649
Total Capacity Of Flammable Materials Permitted
(In Gallons)
Industries Engaged in Storage for Resale Above Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash
point over 200°F but less than 350°F
400,000
From and including 105°F to and
including 200°F
200,000
Materials having a closed cup flash
point of less than 105°F
100,000
Total 700,000
Industries Engaged in Utilization and
Manufacture of Flammable Materials
Where Storage is an Ancillary Use
Above Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash
point over 200°F but less than 350°F
200,000
From and including 105°F to and
including 200°F
100,000
Materials having a closed cup flash
point of less than 105°F
50,000
Total 350,000
The quantity of flammable liquids or materials stored below ground shall be unrestricted.
When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in
cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed
above.
7. Glare: Any operation or activity producing glare shall be conducted so that direct and indirect
illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2) footcandle
when measured in a residence district.
Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded so as not to cause a nuisance
across lot lines.
When street lighting produces illumination in excess of one foot candle at any point in a residence
district, the contribution by light sources from within any of the manufacturing districts measured at
the same point shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the street lighting.
8. Radiation Hazards:
a. Release Outside Property Lines: In all manufacturing districts, the release of radioactive materials
or the emission of ionizing radiation outside of property lines shall be in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the State of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 433/649
b. Unsealed Radioactive Materials: In all manufacturing districts, unsealed radioactive materials
shall not be manufactured, utilized or stored (except when such materials are stored in a fireproof
container at or below ground level) in excess of the following multiples of the quantities set forth in
Table 3 of this Section.
Table 3
QUANTITIES OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS
Radioactive Material
Unsealed,
Curies
Antimony (Sb124) 1
Arsenic 76 (As76) 10
Arsenic 77 (As77) 10
Barium-lanthanum 140 (BaLa140) 1
Beryllium (Be7) 50
Cadmium-silver 109 (CdAg109) 10
Calcium 45 (Ca45) 10
Carbon 14 (C14) 50
Cerium-praseodymium 144 (CePr144) 1
Cesium-barium 137 (CsBa137) 1
Chlorine 36 (Cl36) 1
Chromium 51 (Cr51) 50
Cobalt 60 (Co60) 1
Copper 64 (Cu64) 50
Europium 154 (Eu154) 1
Fluorine 18 (F18) 50
Gallium 72 (Ga72) 10
Germanium 71 (Ge71) 50
Gold 198 (Au198) 10
Gold 199 (Au199) 10
250
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 434/649
Hydrogen 3 (tritium) (H3)
Indium 114 (In114) 1
Iodine 131 (I131) 10
Iridium 192 (Ir192) 10
Iron 55 (Fe55) 50
Iron 59 (Fe59) 1
Lanthanum 140 (La140) 10
Manganese 52 (Mn52) 1
Manganese 56 (Mn56) 50
Molybdenum 99 (Mo99) 10
Nickel 59 (Ni59) 1
Nickel 63 (Ni63) 1
Niobium 95 (Nb95) 10
Palladium 109 (Pd109) 10
Palladium-rhodium 103 (PdRh103) 50
Phosphorus 32 (P32) 10
Polonium 210 (Po210) 0.1
Potassium 42 (K42) 10
Praseodymium 143 (Pr143) 10
Promethium 147 (Pm147) 10
Radium 226 (Ra226) 0.1
Rhenium 186 (Re186) 10
Rhodium 105 (Rh105) 10
Rubidium 86 (Rb86) 10
Ruthenium-rhodium 106 (RuRh106) 1
Samarium 153 (Sm153) 10
Scandium 46 (Sc46) 1
Silver 105 (Ag105) 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 435/649
Silver 111 (Ag111) 10
Sodium 22 (Na22) 10
Sodium 24 (Na24) 10
Strontium 89 (Sr89) 1
Strontium-yttrium 90 (SrY90) 0.1
Sulfur 35 (S35) 50
Tantalum 182 (Ta182) 10
Technetium 96 (Tc96) 1
Technetium 99 (Tc99) 1
Tellurium 127 (Te127) 10
Tellurium 129 (Te129) 1
Thallium 204 (Tl204) 50
Tin 113 (Sn113) 10
Tungsten 185 (W185) 10
Vanadium 48 (V48) 1
Yttrium 90 (Y90) 1
Yttrium 91 (Y91) 1
Zinc 65 (Zn65) 10
Beta and/or gamma emitting radioactive
material not listed above
1
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-8-3: M1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
Any establishment the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling,
disassembling, repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing and storing of materials, products and goods,
provided operations conform with the performance standards and other general requirements
applicable to an M1 District.
Agriculture.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 436/649
Building material sales and storage, including milling, planing, jointing or manufacture of millwork.
Contractors' offices and shops.
Dwelling units for watchmen and operating personnel and their families when the nature of
operations require such personnel to reside on the premises where they are employed.
Fuel and ice retail sales and storage.
Greenhouses, including retail and wholesale sales of plants and produce.
Monument establishments, including accessory open sales lots.
Offices.
Parking lots and storage garages.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Public open space.
Public utility, governmental service and similar uses as follows:
Bus transit facilities, including shelters, passenger stations parking areas, and service buildings.
Compressor stations, well head stations, well separators and other similar above-the-ground
facilities customarily used for the distribution of natural gas as a part of the operations of a natural
gas company or nonexempt operations of a public utility company.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Gas regulator stations.
Public utility and governmental service establishments, other, including offices, storing, testing,
repairing and servicing.
Radio and television towers (no limit on height of towers).
Railroad rights of way and passenger stations.
Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers and telephone transmission equipment and other
such service buildings (no limit on height of towers).
Water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs; sewage treatment plants and lift stations,
public or community.
Research laboratories.
Schools, commercial or trade.
Training centers, engineering or sales.
Wholesale establishments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 437/649
Accessory uses to the above permitted uses. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses1:
Airports, public and private on a lot not less than five (5) acres in area.
Heliports, public and private on a lot not less than one acre in area.
Medical cannabis cultivation center, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis cultivation center
operates in strict conformance with the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act2, as
amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; and 2) the medical cannabis cultivation center
is not located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of a preexisting public
or private preschool or elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group daycare
home, part day childcare facility; public park; church or other place of worship; or an area zoned for
residential use or designated for residential use on the village's comprehensive plan.
Medical cannabis dispensing organization, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis dispensing
organization operates in strict conformance with the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot
program act3, as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 2) the medical cannabis
dispensing organization is not located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of a
preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare
home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility; public park; or church or other place of worship;
and 3) drive-throughs are prohibited.
Telecommunication facilities and towers. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014; Ord. 2015-
17, 6-23-2015)
C. Lot Coverage: Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 0.6.
Impervious service ratio: Not to exceed 0.7. (Ord. 2006-38, 10-10-2006)
D. Yards: Except as required herein under regulations along residence district boundary lines, and
applicable M1 district performance standards, yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
1. Front Yard: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
2. Side Yards: a) Not less than forty feet (40') wide when adjoining a street or residence district; b) not
less than fifteen feet (15') wide when adjoining an interior lot line.
3. Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth, except when adjoining a railroad right of
way, the rear yard may be measured from the centerline of the railroad right of way, and except
when adjoining a residence district, the rear yard shall be not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
4. Yard Requirements For Existing Buildings Or Structures: Where manufacturing buildings or
structures existing on the effective date hereof have yards of less dimension than those required
herein, any expansion of said buildings or structures shall, in lieu of the above requirements, be
required to provide yards having a minimum depth or width equal to those provided by said buildings
or structures on the effective date hereof; provided, that the yard so affected does not adjoin a
residence district boundary line. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 438/649
E. Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
F. Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-8-4: M2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
Air, rail or motor truck freight terminals, cartage facilities, railroad switching and classification yards,
repair shops and roundhouses.
All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling, disassembling,
repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing and storing of materials, products and goods, provided
operations conform with the performance standards and other general requirements of this chapter
applicable to the M2 district.
Any use permitted in the M1 district. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
B. Conditional Permitted Uses:
Any use allowed as a conditional permitted use in the M1 district.
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics, on a lot not less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet
in area.
Automobile wrecking yards and junkyards, providing they are screened by a solid wall or uniformly
painted solid fence at least eight feet (8') high.
Cargo container facilities, for both temporary and permanent uses, contingent upon the approval of a
site plan and provided that: 1) the cargo container facility shall not be adjacent to any residential
district expressway or main arterial road; 2) the storage of the cargo containers shall have a minimum
setback distance of one hundred feet (100'), a minimum side setback distance of thirty feet (30') and a
minimum rear setback distance of forty feet (40') from the property lines; 3) the area for the storage of
such containers shall be limited to less than thirty five percent (35%) of the buildable area of the site;
4) screening in the form of a berm with a minimum height of six feet (6') and fencing (100 percent
opaque) with a minimum height of eight feet (8'), sufficient to shield the containers from the view of the
surrounding properties shall be used and continuously maintained on the property; and 5) the
containers shall be stored horizontally and not stacked greater than two (2) containers in height. Single
or multiple cargo containers, temporarily and/or permanently, shall not be used for any purpose within
any residential or business district.
Mining, loading and hauling of coal, clay, sand, gravel, topsoil or other aggregate or minerals, and oil
or gas well drilling, including equipment, buildings or structures for screening, crushing, mixing,
washing or storage; provided, that: 1) no excavation shall take place within forty feet (40') of any
property line; 2) all buildings or structures, for the screening, crushing, washing, mixing or storage are
located not less than five hundred feet (500') from an existing residence or any residence district
established by this title; 3) all property lines adjoining other districts except other manufacturing
districts shall be provided with a stationary fence; 4) a plan of development for the reclamation of the
land is provided as part of the application for a conditional use permit; 5) buildings, structures,
equipment and operations for processing on the premises of material secured by such uses shall be
allowed only when authorized by the board of trustees and provided the operations shall conform with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 439/649
performance standards set forth in the M2 manufacturing district.
Storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors
or gases exceeding the total capacity permitted in the M2 district.
Tattoo and/or body piercing parlor; provided that each tattoo and/or body piercing parlor shall conform
with all regulations of the applicable county health department, but at the minimum: 1) maintain
records, including, at the minimum, the name, date of birth, address, and signature for each patron,
which shall be available for examination by the village, and the Will, Grundy, or Kendall health
department, whichever is applicable, for a period of not less than two (2) years; 2) construct the
interior walls, floor and ceilings in which tattooing and/or body piercing is done of an impervious,
smooth and washable surface of not less than five hundred (500) square feet; 3) utilize sterile single
use needles and sterile instruments, and shall not reuse tattoo ink; 4) utilize closed cabinets and/or
covered containers for the storage of clean linens, towels, needles, and other materials, instruments
and equipment, and closed cabinets and/or covered containers for all used linens, towels, needles,
materials, instruments and equipment, separate from the clean storage areas; 5) comply with the
department of labor's occupational safety and health administration regulations, with respect to
occupational exposure to blood, blood borne pathogens, or other potentially infectious materials; 6)
shall comply with all state and county health requirements; and 7) allow for periodic inspections by the
applicable health department. Furthermore, no person shall operate or cause to be operated a tattoo
and/or body piercing parlor within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundary of a preexisting:
1. Public or private elementary or secondary school; or
2. Licensed daycare center; or
3. Cemetery; or
4. Public park; or
5. Public housing; or
6. Place of religious worship; or
7. Residential zoning district; or
8. Other tattoo and/or body piercing parlor.
For the purpose of this use, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part
of the premises where the tattoo and/or body piercing parlor business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the other specified use.
Telecommunication facilities and towers. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1991-2, 4-9-1991; Ord. 2003-
26, 5-27-2003; Ord. 2006-01, 1-10-2006; Ord. 2015-17, 6-23-2015)
C. Lot Coverage: Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 0.65.
Impervious surface ratio: Not to exceed 0.8. (Ord. 2006-38, 10-10-2006)
D. Yards: As in the M1 district. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
E. Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 440/649
F. Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 9
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5-9-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The off-street parking and off-street loading provisions of this Title shall apply as follows:
A. Accessory off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as required by the
regulations of this Chapter for all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established in
each district after the effective date hereof.
B. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased through the addition
of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement in the amount
specified herein requiring parking or loading facilities, such additional parking and loading facilities as
required herein shall be provided.
C. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking
or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or
structure was erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional parking or loading facilities are
mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the
existing use, if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this Title. (Ord., 5-15-
1974)
5-9-2: PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Nothing in this Title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings; provided, that all regulations herein governing the
location, design and operation of such facilities are adhered to. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-9-3: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION:
When any conforming or nonconforming building, structure or use which is in existence on the effective
date hereof, which is restored and continued in operation after being damaged or destroyed by fire,
collapse, explosion or other cause, to the extent that the cost of restoration does not exceed sixty percent
(60%) of the assessor's valuation, there may be provided only the off-street parking or loading facilities
equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction. However, in no case shall it be
necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this Title for
equivalent new uses or construction. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-9-4: OFF-STREET PARKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 441/649
Off-street parking facilities for motor vehicles shall be provided in accordance with additional regulations
set forth hereinafter.
A. Existing Parking Facilities: Accessory off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date
hereof and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below,
or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or
use under the provisions of this Title.
B. Use: Accessory off-street parking facilities required as accessory to uses listed herein, shall be solely
for the parking of automobiles of patrons, occupants or employees. When bus transportation is
provided for patrons, occupants or employees of a specific establishment, additional open or enclosed
off-street parking spaces for each bus to be parked on the premises shall be provided in accordance
with regulations set forth in this Chapter.
C. Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this Title
results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded
while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
D. Collective Provisions: Off street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if the
total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each
such use and provided that all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces, in relation
to the use served, are adhered to, and provided it is authorized by the zoning board of appeals in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
E. Size: A required off street parking space shall have a width and length, exclusive of access drives or
aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas in accordance with standards set forth in section 5-9-6
of this chapter. Enclosed parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
F. Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of width
and design in accordance with standards set forth in section 5-9-6 of this chapter. All off street parking
facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley with location
and design of intersection of parking area access driveway and the street or alley in accordance with
regulations set forth in section 5-9-7 of this chapter.
G. In Yards: Off street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located in required interior side yards and
rear yards, not less than five feet (5') from the nearest lot line, except a parking area containing four
(4) or more parking spaces shall be not less than twenty feet (20') from a residential lot line. In the
business district, the required off street parking spaces may be located in a front yard or side yard
adjoining a street, not less than five feet (5') from a street line.
H. Design And Maintenance:
1. Open And Enclosed Spaces: Accessory off street parking spaces located on the same lot as
occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or enclosed in a building. Accessory off street
parking spaces that may be permitted elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use shall be
open to the sky. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 442/649
2. Surfacing: All open off street parking areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be
constructed of hot mix asphalt (HMA), portland cement concrete (PCC) or interlocking concrete
pavers over a compacted aggregate base, as approved by the building inspector. Interlocking
concrete pavers shall meet manufacturer and Interlocking Concrete Pavement Institute (ICPI)
installation guidelines and shall conform to ASTM C936 and/or C1319. When interlocking concrete
pavers are proposed, a maintenance plan shall be required to assure continued functionality and
appearance.
Materials for off street parking areas pavement shall be designed to service the anticipated traffic
loadings; however, the minimum structural number (SN) for off street parking areas shall be 2.30 for
regular/light duty pavement and 3.00 for heavy duty pavement. (Ord. 2014-11, 5-27-2014)
3. Screening And Landscaping: All open off street parking areas containing more than four (4) parking
spaces, located less than forty feet (40') from the nearest property line of a lot in a residence district
shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on such property line by a wall, fence
or densely planted compact hedge, not less than five feet (5') nor more than eight feet (8') in height.
Such screening shall be as approved by the building inspector.
4. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall be arranged so as not to reflect
direct rays of light into streets or adjacent residence districts.
5. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in off
street parking areas. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any accessory
parking facilities.
I. Location: After the effective date hereof, required accessory off street parking spaces shall be located
on the same lot as the building or use served, except when the planning commission recommends and
the board of trustees authorizes, for a specific use, the location of all or part of the required off street
parking spaces on a lot that does not contain the principal use or structure. However, there shall be
compliance with regulations set forth in subsection J of this section.
J. Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: In cases where parking facilities are permitted on a lot other than
the lot on which the structure or use served is located, the owner of record of such lot shall be the
same as the owner of record of the lot occupied by the structure or use in which the parking facilities
are accessory. A covenant running with the land must be recorded in the office of the recorder of
deeds of Grundy and/or Will County, Illinois, on the lot upon which the accessory off street parking is
located which prohibits any other use on that lot, and a copy of the recorded covenant certified by the
recorder of deeds of Grundy and/or Will County, Illinois, must be deposited with the building inspector.
The covenant shall not be released until such time as either one of the following conditions occur:
1. The structure on the lot containing the principal use is removed and the principal use terminated.
2. Another lot of the required size within the required distance is properly developed and used for the
required accessory off street parking in place of and in lieu of the initial lot used for accessory off
street parking with the same requirements, covenants and conditions attached to such substitute
accessory use lot as approved by the same authority as required for approval of such initial lot.
K. Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum
number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time.
L. Required Garages:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 443/649
Single-family
detached
dwellings
There shall be provided for each single-family detached dwelling a private
garage, accessory to and attached to the dwelling, with a minimum floor area
of 400 square feet
Two-family and
single-family
attached dwellings
There shall be provided for each two-family or single-family detached dwelling
unit a private garage, accessory to and attached to the dwelling unit, with a
minimum floor area of 200 square feet
M. Required Spaces: There shall be provided for each building, structure and use hereafter erected,
structurally altered or enlarged, the minimum number of accessory off street parking spaces in
accordance with the following: (Ord., 5-15-1974)
1. Dwelling And Lodging Uses:
Hotels and
motels
1 parking space for each room or suite of rooms comprising a lodging unit, 1 parking
space for each 2 employees, and 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of retail
sales and dining area
Lodging
houses and
apartment
hotels
1 parking space for each lodging room and 1 parking space for each dwelling unit,
and 1 parking space for each 2 employees
Multiplefamily
dwellings
2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
Singlefamily,
detached
and
attached,
and twofamily
2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit plus 1 additional parking space per each 2
roomers or lodgers accommodated, but no more than 4 spaces for each singlefamily
detached dwelling and no more than 3 spaces for each single-family attached
or two-family dwelling. Attached garages required in accordance with subsection L of
this section
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1984-2, 2-27-1984; Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
2. Schools, Institutions And Auditoriums Or Other Places Of Assembly:
Auditoriums, meeting halls, exhibition halls and auditoriums as
accessory to churches, schools and other institutional
establishments
1 parking space for each 5
seats, or for each 90 linear
inches of seating space
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues 1 parking space for each 5
seats, or for each 90 linear
inches of seating space
Colleges, junior colleges and universities 1 parking space for each 6
students, based upon the
maximum number of students
that can be accommodated in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 444/649
accordance with design
capacity plus 1 parking space
for each 2 employees
Hospitals 1 parking space per bed
Libraries, museums and art galleries 1 parking space for each 800
square feet of floor area
Nursing homes and similar types of establishments 1 parking space for each 2
beds, plus 1 parking space for
each 2 employees
Private clubs and lodges 1 parking space for each
lodging room and 1 parking
space for each 5 seats in
accordance with design
seating capacity of the main
meeting room
Schools: When the number of parking spaces as required herein
is provided for an auditorium or other places of public assembly
accessory to a school, and when approved by the planning
commission, additional parking spaces need not be provided when
the number of parking spaces for such auditorium or other places
of public assembly is equal to or in excess of the applicable
requirements set forth below:
Commercial or trade, music dance or business 1 parking space for each 2
employees, plus 1 space for
each 3 students, based on
the maximum number of
students that can be
accommodated in accordance
with design capacity
High, public or private 1 parking space for each 7
students based on the
maximum number of students
that can be accommodated in
accordance with design
capacity
Nursery, elementary or junior high 1 parking space for each
faculty member and each
other full time employee
3. Recreational Uses, Commercial Or Noncommercial:
Bowling alleys 7 parking spaces for each lane plus such additional spaces as may be
required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants and the like
Parks, recreation centers
and community centers -
private, semipublic or
public
1 parking space for each 2 persons, based upon the maximum number
of persons that can be accommodated at the same time in accordance
with such design capacity, and 1 parking space for each 2 employees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 445/649
Theaters 1 parking space for each 4 seats
Theaters (automobile
drive-in)
Reservoir standing spaces equal in number to 10% of the vehicle
capacity of such theaters
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
4. Business, Commercial And Industrial Uses:
Automobile laundries 1 parking space for each employee, and in addition, reservoir
standing spaces to accommodate automobiles awaiting entrance to
the automobile laundry equal in number to 5 times the maximum
capacity of the automobile laundry. Maximum capacity shall mean
the greatest possible number of automobiles undergoing same
phase of laundering at the same time
Automobile service stations
1 parking space for each island of gasoline pumps, plus 2 for each
service stall
Banks and other financial
institutions
1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area
Furniture and appliance
stores, motor vehicle sales
establishments, and
establishments for repair of
household equipment or
furniture
1 parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area
Manufacturing, fabricating
processing, storing,
cleaning, testing,
assembling, repairing or
servicing establishments as
permitted in the
manufacturing districts
1 parking space for each 1.5 employees as related to the working
period when the maximum number of persons are employed on the
premises, or 1 for each 800 square feet of floor area, whichever is
greater
Medical and dental clinics 2 parking spaces for each office, examining room and treatment
room, plus 1 space for each 50 square feet of floor area contained
in the reception room or waiting lobby
Medical cannabis cultivation
centers
4 parking spaces plus 1 parking space for each 1,500 square feet of
floor space over 4,500 square feet or when the number of
employees is specifically indicated, 1 parking space for each 1.5
employees employed on the premises
Medical cannabis
dispensing organizations
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area
Offices - business,
professional and public
administration or service
office buildings
1 parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area
Public utility and public 1 parking space for each 2 employees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 446/649
service uses
Restaurants, not including
drive-in establishments
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area
Undertaking establishments
and funeral parlors
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area, plus 1
parking space for each of the funeral parlor's official vehicles
Uses in a shopping center
under unified control or
ownership
The required number of parking spaces shall be equal to the
required number of parking places as heretofore set forth for the
individual uses located in the center
Warehouse, storage,
wholesale and mail order
establishments
4 parking spaces plus 1 parking space for each 1,500 square feet of
floor space over 4,500 square feet or when the number of
employees is specifically indicated, 1 parking space for each 1.5
employees employed on the premises
All other business and
commercial establishments
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014)
5. Other Uses: Parking spaces for other permitted uses or conditional uses not listed above shall be
provided in accordance with requirements designated by the planning commission. (Ord., 5-15-
1974)
5-9-5: OFF STREET LOADING:
There shall be provided off street loading spaces not less than the minimum requirements specified in this
chapter in connection with any building, structure or use which is to be erected or substantially altered,
and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles in
accordance with the following: (Ord., 5-15-1974)
A. Location: Accessory off street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal use.
Open off street loading spaces which abut a residence district boundary line shall be completely
screened therefrom by a fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, of an architectural design
approved by the building inspector, not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height, or
a densely planted tree or shrub hedge maintained to not less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted
or required loading space shall be located within forty feet (40') of the nearest point of intersection of
any two (2) streets. No loading space shall be located in a required front or side yard, except in a
manufacturing zoning district (M1 or M2) with manufacturing zoning adjacent to and across the street.
In that event, a loading space may be located in a required front yard as long as it will be set back
sufficiently so as to allow vehicles being loaded or unloaded not to extend into the street. (Ord. 1998-
09, 5-26-1998)
B. Size: Unless otherwise specified in this Title, a required off-street loading space shall be at least
fourteen feet (14') in width and at least fifty five feet (55') in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles,
ramps and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than fifteen feet (15').
C. Access: Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements. Access drives
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 447/649
and intersection of driveways with streets shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in Section
5-9-7 of this Chapter.
D. Surfacing: All open off-street loading spaces, access drives, aisles and maneuvering spaces shall be
improved with a compacted base and a permanent wearing surface as approved by the Building
Inspector.
E. Repair And Service: No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall
be permitted within any required loading space.
F. Utilization: Space allocated to any off-street loading spaces shall not, while so allocated, be used to
satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof.
G. Off-Street Loading Space Requirements: The minimum number of off-street loading spaces accessory
to building structures and uses hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged in all business and
manufacturing districts shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Gross Floor Area
Of Establishments
Required Number
5,000 to 10,000 1
10,000 to 25,000 2
25,000 to 40,000 3
40,000 to 100,000 4
For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof
over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area: one additional loading space. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
5-9-6: MINIMUM STANDARDS OF PARKING SPACES, AISLES, PARKING BAYS;
TABLE:
Specifications provided in the following table shall apply:
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF PARKING SPACES,
AISLES, AND PARKING BAYS
PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
Angle Of
Parking
Width Of
Space
Width Of Space Parallel
To Aisle
Depth Of Space Perpendicular
To Aisle
Width Of
Aisle
45° 8'6" 12'0" 17'0" 11'6"
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 448/649
45° 9'0" 12'9" 17'0" 11'0"
60° 8'6" 9'10" 18'0" 18'0"
60° 9'0" 10'5" 18'0" 17'0"
90° 8'6" 8'6" 18'0" 29'0"
90° 9'0" 9'0" 18'0" 27'0"
WIDTH OF PARKING BAYS*
Type Of Parking Space Arrangement
Intermeshing Head-In To Curb Back-In To Curb
43'0" 43'10" 49'0"
42'10" 43'8" 49'2"
53'5" 52'7" 57'8"
52'8" 51'10" 57'2"
65'0" 65'0"
63'0" 63'0"
*Parking bay consists of two (2) rows of parking spaces and one aisle.
(adapted from traffic design of parking garages, the eno foundation for highway traffic control, 1957)
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-9-7: ACCESS DRIVEWAYS FROM STREETS TO OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING SPACES:
A. Width Of Driveways (Measured At The Lot Line Adjoining A Street):
1. Residential Uses: Residential driveways shall not be less than nine feet (9') wide, nor more than
thirty feet (30') wide.
a. No driveway constructed upon a corner lot shall be closer than thirty feet (30') from the
intersection of the street right-of-way line. (Ord. 2001-08, 4-24-2001)
2. Nonresidential Uses:
a. Not less than fourteen feet (14') wide nor more than twenty feet (20') wide for a one-way
driveway.
b. Not less than twenty feet (20') wide nor more than thirty five feet (35') wide for a two-way
driveway serving twenty (20) or fewer parking spaces and/or one loading space.
c. Not less than twenty four feet (24') wide nor more than thirty five feet (35') wide for a two-way
driveway serving more than twenty (20) parking spaces and/or two (2) or more loading spaces.
B. Radius Connecting Street Pavement Edge And Driveway Edge:
1. In Residence Districts: Not less than five feet (5'), except driveways more than twenty feet (20') in
width, not less than eight feet (8').
2. Business And Manufacturing Districts:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 449/649
a. Not less than fifteen feet (15') at the intersection of a driveway and street pavement in a street
having a right of way more than sixty six feet (66') wide.
b. Not less than eight feet (8') at the intersection of a driveway and a street pavement in a street
having a right of way of sixty six feet (66') or less in width.
C. Angle At Intersection Of A Driveway And Street: The acute angle formed at the intersection of driveway
and street pavement edges shall be not less than sixty degrees (60°).
D. Spacing Between Separate Driveway Entrances On A Lot (Measured At The Lot Line Adjoining A
Street):
1. Not less than twenty feet (20') on streets having rights of way more than sixty six feet (66') in width.
2. Not less than ten feet (10') on streets having rights of way sixty six feet (66') or less in width.
E. On Corner Lots, Spacing Between Driveway Entrance And Right-Of-Way Line Of An Adjacent
Intersecting Street (Measured From The Nearest Edge Of The Driveway Pavement At Its Intersection
With The Street Right-Of-Way Line Of An Adjacent Intersecting Street):
1. Not less than fifteen feet (15') to an adjacent intersecting street having a right of way more than
sixty six feet (66') in width.
2. Not less than eight feet (8') to an adjacent intersecting street having a right of way sixty six feet (66')
or less in width. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 10
NONCONFORMING USES
5-10-1: PREAMBLE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses, buildings and
structures, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses may be continued. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-10-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMANCE:
Any building, structure or use which existed lawfully on the effective date hereof, and which becomes
nonconforming upon the effective date hereof, or of any subsequent amendment hereto, may be
continued only in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Repairs And Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or
structure; provided, that no structural alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure,
except those required by law, or except to make the building or structure and use thereof conform to
the regulations of the district in which it is located. Ordinary repairs and alterations shall be determined
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 450/649
by the Building Inspector and shall include, among other things, the replacement of storage tanks
where the safety of operations of the installation requires such replacement.
B. Additions And Enlargements:
1. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
nonconforming building or structure and use thereof, including all additions and enlargements
thereto, is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
2. A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming only as to bulk may be added to or
enlarged, provided such additions or enlargements conform to all regulations of the district in which
it is located.
C. Moving: No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location
unless every portion of such building or structure, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all
regulations of the district in which the moved building is to be located.
D. Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures: A nonconforming building or
structure, or portion thereof, which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to
the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed
sixty percent (60%) of the total cost of reconstructing the building or structure, shall not be restored
unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all regulations of the district in
which it is located. However, if the damage is less than sixty percent (60%) of the cost of
reconstructing the building or structure, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless such work is
started within one year from the date of the partial destruction.
E. Change Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: The nonconforming use of a building or
structure, or portion thereof, may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which the building or
structure is located, however, once a use is changed to a conforming use, such building or structure
shall not thereafter be used for a nonconforming use.
F. Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Buildings Or Structures: The existing nonconforming use of a part
or all of a conforming building or structure may be continued subject to the following provisions:
1. The nonconforming use of a part of such building or structure shall not be expanded or extended
into any other portion of such building or structure, nor changed to any other nonconforming use.
2. If a nonconforming use of such a building or structure is discontinued, or abandoned for a period of
six (6) consecutive months, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent use of such building or
structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises are located.
3. Any lawful nonconforming use in a conforming building or structure existing in a residence district on
the effective date hereof, or any amendments hereto, shall be entirely discontinued within ten (10)
years from the effective date hereof, or any amendments hereto.
G. Nonconforming Use Of Land: The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in
connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use
of land, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
1. Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies on the
effective date hereof, or changed to another nonconforming use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 451/649
2. If such a nonconforming use of land is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive
months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations of the district in which the land is located.
3. Where the nonconforming use of land is accessory to the nonconforming use of a building or
structure, it shall be discontinued on the same date as the nonconforming use of the building or
structure. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 11
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5-11-1: ORGANIZATION:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in:
The office of the building officer and inspector
The planning and zoning commission
The board of trustees
(Ord., 5-15-1974, amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
5-11-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The building officer and inspector1 shall enforce this title and in furtherance of his authority shall:
A. Determine conformance of applications for zoning certificates with regulations of this title.
B. Issue all zoning certificates, following approval as required in this title, and maintain records thereof.
C. Issue all certificates of occupancy, and maintain records thereof.
D. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms
of this title.
E. Receive, file and forward to the planning and zoning commission all applications for amendments,
conditional uses or for other matters on which the planning and zoning commission is required to act
under this title.
F. Receive, file and forward to the planning and zoning commission all applications for amendments,
conditional uses, or other matters which, under this title, require referral to the planning and zoning
commission.
G. Maintain permanent and current records of the administration and enforcement of this title, including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, variations, appeals and applications therefor and records of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 452/649
hearings thereon, and designate on the zoning district map each amendment thereto.
H. Decide or make recommendations on all other matters under this title upon which the building officer
and inspector is required to act.
I. Receive from the village clerk all notices of petitions for appeals, variations, amendments and
conditional use permits which have been referred by the village clerk to the planning and zoning
commission or other appropriate reviewing body.
J. Provide and maintain public information facilities relative to all matters pertaining to this title. (Ord., 5-
15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
5-11-3: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
A. No permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by an officer or employee of the
village, unless the application for such permit has been examined by the building officer and inspector
and has affixed to it a certificate of the building officer and inspector that the proposed building or
structure and use complies with all the provisions of this title. Any certificate issued in conflict with the
provisions of this title shall be null and void.
B. An application for a zoning certificate for a use of land, buildings or structures, which requires
compliance with performance standards as set forth in the manufacturing district regulations2, shall
have affixed to it a certification of a professional engineer, licensed by the State of Illinois, whose
qualifications pertinent to the engineering aspects of the various performance standards regulations
have previously been approved by the Board of Trustees. The Building Officer and Inspector shall,
upon receipt of such application, approve and authorize the issuance of a zoning certificate, provided
there is compliance with all other provisions of this Title. Within fifteen (15) days after the date of
issuance of such zoning certificate, the Building Officer and Inspector shall examine said application
and if he finds the proposed use of land, building or structure does not comply with such performance
standards or other applicable regulations of this Title, he shall notify the professional engineer and
person filing the application, in writing, of his finding. Failure of the professional engineer to show that
such application is in compliance or for the applicant to submit a revised application which shows
compliance within thirty (30) days of such notification shall be cause for revocation of the zoning
certificate. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-11-4: FILING PLANS:
All applications for zoning certificates shall be accompanied by plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing
the actual shape, area and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of
the existing buildings and accessory buildings, and the lines within which the new buildings or structures
shall be erected, the existing and intended use of each building or structure, the number of dwelling units
or lodging rooms a building is designed to accommodate, location and number of off-street parking and
off-street loading spaces, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots and
performance standards as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Title.
One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall have been approved by the
Building Officer and Inspector. The lot and location of the building thereon shall be staked out on the
ground before construction is started. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 453/649
5-11-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. No land shall be occupied or used in a manner different than that existing on the effective date hereof,
and no building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part
for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
Officer and Inspector stating that the building, structure or land improvement complies with all the
building and health laws and the provisions of this Title. No change of use shall be made in any
building, structure or land improvement or part thereof, now or hereafter erected or altered, without an
occupancy permit having been issued by the Building Officer and Inspector, and no permit shall be
issued to make such change unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this Title and amendments
thereto. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the continuance of the present occupancy or use of any
existing building, structure or lane improvement, except as may be necessary for the safety of life and
property.
B. No certificate of occupancy permit for a change of use in an existing building, structure or land
improvement shall be issued until the premises have been inspected and certified by the Building
Officer and Inspector to be in compliance with applicable requirements for the zoning district in which it
is located.
C. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made coincident with the application for a zoning
certificate and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of the building or
structure has been completed. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office
of the Building Officer and Inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having
proprietary or tenancy interest in the land, building or structure affected. A fee of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be charged for each original certificate, and one dollar ($1.00) for each copy thereof.
D. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of occupancy, a temporary permit may be issued to be
valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date, during the completion of any building,
structure or land improvement or during partial occupancy thereof. Application for a temporary permit
shall be accompanied with a statement covering the items of work to be completed and the reasons
the temporary permit is requested. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
E. Notwithstanding any above provisions prohibiting the issuance of occupancy permits for residential,
commercial or industrial buildings prior to the completion of the construction and installation of
facilities, within the construction thereof, the Building Officer and Inspector, at his discretion, may issue
or cause to be issued an occupancy permit for such buildings, the construction of which is incomplete,
when in the determination of the Building Officer and Inspector the issuance of such occupancy permit
will not affect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of such buildings nor of other persons
who may be on the premises and site of such buildings.
The Building Officer and Inspector shall, prior to the issuance of such occupancy permit, require the
owner of such building or the construction contractor thereof, or both, to deposit with the Village the
sum of money in cash, bond, or letter of credit which he deems sufficient in amount to complete the
construction of said building or the installation or required facilities therein and any land improvements
required by code, plus twenty five percent (25%). No such occupancy permit shall be issued until and
unless such deposit shall have been made prior to the completion of the construction otherwise
required by this Section.
Examples of items that are not completed that the Building Officer and Inspector may consider in
issuing an occupancy permit when construction is not complete include, but are not limited to the
following: gutters, down spouts, patios, decks, cabinets, fixtures, yard grading, driveways, unfinished
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 454/649
bathrooms, unfinished second floors in two (2) story homes, damaged sidewalks, window well drains,
exterior caulking and interior trim.
Said deposit shall be held in a separate account by the Village and shall be returned to the person
depositing the same upon the Building Officer and Inspector's written statement that the unfinished
construction for which such deposit was required has been completed in accordance with the
provisions so stipulated by ordinance.
All construction work for which said deposit is being held must be completed no later than six (6)
months from date of occupancy. Any portion remaining unfinished after the six (6) month period shall
be just cause for the forfeiture of the total amount deposited. (Ord. 1996-18, 7-9-1996)
5-11-6: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The Board of Trustees shall decide all applications for variations of the provisions of this Title
after a public hearing held before the Planning and Zoning Commission3. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold public hearings upon all applications for variations and shall report its
recommendations to the Board of Trustees. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend a
variation only after they have made a finding of fact specifying the reason or reasons for
recommending the variation. Such findings shall be based upon the standards prescribed in
subsection D of this Section. No variation shall be granted to the Board of Trustees without such
findings of fact. When the Planning and Zoning Commission fails to recommend a variation, it can only
be adopted by an ordinance with the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Board of Trustees. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review all applications for variations for conformity of the
applications with the Comprehensive Plan, the provisions of this Title, and to generally accepted
standards of land use policy. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1988-19, 12-12-1988; Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-
1993)
B. Initiation: An application for a variation may be made by any governmental office, department, board,
bureau or commission or by any person having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to
exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to
purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest applicable to the land or land and improvements
described in the application for a variation. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
C. Application For Variation And Notice Of Hearing: An application for a variation shall be filed with the
Village Clerk, who shall forward a copy of the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
Village Board of Trustees without delay. The application shall contain such information as the Planning
and Zoning Commission may from time to time by rule provide. No application shall be considered
complete until all exhibits called for in the application have been filed, and the filing fee paid. No more
than ninety (90) days after the filing of such application, a hearing shall be held on the application,
except that if the application is not complete at least twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled hearing,
the hearing shall be continued over to another scheduled meeting. Notice of such hearing shall be
published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the village. The published notice may be
supplemented by such additional form of notice as the planning and zoning commission may by rule
provide. The filing fee for the application shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00), and shall be paid at the time an application for variation is filed. The filing fee, once paid, is
nonrefundable. (Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994)
D. Standards For Variations: The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend a variation of the
regulations of this title, as authorized herein unless it shall have made findings of fact based upon the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 455/649
evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
1. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the
conditions allowed by the regulations in the district in which it is located;
2. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
3. The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
4. For the purpose of implementing the above rules, the planning and zoning commission shall also, in
making its determination whether there are practical difficulties or particular hardships, take into
consideration the extent to which the following facts favorable to the applicant have been
established by the evidence: (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
a. The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the specific property
involved would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out;
b. The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable, generally to
other property within the same zoning classification;
c. The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of
the property;
d. The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by the owner of the property, or by a
previous owner;
e. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; and
f. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or
substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or
endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the board of trustees may require
such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary
to comply with the standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of
such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and better to carry out the general intent
of this zoning title. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
The planning and zoning commission shall file its written recommendations on each application
for variation with the village clerk. The village clerk shall forward a copy of the written
recommendations to the board of trustees, and the applicant. (Ord. 1988-19, 12-12-1988; amd.
Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
E. Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations of this zoning title shall be granted by the
planning and zoning commission only in accordance with the standards set out in this section and may
be granted only in the following instances, and in no others: (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-
24-1993)
1. To permit any yard or setback less than a yard or a setback required by the applicable regulations;
2. To permit the use of a lot or lots of record on the effective date hereof for a use otherwise prohibited
solely because of insufficient area or width of the lot or lots;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 456/649
3. To permit the same off street parking facility to qualify as required facilities for two (2) or more uses,
provided that substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the
same hours of the same days of the week; and
4. To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading facilities required by ten percent (10%) of the
applicable regulations. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5. To permit signs constructed to a height of not more than sixty five feet (65') above the normal
finished grade beneath it to the top of the sign and with a signage face not to exceed two hundred
(200) square feet, for property located in B zoning districts and M zoning districts and located within
one thousand seven hundred fifty feet (1,750') of the right of way of Interstate 80. (Ord. 2014-23, 7-
22-2014)
6. To permit patios, terraces and decks in front or side yards for property located in the residential
zoning districts, provided the patios, terraces and decks do not interfere with existing public utility
and drainage easements. (Ord. 2007-42, 9-11-2007)
5-11-7: APPEALS, SCOPE OF:
An appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission may be made by any person or by any office,
department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the Building Officer and Inspector under this Title
in accordance with Illinois statutes and the following:
A. An application for an appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk within twenty (20) days of the date of
the action from which the appeal is being filed, and thereafter the Village Clerk shall forward such
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for processing. The Village Clerk shall forward to
the Building Officer and Inspector a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and he shall
forthwith transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
B. An appeal stays all the proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission, after the notice of appeal
has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order which may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall fix a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, for
the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a
reasonable time. The Planning and Zoning Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made on the
premises and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
5-11-8: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this Zoning Title may
be amended, from time to time, by ordinance in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. An
amendment shall be granted or denied by the Board of Trustees only after a public hearing before the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 457/649
Planning and Zoning Commission and a report of its findings and recommendations has thereafter
been submitted to the Board of Trustees.
B. Initiation Of Amendments: Amendments may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, Planning and
Zoning Commission and by any person having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to
exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to
purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is
described in the application for an amendment. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
C. Application For An Amendment And Notice Of Hearing: An application for an amendment shall be filed
with the Village Clerk, who shall forward a copy of the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Village Board of Trustees without delay. The application shall contain such information as the
Planning and Zoning Commission may from time to time by rule provide. No application shall be
considered complete until all exhibits called for in the application have been filed, and the filing fee
paid. No more than ninety (90) days after the filing of such application, a hearing shall be held on the
application, except that if the application is not complete at least twenty (20) days prior to the
scheduled hearing, the hearing shall be continued over to another scheduled meeting. Notice of such
hearing shall be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the village. The published notice may
be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the planning and zoning commission may by
rule provide. The filing fee for the application shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00),
and shall be paid at the time an application for amendment is filed. The filing fee, once paid, is
nonrefundable. (Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994)
D. Decisions:
1. The board of trustees, upon report of the planning and zoning commission and without further public
hearing, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes,
or may refer it back to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. (Ord., 5-15-
1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2. In case a written protest against any proposed amendment is signed and acknowledged by owners
of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley therefrom, or by owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be altered, is filed with the village
clerk, the amendment cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all
members of the board of trustees. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-11-9: CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES:
A. Purpose: The formulation and enactment of a comprehensive ordinance is based on the division of the
entire village into districts in each of which are permitted specified uses that are mutually compatible.
In addition to such permitted, compatible uses, however, it is recognized that there are other uses
which it may be necessary or desirable to allow in a given district but which, on account of their
potential influence upon neighboring uses or public facilities, need to be carefully regulated with
respect to location or operation for the protection of the community. Such uses are classified in this
title as "conditional permitted uses" and fall into two (2) categories:
1. Uses either municipally operated or operated by publicly regulated utilities, or uses traditionally
affected by public interest;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 458/649
2. Uses entirely private in character which, on account of their peculiar locational need, the nature of
the service they offer to the public, and their possible damaging influence on the neighborhood, may
have to be established in a district or districts in which they cannot reasonably be allowed as an
unrestricted permitted use under the zoning regulations. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
B. Initiation: Conditional permitted uses may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, Planning and Zoning
Commission and by any person having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase or any
exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is described in the
application for a conditional permitted use. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
C. Application For Conditional Permitted Use And Notice Of Hearing: An application for a conditional
permitted use shall be filed with the Village Clerk, who shall forward a copy of the same to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Board of Trustees without delay. The application
shall contain such information as the Planning and Zoning Commission may from time to time by rule
provide. No application shall be considered complete until all exhibits called for in the application have
been filed, and the filing fee paid. No more than ninety (90) days after the filing of such application, a
hearing shall be held on the application, except that if the application is not complete at least twenty
(20) days prior to the scheduled hearing, the hearing shall be continued over to another scheduled
meeting. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor
less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village.
The published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the Planning and
Zoning Commission may by rule provide. The filing fee for the application shall be in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall be paid at the time an application for conditional permitted use is
filed. The filing fee, once paid, is nonrefundable. (Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994)
D. Decisions:
1. The Board of Trustees, upon report of the Planning and Zoning Commission and without further
public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed conditional permitted use in accordance with
applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer it back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further
consideration. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2. In case a written protest against any proposed conditional permitted use signed and acknowledged
by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley therefrom, or by
owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be altered, is filed
with the Village Clerk, the conditional permitted use cannot be passed except on the favorable vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Board of Trustees. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
E. Effective Period: No conditional use permit shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the
date it is granted, unless a building permit or certificate of occupancy is obtained within such period
and the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within such period. The
Board may grant one extension of this period, valid for no more than one hundred eighty (180)
additional days, upon written application to the Board for the request for extension to be placed on a
Village Board agenda for action and good cause shown by the applicant. No notice or hearing is
required for the granting of such an extension. If any conditional use is abandoned or discontinued for
a continuous period of one year, the conditional use permit for such use shall become void, and such
use shall not thereafter be reestablished unless a new conditional use permit is obtained. (Ord. 1997-
08, 5-27-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 459/649
5-11-10: PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement
of any of the provisions of this Zoning Title shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in Section 1-4-
1 of this Code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. The Building Officer and Inspector is hereby designated and authorized to enforce this Title. However,
it shall also be the duty of all officers, citizens and employees of the Village to assist the Building
Officer and Inspector by reporting to him any new construction, reconstruction, improved land uses, or
upon any seeming violation. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 12
FENCES AND HEDGES
5-12-1: FENCE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No fence shall be erected or substantially altered in the village without a building permit issued therefor by
the village building department upon payment of the required permit fee. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-2: PRIVATE FENCES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No private fence(s) shall be allowed or constructed on public streets or highway rights of way. Fences
may, by permit, be placed on public utility easements so long as the structures do not interfere in any way
with existing underground, ground or overground utilities. Further, the village or any utility company having
authority to use such easements shall not be liable for repair or replacement of such fences in the event
they are moved, damaged or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of said easement. Fences in violation of
this section may be summarily removed. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-3: PROHIBITED MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION:
A. No barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall be allowed on private property in residential zones or on
lots in any zone being used for single- or multiple-family dwelling purposes. No barbed wire or barbed
wire fences shall be allowed on private property in business or industrial zones where the property
lines of such property abut lots or parcels zoned or being used for single- or multiple-family purposes
or on fences in front yards.
B. No fence shall be constructed of material obviously intended to inflict great bodily harm should a
person or animal attempt to climb or scale it. Such material includes, but is not limited to, electrically
charged wires or other electrical conduit, broken glass, razor blades and sharp or ragged metal spikes
or spears. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-4: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 460/649
All fences shall be maintained in good, structurally sound repair and in a neat, clean, presentable and
attractive condition. If, on inspection by the zoning officer, any fence, in his determination, does not meet
the requirements of this section, he shall order the owner or occupier of the premises, by registered or
certified mail, to make the necessary repairs or improvements as directed or he shall be in violation of this
code, and the village attorney shall cause a complaint to be issued and processed against said owner or
occupier in accordance with rules of the circuit court of Grundy County or Will County, Illinois, where
applicable. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-5: FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. In single- and multiple-family residential zones, no fence may exceed four feet (4') in height above
ground level in front yards. Fences along the side lines to the rear of the front yard and along the rear
lot line may not exceed six feet (6') in height above ground level. On lot lines abutting the public right
of way or residential property, the fence must face outward with support posts on the inside.
B. When any fence of six feet (6') in height is installed on any interior lot the fence shall not extend
beyond the front building setback line as shown on the final plat of the subdivision. A fence extending
beyond the building setback line into the front yard shall be a decorative fence. The fence shall be set
back a minimum of one foot (1') from the sidewalk.
C. When any fence is installed in the front, side or rear yard, it shall not extend beyond the property line or
encroach upon adjoining property.
D. On all corner lots, any fence other than a decorative fence shall not extend beyond the building
setback lines as established and recorded on the final plat(s) of all residential subdivisions. (Ord.
1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-6: BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING ZONES:
A. Except as permitted in subsections 5-7-2B4 and 5-8-2B3 of this title and subsection E of this section,
fences may not exceed six feet (6') in height above ground level, and the use of barbed wire is
prohibited; except, that one foot (1') additional of any fence along side or rear lot lines in these zones
may be constructed of barbed wire. Barbed wire shall not be used, installed or constructed on fences
fronting on any street.
B. When any fence is installed in the front, side or rear yard, it shall not extend beyond the property line or
encroach upon adjoining property.
C. No fence or wall shall be erected, constructed or maintained within the first fifty feet (50') from the front
lot line. However, a decorative fence may be erected within the first fifty feet (50').
D. Fences shall be permitted in the required interior side yard or rear yard; provided, that the fence does
not extend nearer to a lot line adjoining a street than the longest distance between such lot line and
the nearest wall of the principal building or structure; in the case of corner lots, not beyond the front or
street side line of the building or structure; and does not exceed a height of six feet (6'), except as
permitted in subsections 5-7-2B4 and 5-8-2B3 of this title and subsection E of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 461/649
E. Screening which is required for swim and/or tennis clubs, private and public, shall not exceed a height
of twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006)
5-12-7: ADJOINING DISTRICTS:
A. Fences installed as a screening between commercial and residential or between industrial and
residential districts shall be of the same design, construction material, height and color. Height
requirement is six feet (6') with a solid effect.
B. Where no fence exists at time of construction, the first developer to install such a fence will set the
established guideline for both adjoining and other fences in the same district to follow.
C. All fences shall join together to provide continuity along the common lot line of commercial and
residential or industrial and residential districts where a fence for screening is required.
D. All fences other than those intended for decorative or screening purposes shall be buffered with
berming and/or landscaping.
E. Screening which is required for swim and/or tennis clubs, private and public shall not exceed a height
of twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-8: NONCONFORMING FENCES:
Fences existing at the effective date hereof which are not in violation of section 5-12-4 of this chapter and
are not located on public street and highway rights of way, but which violate any other section of this
chapter may continue to be maintained and to exist but may not be replaced, if destroyed or removed, to
the extent that the violations would be continued. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-9: HEDGES:
Hedges, plantings, shrubbery, etc., when used as a screening, shall in no way obstruct the view of traffic
at any intersection. On corner lots, no obstruction higher than thirty inches (30") above curb level shall be
located within thirty feet (30') of the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street lines. If it is
deemed to create a hazard, the owner must remove same upon notice from the zoning officer or chief of
police within thirty (30) days of such notification. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-10: NUISANCE DECLARED; ABATEMENT:
Any fence which shall be erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is deemed a
nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the zoning officer and the chief of police to abate the same. (Ord.
1996-20, 7-9-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 462/649
Chapter 13
SIGNS
5-13-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all signs and portions of signs erected, altered
with respect to height and area of sign face, added to, or relocated in the village shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. Any existing sign not in conformity with the regulations herein
prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-2: INTERPRETATION:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an expression of the maximum allowable number
and size of signs which cause the least potential conflict with surrounding uses and which promote an
improved physical appearance and aesthetics within the village.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the control of signs are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by the provisions of any other
law, code, ordinance, statute, resolution, rule or regulation of any governmental body, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards shall govern.
C. When a sign type is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to permitted signs, it shall be
assumed that such signs are hereby expressly prohibited. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-3: RULES:
The language set forth in this chapter shall be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall
include the plural number, and the plural the singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. All measured distances or standards shall be to the nearest integer; if a fraction is one-half (1/2) or
less, the integer next below shall be taken.
E. Height of signs shall be measured to the highest point thereon, from the crown of the street directly
opposite the sign, or from the average normal grade level directly below the sign, whichever is higher.
(Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 463/649
5-13-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms when used in this chapter shall be construed as follows:
CORNER LOT: A lot with property lines of two (2) streets bisecting on an angle.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: A sign or portion of a larger sign capable of displaying letters,
numbers, words, symbols, figures, images, or characters electronically or electrically to provide a
message or picture. Electronic message centers do not include temporary electronic speed limit signs,
temporary electronic signboards displaying emergency information, or temporary signs utilized to direct
traffic, such as electronic arrow boards or electronic signs providing traffic information.
FACADE: The face or wall of a building as it is presented to view; the apparent width and/or height of a
building as viewed from streets, driveways, and parking lots. Minor changes in wall elevations do not
constitute the creation of additional facades.
GROUND SIGN: A permanent sign which is supported by uprights or braces securely anchored in the
ground, with no more than two feet (2') of clear space between the bottom of the face of the sign and the
grade beneath the sign face.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign which is permanently attached to a structure or foundation.
POLE SIGN: Any sign having a supporting structure with a size less than twenty five percent (25%) of the
total width of the sign with more than two feet (2') of clear space between the bottom of the face of the
sign and the grade beneath the sign face.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign placed upon a property advertising that particular property for sale or lease.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A permanent ground sign placed at the major entrances to and
identifying a residential development.
RESIDENTIAL MARKING SIGN: A temporary sign advertising a residential development.
SHOPPING CENTER: A commercial development in excess of ten (10) acres of land improved with a
structure of at least fifty thousand (50,000) square feet containing five (5) or more distinct and separate
retail businesses.
SHOPPING PLAZA: A commercial development in excess of one acre of land, improved with a structure
containing three (3) or more distinct and separate retail businesses, also sharing common parking areas
and access drives.
SIGN: Any structure, vehicle, device, or any part thereof, which shall be used to identify, advertise, or
attract attention to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group,
commodity, profession, enterprise, industry, or business and which shall display or include any letter,
word, model, number, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as announcement,
direction, or advertisement, and which is intended to be seen by persons in the public right of way.
SIGN AREA: Unless otherwise specified, the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle, or circle which can
wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. In the event that individual letters or insignia of a wall sign are
attached directly to the wall and vary significantly in size, sign area may be computed using not more than
two (2) triangles, rectangles or circles per word or insignia, visible faces of a multifaced sign shall be
treated as if it were a single faced sign with only the area of the largest single faced sign visible at any
one time being computed to determine sign area.
SIGN FACE: The surface of a sign or signboard upon, against or through which a message is displayed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 464/649
SIGN PANEL: An individual sign placard for use in a sign plaza displaying directional information relating
to residential subdivisions under development and public facilities.
SIGN PLAZA: A freestanding structure not more than eight feet (8') above grade, located in the public
right of way, containing individual sign panels intended to provide direction to homebuyers to the location
of residential subdivisions under development and to provide direction to public facilities, and not for any
other purpose.
SNIPE SIGN: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, utility pole and the like or self-supported
by posts or other supports, independent of any building or other structure and anchored in or upon the
ground, advertising residential subdivisions.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign intended to be displayed a limited length of time and not permanently
attached to a structure or a foundation.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached directly to a building wall which does not extend more than twelve inches
(12") therefrom, nor extend above the eaves line of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, nor extend above the
facade of a flat roof, nor above the deck line of a mansard roof.
WINDOW SIGN: A temporary or permanent wall sign which is visible to persons in the public right of way
and which is placed within or on the outside of a window or on the inside of a glass window, or on the
inside of a building and within one foot (1') of a window. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27, 11-
9-1999; Ord. 2005-58, 11-22-2005; Ord. 2005-59, 11-22-2005; Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
5-13-5: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF SIGNS:
The number of signs which may be maintained on any premises is governed by the zoning district in
which the property is located. A double faced sign shall count as a single sign. When a premises or where
a building has both a front and rear public entrance, a rear sign may be erected. The rear sign shall not
exceed in size the front sign. Signs described in section 5-13-14 of this chapter shall not be counted in
calculating the total number of signs. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-6: LIMIT ON SIGN AREA:
Each premises shall be allowed an aggregate total of four (4) square feet of signage per linear foot of
building frontage, for all signs located on the property. Premises having frontage on more than one
dedicated street will be allowed signage for frontage on each street in accordance with the above formula.
(Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-7: PERMITS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS:
A. No permanent sign shall hereafter be erected, altered, or moved until the person proposing to erect,
alter, or move such sign shall have obtained a permit therefor from the building commission. Such
permit shall be issued only when the sign complies with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person desiring such a permit shall file application therefor upon a form which shall contain the
following information:
1. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 465/649
2. A plot plan drawn to scale showing the location of the building, structure or lot to which the sign is to
be attached or erected, and showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and
thoroughfares;
3. A plan drawn to scale showing the design of the sign, materials used, method of construction, and
means of attachment to the building or ground;
4. The name of the person erecting, altering, or moving said sign;
5. Written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign is to be erected, altered, or relocated;
6. Any other information as the building and zoning officer shall require in order to show full
compliance with this and all other applicable codes of the village. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-8: PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A. No temporary sign, except those enumerated in section 5-13-14 of this chapter, shall be placed or
erected until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the village clerk. A temporary sign permit
shall entitle the holder thereof to display such sign for the time period specified therein. No temporary
sign, including signs for political candidates, shall be permitted or placed in a public right of way. (Ord.
1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
B. Duration of temporary signs shall be as follows:
1. Residential Marketing Signs, On And Off Site: Twelve (12) months, renewable on a six (6) month
basis thereafter.
2. Commercial Or Industrial Real Estate Signs: Commercial or industrial real estate signs, exceeding
six (6) square feet in area, six (6) months, renewable on a six (6) month basis.
3. Temporary Mobile Signs: Advertising a special sale or event not to exceed thirty (30) days and not
more than three (3) times per year with at least thirty (30) days between such advertising periods.
C. Application for a permit for temporary sign shall be made on a form provided by the village. Permits for
temporary signs must be kept on the premises where signs are displayed. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
D. Every applicant for a temporary sign, searchlight and inflatable balloons shall pay a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). No fee shall be charged for temporary sign permits for not for profit activities or
organizations. The use of searchlights for grand openings shall not exceed seventy two (72) hours in
duration and the permit fee shall be established by village ordinance. The use of large inflatables (i.e.,
hot air balloons) for special events shall not exceed seventy two (72) hours in duration and the permit
fee shall be established by village ordinance. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
5-13-9: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited:
A. Moving, rotating or animated signs, except traditional barber poles, not exceeding two feet (2') in height
and projecting not more than twelve inches (12") from the building, utilized only to identify a haircutting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 466/649
establishment. In authorizing the latter exemption, the corporate authorities find it in the public interest
to retain this historic symbol of American commerce.
B. Searchlights other than for grand openings. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
C. Sign illumination that is not steady and constant, except electronic message centers may display
messages at intervals not less than five (5) seconds. (Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
D. Windows painted or posted in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the viewing area. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-
1998)
E. (Rep. by Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
F. Freestanding panels, flags or banners used to advertise products, prices and services or attract
attention. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
G. Advertising or signage of any type on a satellite antenna. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985; amd. Ord. 1998-
1, 1-13-1998)
H. Signs not listed in sections 5-13-14, 5-13-15, 5-13-16 and 5-13-18 of this chapter shall be deemed to
be prohibited, even though such signs are not specifically listed in this section. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-
1998)
I. Snipe signs. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall be fined one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per sign for the first violation, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per sign for the
second violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) per sign for three (3) or more violations; and a
separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 2005-58, 11-22-2005)
J. Temporary signs which contain one or more electronic message centers. (Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
5-13-10: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON CORNER LOTS:
No sign having a height of more than thirty inches (30") above the crown of the adjacent streets shall be
constructed or placed within the part of the yard or open area of a corner lot which is included within a
triangular area of twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the two (2) street right of way lines
forming such corner lot. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-11: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON LOTS:
With the exception of wall mounted signs not projecting more than twelve inches (12") from wall, no sign
shall be placed closer than five feet (5') from any lot line. Gasoline price signs shall be located on poles,
one per street frontage, not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area. Such gasoline price signs may
be placed within one foot (1') of the lot line if it does not obstruct the view of traffic nor exceed fifteen feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 467/649
(15') in height when mounted on light standards. Temporary mobile signs shall be located not less than
one foot (1') from the property line and shall not obstruct the view of traffic. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-12: ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS:
A. Illumination shall be constant in intensity and color. Illumination shall be installed or applied only
through a translucent surface, recessed into the sign structure, or if the light source is external to the
sign, directed to and concentrated on the sign. Floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or other external
sources of illumination shall be contained within a protective casing. The illumination of signs shall be
located or shielded in such a way that direct rays do not reflect into a public way or any adjacent
property.
B. The following illumination shall be prohibited: changing light intensity, brightness, exposed light bulbs,
flashing, blinking, or traveling and similar illumination, beacon lights, red, green and amber lights.
C. All illuminated signs within one hundred feet (100') of any residential use shall be turned off between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. unless the establishment is engaged
in the operation of business during the period, in which case the sign may be lit during the hours of
operation only.
D. In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any internal or external light source, exceed
fifty (50) foot-candles when measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face
at a distance of four feet (4') from the sign, or exceed one-half (1/2) foot-candle in a residential district.
(Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
5-13-13: SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, supports, background, anchors, and wiring
systems shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the building, electrical and fire
protection codes of the village.
B. All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept in a good state of repair. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-14: CERTAIN SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise stated, signs listed in this section are permitted in all zoning districts and shall not
require a sign permit nor be counted when calculating the number of signs or square footage on a
premises. However, such signs shall conform to all other general regulations in this chapter, for example,
height, area, setback, clearance, etc.:
A. Name and address plates which give only the name and address of the resident of the building, and
which are not more than one square foot in sign area.
B. Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of erection of buildings, no larger than five (5)
square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 468/649
C. No trespassing signs or other such signs regulating the use of a property, not more than two (2) square
feet in sign area in residential districts and six (6) square feet in all commercial and industrial districts.
D. Real estate signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet per side in all districts. Such real estate signs shall
be removed within fifteen (15) days after the premises so advertised has been sold, or leased.
E. Signs regulating on premises traffic and parking, and signs denoting building facilities such as
lavatories and public telephone areas, when less than six (6) square feet in area and bearing no
commercial advertising.
F. Signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction of such a body, and bearing no
commercial advertising, such as traffic signs, railroad crossing signs, safety signs, and signs
identifying public schools and playgrounds.
G. The flag, pennant, or insignia of any government, or of any religious, charitable, or fraternal
organization.
H. One logo flag of a company shall be allowed provided it is flown with and is not larger than the
American flag.
I. Garage sale signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, may be placed at the curb in residential
areas not to exceed ten (10) days. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
J. Temporary signs no larger than thirty two (32) square feet in area advertising the sale of edible farm
products, advertising auctions or special events of charitable or public service groups. Such signs may
remain for thirty (30) days, must be located entirely on privately owned property and must be removed
upon close of the event. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
K. Window signs of paper or similar material shall be allowed in commercial districts, provided that such
signs are to be used to notify the public of special sales or current prices, and further provided that
such signs do not take up more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window area. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-
1998)
L. Temporary residential marketing signs, off site shall be allowed at not more than four (4) off site
locations within the village to call attention and give directions to the development. Each sign shall be
located entirely on private property, shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area and shall not
have a total height of more than ten feet (10'). Location and construction shall be approved by the
village board upon recommendation of the plan commission. Such signs shall be considered
temporary and have a temporary sign permit as outlined in section 5-13-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-
1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
M. Sign plazas, as follows:
1. The village may grant the right to design, erect, and maintain sign plazas pursuant to a duly
executed license agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 469/649
2. Sign plazas shall be ladder type with individual sign panels of uniform design, and shall not include
pennants, flags, or other devices for visual attention.
3. The location and construction of all sign plazas shall be approved by the village board.
4. Sign plazas shall have a sign permit as outlined in section 5-13-7 of this chapter.
5. Fees for the sign plazas and sign panels shall be as set forth in a duly executed license agreement
or as set by the village board.
6. In the event a sign plaza is not constructed within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of
issuance of a permit, such permit shall expire.
7. Sign panels shall contain only the name of a residential community, subdivision, neighborhood,
homebuilder and/or developer, the respective logo and recognized color scheme, the name and/or
location of public facilities, and an appropriate uniform directional arrow. A line of text at the bottom
of the sign panel with directional information is permissible if circumstances so warrant.
8. The name of the village shall be displayed prominently at the top of each sign plaza. (Ord. 2005-59,
11-22-2005)
5-13-15: SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
A. All signs enumerated in section 5-13-14 of this chapter.
B. Name and address plates for buildings containing more than two (2) dwelling units, provided that such
signs shall not be more than three (3) square feet in area.
C. Identification signs for nonresidential uses, i.e., churches, cemeteries, golf courses, private nonprofit
recreational areas, provided that such signs are limited to one sign per building entrance, and provided
that each such sign be limited to thirty two (32) square feet of area, and six feet (6') in height if a
ground sign.
D. Permanent residential development signs at entrances to a residential development or a residential
planned unit development and containing no commercial advertising, constructed entirely upon
privately owned property, constructed of material which is the same or of a more permanent nature
than the material used in the buildings and as approved by the plan commission and village board.
E. Temporary residential marketing signs at major entrances to planned unit developments or residential
subdivisions, not to exceed one hundred twenty eight (128) square feet in area or fifteen feet (15') in
height, containing the name of the development and the names of builders or units therein.
Such signs shall be considered temporary and have a temporary sign permit as outlined in section 5-
13-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-16: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
All signs are prohibited in the commercial districts except:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 470/649
A. All signs permitted in the residential districts, sections 5-13-14 and 5-13-15 of this chapter.
B. Ground or pole signs as follows:
1. Single Or Combined Use Building And Lot: One per street frontage, not to exceed one hundred
(100) square feet in area or four feet (4') in height for a ground sign or twenty five feet (25') in height
for a pole sign.
2. Shopping Plaza: One per street frontage, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area
or six feet (6') in height for a ground sign and twenty five feet (25') in height for a pole sign.
3. Shopping Center: One ground sign per street frontage, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120)
square feet in area or six feet (6') in height; plus one pole sign per street frontage, not to exceed two
hundred twenty (220) square feet in area per sign face, or thirty feet (30') in height, provided that
advertising displayed thereon shall be limited to business, merchandise, and services found within
the shopping center.
4. Real Estate Signs: One per street frontage except as defined in subsection 5-13-14D of this
chapter, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet of sign area per face for each one acre of land
area up to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet of sign area per face; not to exceed ten
feet (10') in height. Such signs shall be considered temporary and have a temporary sign permit as
outlined in section 5-13-8 of this chapter.
5. Gasoline Price Signs: No more than one gasoline price sign per street frontage with a maximum
sign size of fifteen (15) square feet if attached to poles. The sign must be permanently mounted on
a pole and will not be included in the computation of the total signage requirement.
C. Wall sign as follows:
1. Single Use Building And Lot: Two (2) signs per facade, but not to exceed a total of four (4) such
signs.
2. Combined Use Building And Lot: Three (3) signs per facade, but not to exceed a total of six (6) such
signs. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
3. Shopping Plaza: One sign per individual business or other enterprise, two (2) signs per corner unit,
one on each facade. For purposes of this subsection C3, a wall sign may be constructed of
individual sign elements that together convey a single, complete message, and the totality of the
sign elements shall be considered a single wall sign. Sign elements are graphics, taglines or the
individual letters that comprise the main text of a wall sign. The total wall sign area shall be
determined by adding the area of the smallest rectangle, circle, triangle, or parallelogram drawn
around each individual sign element. (Ord. 2011-04, 1-25-2011)
4. Shopping Center: Same as shopping plaza, subsection C3 of this section.
5. Area Limitation: The above signs are limited to an area equal to ten percent (10%) of the facade of
the building containing the business or other enterprise of the facade upon which the sign is to be
mounted.
D. Total sign area per lot: See section 5-13-6 of this chapter.
E. Awning sign as follows:
1. Awning shall not project more than forty eight inches (48") from the wall of the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 471/649
2. Awning shall not project beyond the lot line.
3. Awning signs shall have a bottom elevation of at least eight feet (8') above sidewalk or grade below.
4. Awning signs shall comply with all other requirements of wall signs. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
F. Electronic message centers may be incorporated into ground or pole signs and gasoline price signs, as
follows:
1. Signs containing electronic message centers shall otherwise conform to all other regulations
applicable to signs as regulated by the zoning district of the subject property.
2. The electronic message shall remain fixed for a minimum of five (5) seconds to avoid a flashing or
blinking effect. The electronic message shall change only through dissolve or fade transitions, or
with the use of other subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have the appearance of moving
text or images.
3. The electronic message center portion of a sign shall comprise no more than fifty percent (50%) of
the total area of the sign. (Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
5-13-17: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
All signs are prohibited in the industrial districts except:
A. Permitted Signs: All signs enumerated in sections 5-13-14 and 5-13-15 of this chapter.
B. Wall Signs: Wall signs are limited to an area equal to twelve percent (12%) of the facade upon which
the sign is to be mounted.
C. Ground Signs: One per street frontage; provided that the maximum size of signs in the industrial zone
shall be two hundred (200) square feet.
D. Real Estate Signs (Except As Defined In Subsection 5-13-14D Of This Chapter): One per street
frontage, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet of sign area per face for each one acre of
contiguous land area, but not to exceed a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet of area per sign
face; not to exceed fifteen feet (15') in height. Such signs shall be considered temporary and have a
temporary sign permit as outlined in section 5-13-8 of this chapter.
E. Height: No sign shall project higher than thirty five feet (35') above the normal finished grade beneath
it.
F. Industrial Development Signs: Permanent industrial development signs at entrances to industrial parks
not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet, constructed entirely upon privately owned property,
constructed of material which is the same or of a more permanent nature than the material used in the
buildings and as approved by the plan commission and village board. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
G. Electronic message centers may be incorporated into ground signs, gasoline price signs, and industrial
development signs as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 472/649
1. Signs containing electronic message centers shall otherwise conform to all other regulations
applicable to signs as regulated by the zoning district of the subject property.
2. The electronic message shall remain fixed for a minimum of five (5) seconds to avoid a flashing or
blinking effect. The electronic message shall change only through dissolve or fade transitions, or
with the use of other subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have the appearance of moving
text or images.
3. The electronic message center portion of a sign shall comprise no more than fifty percent (50%) of
the total area of the sign. (Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
5-13-18: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. All permanent signs which are legally in existence at the time of passage of this chapter, but which do
not conform to one or more provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming
use and may be continued only as provided in this title.
B. Any nonconforming sign rendered nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter may be continued in
use, provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair, except as
otherwise permitted herein.
C. Whenever a nonconforming sign has been discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, or
whenever there is evidently a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming sign,
such sign shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the sign thereafter
shall be brought into conformity with the regulations of this chapter. Any such discontinued sign shall
be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the structure
upon which such sign may be found within ten (10) days after written notification from the building
commissioner, and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the
building commissioner may cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be
paid by the owner of the property to which such sign is attached.
D. Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs or
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign.
E. No structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be made in a nonconforming sign, unless the
alteration will result in eliminating the nonconforming use.
F. If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or
more of its replacement value at that time, or fifty percent (50%) or more of the physical structure,
whichever is least, the sign can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty
percent (50%), the sign may then be restored to its original condition and the use may be continued
which existed at the time of such partial destruction until the nonconforming sign is otherwise abated
by the provisions of this chapter. In either event, restoration or repair must be started within a period of
thirty (30) days from the date of damage or destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion.
G. Existing temporary mobile signs shall be removed or permitted hereunder no later than thirty (30) days
after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 473/649
5-13-19: DUTIES:
The building commissioner shall examine all applications for permits for erection of new signs to ensure
conformity with the requirements of this chapter, record and file all applications for permits with any
accompanying plans and documents, make a periodic inspection of all signs in the village, and submit
reports as directed by the village board. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-20: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies available to the village at law or equity, any person or entity who violates
or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
or not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. (Ord. 1998-1,
1-13-1998)
Chapter 14
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES1
5-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Section, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings,
unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having more than twenty five percent (25%) its stock-in-trade in
books, films, toys, devices or mechanisms, videocassettes (whether for viewing off-premises or onpremises),
or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
as defined herein.
ADULT CABARET: A cabaret which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition of any adult oriented motion pictures, live performance, display
or dance of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or
simulated performing of specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas,
removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal
service offered customers.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50)
persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined
herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons
regularly used for presenting material having as a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, proprietorship, or other legal entity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 474/649
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended
primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any premises to which the public patrons or members are invited or
admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or
stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult oriented motion
pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a
member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or
indirect. A sexually oriented business further includes, without being limited to, any adult bookstores, adult
motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments, adult cabaret, adult entertainment
studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented
as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region;
2. Buttocks;
3. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual simulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
C. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. (Ord. 1999-
13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-2: LIQUOR LICENSE:
No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on the premises of any sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-3: REGISTRATION:
The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents,
or any other person managing or controlling a building or premises any part of which contains an adult
use, shall register the following information with the Village Clerk:
A. The address of the premises;
B. The name of the owner of the premises and names of the beneficial owners if the property is in a land
trust;
C. The address of the owner and the beneficial owners;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 475/649
D. The name of the business or establishment;
E. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial owner or the major stockholders of the business
or establishment;
F. The date of initiation of the sexually oriented business;
G. If the premises of building is leased, a copy of said lease must be attached. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-4: LOCATION:
Sexually oriented businesses are permitted in M-1 or M-2 zoned districts, provided that no person shall
operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property boundary of a preexisting:
A. Public or private elementary or secondary school; or
B. Licensed daycare center; or
C. Cemetery; or
D. Public park; or
E. Public housing; or
F. Place of religious worship; or
G. Residential zoning district; or
H. Other sexually oriented business.
For the purpose of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the other
specified use. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-5: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any
material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 476/649
from any public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturday and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon on Sunday. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-7: STAGE SEPARATION AND RAILING REQUIREMENTS:
Entertainers identified in the definition of "adult cabaret" or similar entertainers shall perform upon a stage
elevated at least eighteen inches (18") above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated
area thereof within which entertainers perform, shall be a distance of at least six feet (6') from all parts of
a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The stage area, or the clearly designated area
thereof within which entertainers perform, shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be
located by a barrier or railing, the top of which is at least four feet (4') above floor level. Entertainers shall
additionally stay at least six feet (6') from other entertainers on stage. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
Title 6
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 1
SUBDIVISIONS PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
6-1-1: PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION:
Because each new subdivision accepted by the Village becomes a permanent unit in the basic physical
structure of the future community, and to which the future community will, of necessity, be forced to
adhere, all subdivisions hereafter planned within the incorporated limits of the Village, and within the
unincorporated area lying one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits, shall, in all respects,
be in full compliance with the regulations hereinafter contained in this Title. These regulations are
designed to provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the Village, for the coordination of
streets within new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, and to secure a uniform system of
utilities and services, and otherwise to promote realization of the comprehensive plan. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-1-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of
construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 477/649
B. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
D. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Title, its meaning shall be
construed as set forth in the definition thereof, and any word appearing in parenthesis directly after a
word herein defined shall be construed in the same sense as that word. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Title, shall be construed as herein defined.
ALLEY: A right of way which affords secondary means of access to properties abutting upon a street.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, railroad rights
of way, or other similar natural boundaries. A block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of
the corporate limits of the Village.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Building Officer and Inspector of the Village or his duly authorized
representative.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land, which denotes the area between
such line and the adjacent street right-of-way line where a building and other obstructions are prohibited,
except those obstructions that are permitted by zoning ordinance regulations.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including the
principal entrance streets of residential developments and the principal streets for circulation within such a
development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Refers to the composite of the functional and geographic elements of the
comprehensive plan of the Village and environs or any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps,
charts, text of reports, implementing ordinances and the official map1.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street with a single outlet.
EASEMENT: A quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty, privilege or advantage in land
without profit is dedicated and is distinct from ownership of the land or is granted either to the public, a
particular person or a combination of both.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described in Section 5-
12-6 hereof.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street which is parallel to and either adjacent to or within the right of way of a
thoroughfare.
HALF STREET: A street of less than the total required width along one or more property lines of a
subdivision.
LAND IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewerage system, storm sewer system, water supply and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 478/649
distribution systems, roadway, side-strip, sidewalk, pedestrianway, no-access strip, off-street parking area,
lot grading or other improvement which the Village may require under this Title.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building
development.
LOT, BUTT: A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2) corner lots.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel
streets.
MINOR STREET: A street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to serve abutting properties.
NO-ACCESS STRIP: A land area at least twelve feet (12') wide along the rear lot line of a double-frontage
lot and abutting a thoroughfare within which no vehicular driveway shall be permitted.
OFFICIAL MAP: The official map of Minooka, Illinois2.
OWNER OR SUBDIVIDER: Includes any person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public
or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of any of them, or other legal entity having sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided or divided to commence and maintain proceedings
under the provisions of this Title.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way across or within a block designated for pedestrian use.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The Village's Planning and Zoning Commission. References in
this Code to "Plan Commission" or "Planning Commission" shall be deemed to mean the Village's
Planning and Zoning Commission3.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as described in Section 5-12-4
hereof.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street designated for vehicular use.
SIDE-STRIP: The unpaved strip of land within a street right of way and is parallel to the roadway.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street designated for pedestrian use.
STREET: A right of way which affords primary means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, easement or however
otherwise designated.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the right of way lines of a given street.
SUBDIVISION: Is: a) a described tract of land which is to be or has been divided into two (2) or more
parcels of land; b) any division of land which creates a lot for transfer of ownership and/or building
development where a new street is involved; or c) the dedication of streets, ways or other areas for the
use of the public. The division of a tract, parcel or lot into parcels or lots all of which resultant parcels or
lots exceed five (5) acres and if a new street is not involved, or the division of land for the purpose of
transfer of ownership to adjoining property owners and such division does not create an additional lot or
lots, provided that a contract for sale requiring conformity with this title may be entered into, shall not be
deemed to be a subdivision. A certified plat of survey, when required by the village board, shall be in
conformance with applicable provisions of this title and shall be required for the division of land when a
new lot is created for the purpose of transfer of ownership and/or building development and a new street
is not involved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 479/649
The term "subdivision" includes "resubdivision" and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The basic land planning principles established as guides for the
preparation of preliminary plats.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an arterial trafficway between
various districts of the village and its environs.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The village board of the village of Minooka, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village of Minooka, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: A professional engineer, registered in the state of Illinois, who has been duly
appointed as the village engineer of the village, or who has been hired by the village as its consulting
engineer. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the recorder's office of the county having
jurisdiction or have any validity until it shall have been approved in a manner prescribed in this title. (Ord.,
5-15-1974; amd. 1997 Code)
6-1-5: VARIATIONS:
The planning and zoning commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this title in
specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the comprehensive plan or intent of this title. Such
recommendations shall be communicated to the village board or governing county authorities in writing,
substantiating the recommended variation. The village board may approve variations from these
requirements for subdivisions within the village limits when, in its opinion, such variations will not
adversely affect the comprehensive plan or the spirit of this title. The planning and zoning commission
shall notify the owner or subdivider and other interested parties as to the time and place of the planning
and zoning commission meeting at which the variation is being considered and where the owner or
subdivider and other interested parties will be afforded an opportunity of being heard. Such notice shall be
published, posted or delivered and in such form as prescribed by the village attorney. (Ord., 5-15-1974;
amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-1-6: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any provision of this title shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Chapter 2
PLATS AND PROCEDURES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 480/649
6-2-1: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land in the village and the unincorporated areas within one and
one-half (11/2) miles of the village limits, an owner or subdivider shall submit a preliminary plan and a final
plat to be acted upon by the village authorities in accordance with the laws of the state and the following
provisions of this title. Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat it is recommended that: a) the owner or
subdivider consult with the planning and zoning commission and other village officials to secure
information relative to requirements of the comprehensive plan, official map, zoning regulations,
subdivision regulations and any other applicable village ordinances; and b) subsequently submit to the
planning and zoning commission a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision prepared on a topographic
survey of the area showing the street system, arrangement of lots, and location of public use areas that
may be required to be reserved. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
A. Preliminary Plat:
1. The owner or subdivider shall file an application for approval of the preliminary plat with the village
clerk. Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat and the required filing fee shall accompany the
application. The filing fee for a preliminary plat shall be in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994)
2. The village clerk shall refer six (6) copies of the preliminary plat to the planning and zoning
commission, at least twenty (20) days in advance at the next meeting of the planning and zoning
commission.
3. The planning and zoning commission shall notify the owner or subdivider as to the time and place of
the planning and zoning commission meeting at which he will be afforded an opportunity of being
heard.
4. The planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary
plat approval within ninety (90) days from the date of filing the application or the filing by the
applicant of the last item of required supporting documents, whichever date is later, unless such
time is extended by mutual consent.
5. When the preliminary plat has been acted upon by the planning and zoning commission, it shall be
referred to the village board. If the planning and zoning commission approves the plat, it shall so
indicate on the plat, and if it disapproves such plat, it shall furnish the village board and the applicant
a written statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the
aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this title and the official map, and with the
intent of the comprehensive plan. The village board shall accept or reject said plat within thirty (30)
days after its regular stated meeting following the action of the planning and zoning commission.
6. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the village board, the following notice of approval shall be
stamped upon four (4) prints thereof, and required signatures affixed:
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of a subdivision shown hereon has received
approval by the Village Board of the Village of Minooka, Illinois, and upon compliance by the
subdivider with requirements of qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plats and with
other revisions and stipulations that may be required, the Village Board will receive the final plat for
consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such form and within such time as required by
the subdivision regulations of the Village
The Village Board of the Village of Minooka, Illinois
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 481/649
Date 19
By
Village President
Attest
Village Clerk
7. Said prints of such approved preliminary plat shall be distributed by the Village Clerk as follows:
a. Six (6) prints shall be sent to the Planning and Zoning Commission;
b. One print shall be sent to the Village Engineer;
c. One print shall be retained by the Village Clerk for filing; and
d. One print shall be returned to the subdivider.
8. Approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board shall be
conditioned upon stipulations as set forth in Section 5-12-5 hereof. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord.
1993-12, 8-24-1993)
B. Final Plat:
1. Within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the Village Board, the owner or subdivider
shall file an application for approval of the final plat with the Village Clerk. In case application for
approval of a final plat is made for a part or parts of an approved preliminary plat, the Village Board
may extend the time for application of approval of final plats for other parts of the approved
preliminary plat until a later date or dates beyond the foregoing one year period. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
2. The application for final plat shall include the original drawing, drawn with ink on linen tracing cloth
or its equivalent measuring twenty nine inches by twenty nine inches (29" x 29") one transparency
print and six (6) prints of the final plat, six (6) copies of all supporting maps, plans and other
drawings, and all other required documents. The Village Clerk will refer the application for approval
of the final plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission twenty (20) days in advance of the next
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation and report relative to design
characteristics of the final plat. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the approved
preliminary plat, except that the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village
Board may require such changes or revisions as deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the
community in keeping with the provisions of this Title. The filing fee for each final plat shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1982-5, 11-8-1982; amd. Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994; Ord. 1993-12, 8-
24-1993)
3. When the subdivider or owner, submitting the application for final plat approval, has filed with the
Village Clerk all drawings, maps and other documents required by this Title to be furnished in
support thereof and when all such material meets all requirements of this Title and other applicable
ordinances of the Village, the Village Board shall approve the proposed plat within sixty (60) days
from the date of filing the last required document or other paper, or a period of time beyond such
sixty (60) day period that is mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Village Board.
4. Upon approval by the Village Board, the Village Clerk shall secure three (3) contact prints of the
approved final plat, and three (3) copies of the approved supporting documents. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
a. One contact print of the final plat, and when applicable, one copy of the accompanying protective
covenants and one copy of the supporting documents shall be delivered to the Planning and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 482/649
Zoning Commission for the files; (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
b. One contact print and all specifications, drawings and estimates shall be delivered to the Village
Engineer; and
c. One contact print and all other supporting documents shall be retained by the Village Clerk. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
5. The final plat in exact form as approved shall be filed for record in the Recorder of Deed's office of
Grundy and/or Will County, as required, within twenty (20) days of acceptance thereof by the Village
Board and the receipt of approval from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for construction
of water and/or sewer lines. Immediately after recording, the original or a duly certified copy of the
recorded plat shall be filed with the Village Clerk along with three (3) print copies of the required
plat. The subdivider shall pay recording fees and the cost of the original or a certified copy of the
recorded plat and print copies.
a. If, after the twenty (20) working day period has expired, the final plat has not been properly
recorded, then the final plat is null and void and of no force and effect.
b. If, due to extenuating circumstances, the final plat cannot be properly recorded within the twenty
(20) working days, the subdivider may submit a written request for an extension of time to record
the final plat to the Village Clerk. The request will be subject for review and consideration by the
Village Board of Trustees at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 1996-30, 10-8-1996)
C. Land Division: Before dividing lots or blocks in any recorded subdivision, which in any case does not
involve new streets or easements of access, or the sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land
following division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of land existing on the
effective date hereof, which does not involve any new street or easement of access, the owner or
divider shall file with the Village Clerk the original drawing and four (4) contact prints of a certified plat
of survey showing the proposed division of such lots, blocks, parcels or tracts of land. Three (3) prints
of the plat of survey shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission at least ten (10) days
before the next meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Not more than thirty (30) days after
the meeting at which the plat of survey is referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify the owner or divider whether a new
street or easement of access is required. In the event that a new street or easement of access is
required, the notice shall stipulate than an application for final plat approval containing such maps,
certifications and supporting documents as required by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
filed with the Village Clerk for processing as herein set forth in this Section and Section 5-12-5 hereof.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
Where the preliminary layout covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a sketch of the
prospective lot layout and street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the street system
of the submitted part will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system
of the part not submitted.
The preliminary plat shall be drawn on tracing paper or tracing cloth having a minimum size of twenty four
inches by eighteen inches (24" x 18"), in a manner that clear and legible prints can be made and shall
show the following:
A. Identification And Description:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 483/649
1. Proposed name of subdivision not duplicating name of any plat heretofore recorded in the Village or
in Grundy County and/or Will County, Illinois.
2. Location by section, town and range, or by other approved legal description.
3. An accompanying boundary line survey map with accurate distances and angles prepared and
certified by a registered surveyor and an accompanying topographic map indicating source of
survey shall accompany the preliminary plat.
4. Names and addresses of the owner or subdivider of the proposed subdivision and designer of such
subdivision and date of preparation.
5. Graphic (engineering) scale, which shall not exceed one hundred feet to one inch (1" = 100').
6. North point (designated as true north).
B. Existing Conditions:
1. Boundary lines of proposed subdivision in accordance with subsection A3 above.
2. Total acreage therein.
3. Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
4. Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other rights of way
showing type of improvement (if any), railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public open
spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section and corporate lines within the
tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract.
5. Location and size of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within
the tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract; also locations of catch
basins, manholes, valves and hydrants, and indicating such data as surface and invert elevations.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
6. Location map shall be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission, drawn at a scale of not
less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000'), showing boundary lines of adjoining
unsubdivided or subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest thoroughfare or other natural
boundaries, identifying type of use of surrounding land and showing alignments of existing streets.
7. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall require topographic data including existing contours at
vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical conditions, such
vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the Village Engineer, (topographic
data shall refer to United States Geodetic Survey or adjusted County datum); and locations of
watercourses, marshes and other significant features. Soil boring data and seepage tests may be
required at locations and depths as determined by the Village Engineer. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord.
1993-12, 8-24-1993)
8. Locations of or references to locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in
preparation of survey and grade elevation of each monument and marker.
C. Subdivision Design Features:
1. The preliminary plan shall be in substantial accord with the comprehensive plan as amended from
time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 484/649
2. Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names (not duplicating the name of any
street heretofore used in the Village and its environs unless such street is an extension of or in line
with an already named street, in which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed
through streets extended to boundaries of subdivision.
3. Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements.
4. Layout, total number of lots and dimensions of the lot containing the minimum width and depth and
the lot containing the maximum width and depth.
5. Minimum front and side street building setback lines, indicating dimensions.
6. Areas (other than those listed in subsection C2, 3 and 4 above), if any, intended to be dedicated or
reserved for nonresidential purposes, indicating in each the approximate acreage. Such areas shall
be designated by letter or number.
7. Typical cross-section of streets and alleys, together with an indication of the proposed storm water
runoff. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
8. When recommended by the Village Engineer and required by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
the subdivider shall submit proposed detailed grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be
approved for subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding, or is within a flood plain, or which
contains inadequate drainage facilities or other topographic conditions which may increase danger
to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make
improvements which will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer and Planning and Zoning
Commission, make such land safe for development and occupancy. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord.
1993-12, 8-24-1993)
9. Land lying wholly or partially within a flood plain may be laid out and slotted or divided as building
lots; provided, that part of site to be used for building location shall have an elevation of not less
than one foot six inches (1'6") above flood crest, and that said lots be filled in from the building site
to the curb in a gradual slope, and that the yard surrounding the building site on the other three (3)
sides be filled in to a reasonable slope, to meet the existing elevation to be determined by the
Building Officer. (Code Change 1980)
6-2-3: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
After the approval of the preliminary plat and prior to filing an application for approval of a final plat, the
subdivider shall submit to the Village Clerk two (2) complete copies of all preliminary plans and
specifications (prepared by a registered engineer) for required land improvements, and if required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, detailed grading plans for lots and blocks. The Village Clerk shall
forward one complete set of such copies of preliminary plans and specifications for land improvements
and grading plans to the Planning and Zoning Commission and one such set of plans and specifications
to the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction shall approve
such preliminary plans and specifications or set forth the revisions necessary for approval. Based upon
the conditions of approval of the preliminary plans and specifications, the subdivider shall have prepared,
by a registered engineer, final plans and specifications covering such required land improvements. Such
plans and specifications shall be approved by the Village Engineer and other public officials having
jurisdiction and such approval shall be certified on the final plat. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-
24-1993)
6-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 485/649
A. General:
1. All information required on the preliminary plat as herein set forth in Section 5-12-4, except those
required therein in subsection B2 through 8 and subsection C4, 7 and 8 shall be shown accurately
and drawn at a scale of not more than one hundred feet to the inch (100' to 1") with black waterproof
drawing ink on transparent linen tracing cloth on one or more sheets, each having a maximum
dimension of twenty nine inches by twenty nine inches (29" x 29"), in a manner that clear and legible
transparent or contact prints and photostatic copies can be made.
B. Additional Delineation:
1. Accurate angular and lineal dimensions of all lines, angles and curvatures, with functions used to
describe all boundaries including: boundary line survey of tract; streets; alleys; easements; areas to
be reserved for public use; and other important features. Error of closure of boundary-line surveys
shall not exceed one in ten thousand (1 foot for each 10,000 feet of perimeter survey). Angular error
shall not exceed plus or minus twenty (±20) seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and
hundredths, and when an angle occurs in any lot line between lot corners, the measurement of the
angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The final plat shall show accurately the
location of all permanent lot markers as actually installed.
2. An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive numbers.
3. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments (not less
than 3), which shall be accurately described in the plat by location, size and elevation.
4. Municipal, township or section lines accurately referenced to the lines of the subdivision by
distances and angles of same are on the boundary or within one hundred feet (100') of said
subdivision.
5. Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all block corners, angle points and at
intermediate points as shall be required by the Village Engineer, and installed in such a manner that
they may be located by a registered surveyor. All USGS, State, County, Village or other official
benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position.
6. Accurate outlines of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use or for the exclusive use of
property owners within the subdivision.
7. Protective covenants, or filed as an accompanying document.
C. Certificates: The application for approval of the final plat shall not be deemed completed until the
following certificates, other than the Village Clerk certificate, have been duly executed:
1. OWNER'S CERTIFICATE*
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in the annexed plat, and
has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as indicated thereon, for the uses and
purposes therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and
title thereon indicated.
The undersigned hereby dedicates for public use the lands shown on this plat for thoroughfares,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 486/649
streets, alleys and public services; and hereby also reserves for the Illinois Bell Telephone Company
and the Commonwealth Edison Company, and the Village, the easement provisions which are
stated on their standard form which is attached hereto.
Title
Address
Dated this day of , 19 .
*Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporation form of normal
acknowledgement.
2. NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
I, , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that , is
personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing
instrument as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they
sign the annexed plat as their own free and voluntary act for uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of 19 .
Notary Public
3. SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
This is to certify that I, , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. , have surveyed and subdivided the
following described property: as shown by the plat which is a correct representation of said survey
and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further certify that all
regulations enacted by the Village Board relative to plats and subdivisions have been compiled with
in the preparation of this plat.
Also, I do further certify that no part of the property covered by this plat or subdivision is situated
within 500 feet of any surface drain or watercourse serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more.
Given under my hand and Seal at , Illinois, this day of 19 .
4. PLAT CERTIFICATION
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
Approved by the Board of Supervisors of Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 487/649
Plat Officer
5. COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
I, , County Clerk of Grundy/Will County, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent
general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable tax sales against any of the land
included in the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and Seal at Morris, Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
County Clerk
6. CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
I, , Treasurer of the Village of Minooka do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid
current or forfeited special assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have been
apportioned against the tract of land included in the plat.
Dated at Minooka, Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
Treasurer
7. VILLAGE ENGINEER
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
I, , Village Engineer of the Village of Minooka, Illinois, hereby certify that the land improvements
described in the annexed plat and the plans and specifications therefor meet the minimum
requirements of said village and have been approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction
thereof.
Dated at Minooka, Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
Village Engineer
8. VILLAGE CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
I, , Village Clerk of the Village of Minooka, Illinois, hereby certify that the annexed plat was
presented to and by resolution duly approved by the Village Board of said Village at its meeting held
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 488/649
on , 19 , and that the required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the completion of the
improvements required by the regulations of the Village.
In witness whereof I have hereto set my hand and Seal of the Village of Minooka, Illinois this day of ,
19 .
Village Clerk
Note: Except as otherwise required by Statute, certification of final plats of subdivisions located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the Village limits shall be those
required by the Grundy/Will County subdivision regulations, except when the Village subdivision
regulations are more restrictive, the applicable certifications herein shall also be required. (Ord., 5-
15-1974)
D. Easement Provisions: The final plat shall contain the following grant of easements to the Village:
EASEMENT PROVISION
A permanent nonexclusive easement is hereby reserved for and granted to the Village of Minooka,
Illinois, Commonwealth Edison Company and to those public utility companies operating under
franchise from the Village of Minooka, including, but not limited to, Ameritech Telephone Company,
Northern Illinois Gas Company, and to their successors and assigns, in, upon, across, over, under, and
through the areas shown by dashed lines and labelled "Easements" on the attached Plat of
Subdivision for the purpose of installing, constructing, inspecting, operating, replacing, renewing,
altering, enlarging, removing, repairing, cleaning and maintaining electrical, gas, telephone, or other
utility lines or appurtenances, storm and flood water channels, basins, sewers, storm sewers and
sanitary sewers, water transmission mains and lines, valve vaults and hydrants, and any and all
manholes, hydrants, pipes, connections, catch basins, buffalo boxes and without limitation, such other
structures and appurtenances as may be necessary or convenient for the furnishing of public utility
services, together with the right of ingress and egress across and through the easements for persons
and equipment to do any or all of the above work. The right is also hereby granted to the Village and
Utilities to cut down, trim or remove any trees, shrubs or other plants on the easements that interfere
with the operation of the above or with the exercise of any rights under this paragraph. No permanent
buildings or trees shall be placed on said easements, but the same may be used for gardens, shrubs,
landscaping and other purposes that do not then or later interfere with the aforesaid uses and rights.
Easements are hereby reserved for and granted to the Village of Minooka over all of the easement
areas for ingress, egress and for the performance of municipal and other governmental services,
including water, storm and sanitary sewer service and maintenance. All the easements indicated shall
be perpetual, except those identified as "temporary". The easement areas shown as detention or
retention easements shall include, in addition to the above rights, the right to flood such area with
storm waters, and shall also include the right to install and maintain storm water detention and
retention structures. No fences, permanent buildings or trees shall be placed in easements labeled
"emergency overland release routes".
(Ord. 1997-06, 3-11-1997)
6-2-5: AGREEMENTS:
A. Any owner or subdivider filing an application for approval of a final plat shall submit a statement of
agreement that: the land improvements required by chapter 4 of this title shall be completed by the
owner or subdivider in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village engineer and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 489/649
village board and all inspection fees required and one set of plans and specifications showing such
improvements as installed shall be paid to or filed with the village board following the approval of the
final plat by the village board. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
B. A completion bond shall be posted by such owner or subdivider with the village clerk prior to recording
of the final plat. Insurance company underwriting said completion bond shall have a minimum financial
strength rating of A- as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc. Such completion bond shall be a penal sum
sufficient to cover the cost of the land improvements required by chapter 4 of this title, or in lieu of a
bond, a deposit of cash, or other security or guarantee acceptable to the village board. Such cost for
the completion of the required land improvements shall be in accordance with cost estimates prepared
by the village engineer and approved by the village board. Such bond, cash or security shall equal not
less than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the village engineer's estimate of the
improvement. If a completion bond, deposit of cash or other security or other guarantee is posted,
there shall be good and sufficient surety thereon, as approved by the village board and said security
shall be in such form as approved by the village attorney, conditioned upon the installation of said
improvements and payment of inspection fees, within two (2) years following the approval of the final
plat. If cash or other security is deposited, it shall be used, insofar as it is sufficient, for the cost of
making such improvements, including inspection fees. Any unused balance will be returned to the
depositor. There shall be no reduction of that portion of the bond or other guarantee or deposit
applying to a particular improvement unless or until that improvement is complete and accepted or
approved by the village board, except that upon the completion of the subgrade, base course and onehalf
(1/2) of the thickness of the wearing surface course of a street, alley or parking area, the village
board may reduce that amount of that portion of the bond or other guarantee or deposit covering such
land improvements, but such reduction shall not be more than an amount equal to ninety percent
(90%) of the estimated cost of installation of the subgrade and base course. (Ord. 2003-17, 4-22-
2003)
C. The completion bond shall be acknowledged before a notary public by the principal and surety and
shall be in substantially the same form.
1. KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT: WE, as principal and as surety, are firmly bound
to the Village of Minooka, Illinois, in the penal sum of $ , lawful money of the United States of America,
for the payment of such sum, well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns, jointly and severally, by these presents.
The condition of the above obligation is such that:
WHEREAS, has obtained, according to law and ordinances of the Village, approval of the (Plat of ),
being a Subdivision of
IN Grundy/Will County, Illinois, conditioned upon: (a) that by date the making of certain land
improvements to-wit:
as more fully described in plans dated and prepared by ; and (b) the execution and delivery of this
bond.
NOW, if the said shall well and faithfully and in a good and workmanlike manner of good materials
according to law and the ordinances of the Village, and in conformity with said plans dated , construct
said improvements, and pay all inspection fees payable to the Village by reason of such construction.
THEN THIS OBLIGATION shall be null and void; otherwise the same shall remain in full force and
effect.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and Seal this day of , 19 .
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 490/649
Principal
Surety
2. NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL )
I, , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that personally
known to me to be the same names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me
this day in person and acknowledged that they signed the above instrument as their own free and
voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of , 19 .
Notary Public
D. The village clerk shall not certify the approval of the village board on the final plat until the required
bond, deposit, cash or other guarantee has been filed as required by this section.
Note: Such agreements, as set forth above shall not be required for subdivisions located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the village limits when there is
evidence that agreements are entered into between the owner or subdivider and Grundy/Will County,
except when the village standards of public improvements are of higher quality than Grundy/Will
County standards, such agreements may be required by the village. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-2-6: FEE FOR FILING PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. A fee shall be paid to the village clerk at the time of submission of the preliminary plat. No plat shall be
forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for review without a receipt from the village clerk
being exhibited showing full payment of the fee. Payment of the fee is in no way contingent on whether
the plat of subdivision submitted is approved or disapproved. The fee shall be as follows: (Ord., 5-15-
1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
1. Two dollars ($2.00) per lot for subdivisions containing fifty (50) lots or less, with minimum fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
2. One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each additional lot over fifty (50) in
subdivisions containing more than fifty (50) lots, but not more than one hundred fifty (150).
3. Two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional lot over one hundred fifty
(150) in subdivisions containing more than one hundred fifty (150) lots.
B. In the event that the plat of subdivision calls for development of residential property either as two-family
or multiple-family or as business or industrial property, then the fee shall be determined as two dollars
($2.00) per each dwelling unit or business unit and two dollars ($2.00) per acre of industrial land.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 491/649
6-2-7: VILLAGE ENGINEER'S SERVICES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2005-48, 10-25-2005)
6-2-8: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
No building permit as regulated by the building code shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement of land or any lot within a subdivision, as defined
herein, which has been approved for platting until all requirements of this title have been fully complied
with. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-2-9: BUILDINGS WITHIN PROPOSED MAJOR STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
After the effective date hereof, no permanent building or structure shall be erected within the rights of way
of major thoroughfares as shown on the official map of the village. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-2-10: BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
A. Building Permits: No building permit shall be granted by any village official for the use of any building,
structure or land improvement within a subdivision or planned unit development (PUD) approved for
platting or replatting until the following improvements have been installed, inspected, and approved by
the applicable village authority:
1. Sanitary sewer;
2. Water main;
3. Storm sewer, including sump pump collector lines;
4. Storm water detention;
5. Aggregate base course; and
6. Curb and gutter.
B. Building And Occupancy Permits For Model Homes: Building permits may be issued for the
construction of model homes, to be used for temporary sales or construction offices, within a
subdivision or planned unit development (PUD), approved for platting or replatting, after recording of
the final plat, and after a site plan has been approved by the applicable village authorities. Occupancy
permits for such model homes shall not be issued, however, until compliance with the following
provisions:
1. No occupancy permit1 shall be granted by any village official for the use of any building or any
dwelling unit contained therein, structure or land improvement within a subdivision or planned unit
development (PUD) until the improvements as set forth in subsections A1 through A6 of this section
have been installed, inspected and approved by the applicable village authority, and
2. The following have been ordered from the applicable utility or authority:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 492/649
a. Streetlights; and
b. Street signs, including regulatory signs. (Ord. 1998-6, 5-12-1998)
6-2-11: RECORD OF PLATS:
All of such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted and approved as provided in this title
and recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Grundy and/or Will County, shall be filed and kept by
the village clerk among the records of the village. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 3
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
6-3-1: STREET PLAN:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the
comprehensive plan and official map and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets; to reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; to topographical
conditions, to run-off of storm water; to public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relations to
the proposed uses of the area to be served. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-3-2: STREETS:
A. All rights-of-way widths shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Type Of Street
Residential
Subdivision
Manufacturing Or
Business Subdivision
A Major street
100 feet 100 feet
B Collector
streets*
80 feet 80 feet
C Minor
streets
66 feet 70 feet
D Cul-de-sac
streets
66 feet 70 feet
Bubble 120 feet
E Half streets Permitted, see
Section 6-3-2G
Not permitted
F Frontage
roads
40 feet 50 feet
G
Thoroughfares
Right-of-way widths and other design standards of thoroughfares, including
freeways, expressways, parkways, major and secondary thoroughfares, shall be in
accordance with those designated on the official plan of the Village and Environs, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 493/649
by Federal, State, or County authorities having jurisdiction, whichever has the
greater width and design standard requirements.
*A collector street may be required by the Village Board or when recommended by the Planning and
Zoning Commission: 1) in a residential subdivision containing twenty (20) acres or more in area and
where the lots are one-half (1/2) acre or less in area; 2) in any subdivision as an extension of an existing
or planned collector street in an adjacent subdivision; and 3) in any manufacturing or business
subdivision. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993; 1997 Code)
B. Where there is a deflection in horizontal center lines within a given block of any given point in excess of
ten degrees (10°), a curve shall be inserted with a radius of not less than:
Collector streets 300 feet
(Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
C. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length in feet of
these curves shall meet the requirements of AASHTO's "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets" latest edition. (Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
D. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be avoided.
E. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic
flow, and in general, shall be at or near right angles avoiding acute angles. An intersection of more
than two (2) streets shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise. (Ord., 5-
15-1974)
F. A cul-de-sac street in residential districts shall be not more than five hundred feet (500') in length,
measured along the center line from the street of origin to the end of the right of way, or may be longer
than five hundred (500) lineal feet, provided not more than fifteen (15) lots abut upon its right-of-way
lines.
G. Half streets shall be prohibited except where an existing or dedicated half street is adjacent to a tract to
be subdivided, at which time the other half of the street shall be platted or developed within such tract.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
H. Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a
thoroughfare either by: 1) providing frontage road; or 2) by backing lots to the thoroughfare and
providing access by a collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth removed and with a no-access
strip along the rear lot line. These standards are established for the purpose of providing protection for
the residential properties and to provide for traffic safety and the efficient use of the thoroughfare for its
intended function of accommodating through traffic. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
I. Gradients of streets shall be at least five-tenths percent (0.5%) and shall not exceed on:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 494/649
Collector streets 5%
Minor streets 7%
(Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
J. Where streets are dedicated (whether used or not), but not improved to the standards of this Title and
border on or are wholly within the proposed subdivision land, same shall be improved to the standards
of this Title. (Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
6-3-3: ALLEYS AND PEDESTRIANWAYS:
A. Alleys, when permitted in residential subdivisions, shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide, and alleys in
commercial and manufacturing subdivisions shall be not less than thirty feet (30') wide. (Ord., 5-15-
1974)
B. Pedestrianways, when recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the
Village Board, shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-
1993)
6-3-4: EASEMENTS:
A. Utility distribution of transmission installations serving the subdivision and, when required, storm water
drainage ways, shall be located in easements as designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such
easements shall be located along the rear lot lines or side lot lines at locations of extensions of utility
installation between blocks or continuity of drainage ways. They shall occupy not less than the rear ten
feet (10') of lot depth or ten feet (10') of lot width adjoining the applicable side lot line, or may be of a
greater width if recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the Village Board. Additional
easements at other locations may be recommended for specific conditions by the Village Engineer and
required by the Village Board.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided
a drainage easement conforming substantially with the areas bordering such watercourse that are
subject to flooding, unless said watercourse is improved by deepening or dredging to provide the
same cross-sectional area or floor capacity, in which case the drainage easement may be narrowed to
accommodate the improved watercourse. The boundaries of such areas subject to flooding shall be as
designated by the Village Engineer. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-3-5: BLOCK STANDARDS:
A. In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks containing any lots less than one hundred
feet (100') in width shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) lineal feet, and the maximum length of
blocks containing all lots one hundred feet (100') and over in width shall be one thousand five hundred
(1,500) lineal feet. Pedestrianways, when deemed necessary to provide circulation or access to
schools, parks, transportation or other common destinations, may be required by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 495/649
B. In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum length of blocks shall be as approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the basic street system and traffic
pattern, lot depths and areas designated for public and other nonresidential land uses.
D. Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a railroad or thoroughfare right of way, the Village
Board may require, when recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a street on one or
both sides of such right of way, located approximately parallel to and at a distance removed suitable
for the appropriate use of the intervening land, i.e., park purposes, deep residential lots fronting on it
with a no-access strip along the rear property lines, and off-street parking, business or other uses as
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Village. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-3-6: LOT STANDARDS:
A. General:
1. In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as practicable.
2. Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area requirements set forth in the zoning
regulations of the Village or that of Grundy, Will or Kendall Counties in the unincorporated areas, or
whichever is most restrictive.
3. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or substantially so. (Ord., 5-15-
1974)
4. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage way, channel, stream, railroad or thoroughfare shall
have an additional depth or width as required by the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to
provide acceptable building sites.
5. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as tree
growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar conditions.
B. Residential Subdivisions:
1. Depth of lots shall not be less than one hundred twenty five feet (125').
2. All lots shall have frontage on a street, except lots which do not contain single-family dwellings in a
planned development, as allowed as a conditional permitted use in accordance with regulations
contained in the zoning regulations of the Village, which may have frontage as an easement of
sufficient width for vehicular or pedestrian access to the lot from a street.
3. Double-frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back upon a thoroughfare or upon a body
of water in separate or undivided ownership.
C. Industrial And Business Subdivisions:
1. Depth of lots in a manufacturing or business subdivision shall be as recommended by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village Board.
2. All lots for industrial development shall abut upon a public street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 496/649
3. Double-frontage lots are not permitted except when specifically recommended by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and approved by the Village Board. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-
1993)
6-3-7: PUBLIC USE AREAS, INDICATED ON OFFICIAL MAP:
When an area of land for public use (in addition to streets, alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements)
is recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and required by the Village Board, to be
located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the subdivider shall designate on the preliminary plat and final
plat that such land is reserved for public use. If such land is not acquired or arrangements made for
acquisition by the Village, a school board or other governmental body within one year after the date of
acceptance of all improvements, such land may thereafter be used by the subdivider for a use permitted
at its location by zoning regulations or, if applicable, in accordance with more restrictive protective
covenant requirements. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-3-8: ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS:
If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are herein dedicated as such,
whether located within the corporate limits of the Village or in part outside thereof, or contains streets
located outside of said corporate limits, the approval of the plat by the Village Board of the subsequent
annexation of the property to the Village shall not constitute an acceptance thereon or therein, for
maintenance purposes, irrespective of any act or acts by an officer, agent or employee of the Village with
respect to such streets or improvements. The acceptance of such streets or thoroughfares for
maintenance shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the Village Board after there has been
filed with the Village Clerk a certificate by the Village Engineer certifying that all improvements required to
be constructed or installed in or upon such streets or thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the
final plat of subdivision by the Village Board, have been fully completed and the construction or
installation thereof has been approved by him. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 4
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
6-4-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Before a final plat of subdivision is approved by the Village Board, the owner or subdivider shall submit to
the Village Engineer completed plans and specifications, prepared by a registered engineer, covering the
improvements and utilities described in the subdivider's plat, and the Village Engineer shall certify in
writing to the Village Board that such improvements and utilities meet the minimum requirements of the
Village, County, State and other authorities having jurisdiction, and comply with the following sections.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-2: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS OF DESIGN:
Design, dimensions, materials and methods of construction of improvements shall conform to the
following general requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 497/649
A. For storm drainage, section 603 of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction"
adopted by the State of Illinois, Division of Highways, latest edition thereof;
B. For public sanitary sewer system and/or sewage treatment works, "Rules and Regulations Governing
the Submission of Plan Documents and the Design of Sewage Works" adopted by the Environmental
Protection Agency; and other regulations as may be imposed by the Village or health department of
the county having jurisdiction therein;
C. For subgrade preparation of streets, section 212 of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", latest edition thereof;
D. For base course of streets, section 301 of the aforementioned "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction";
E. For surface course of streets, B-5 Specifications for Bituminous Concrete Dense Graded Aggregate
Type, Modified Plant Mix, as set forth in section 405 of the aforementioned Illinois Road and Bridge
Construction Standards;
F. For curbs and gutters, section 616 of the aforementioned specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction; and
G. For sidewalks and crosswalks, section 624 of the aforementioned "Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction", latest edition thereof. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-3: SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM1:
A. Public or community sanitary sewerage systems, including sewer stub terminals to the lot line of each
lot shall be installed to serve each lot in a subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions or lot divisions
containing no lots less than one acre in area and located in the unincorporated areas within one and
one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village may be served with individual sewage
disposal systems, except that individual sewage disposal systems shall be permitted in subdivisions
annexed to the Village after the effective date hereof only after the Village Board shall find that
connection with a public or community system is not practicable, or there is an agreement between the
subdivider and the Village and a guarantee by the subdivider that all lots in the subdivision will be
served with a public or community sewerage system within a specified period of time. (Ord., 5-1 5-
1974)
B. All sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with standards approved by the State of
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. All sewer design plans and specifications shall be submitted
to the Village Engineer for approval and filing. Each lot platted for the subdivision shall be served by
the sanitary sewer system. All sanitary sewers installed shall be inspected by a reputable firm
approved by the Village Engineer and a report filed with the Village. All sanitary sewer manholes shall
be pre-cast concrete or other material approved by the Village Board. Wherever two (2) sewer lines
connect and there is a difference of vertical elevation of more than two feet (2'), there shall be
constructed a pre-cast, drop-type manhole as specified by the Village Engineer. (Ord., 5-15-1974;
1977 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 498/649
C. Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than required to serve only the subdivision as
delineated in the preliminary plat is required by the Village Board to serve future growth in the vicinity
of the subdivision, the subdivider shall pay for only his portion (based on ordinance requirements for
his subdivision) of the total cost of installation, balance to be borne by the Village. The Village will pay
the difference in cost between the size required for the subdivision and the larger size required by the
Village Board, pursuant to an agreement entered into between the subdivider and the Village. (Ord., 5-
15-1974)
6-4-4: STORM SEWER SYSTEM:
A. An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be constructed and installed, consisting of natural
watercourses, storm sewers and other necessary facilities which will drain the subdivision and protect
roadway pavements.
B. Storm drainage inlets shall be placed in street gutters at intersections and elsewhere as required by the
terrain, but shall not be spaced more than five hundred feet (500') along the gutter. A four inch (4")
storm sewer shall be stubbed to the lot line, one for each two (2) lots, for sump pump storm drainage.
C. Any outfall storm sewer that drains into an existing open ditch or natural watercourse shall have a
reinforced concrete headwall and a concrete apron at least ten feet (10') in radius from the center
point of the outfall.
D. Storm water shall not be directed into the sanitary sewer system and no connection between the storm
and sanitary sewer systems will be permitted at any time before, during or after construction.
E. Where installation of storm sewer lines of larger capacity than required to serve only the subdivision as
delineated in the preliminary plat is required by the Village Board to serve future growth in the vicinity
of the subdivision, the subdivider shall pay for only his portion (based on ordinance requirements for
his subdivision) of the total cost of installation, pursuant to an agreement entered into between the
subdivider and the Village.
F. The storm sewer system must discharge into an outlet adequate for the computed run-off from the
development and adjacent watershed areas. In case an adequate outlet is not available, on-site storm
water detention will be required. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-5: WATER SUPPLY2:
A. Public or community water supply and distribution systems, including water stub terminals to each lot,
shall be installed to serve each lot in a subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions or lot divisions
containing no lots less than one acre in area and located in the unincorporated areas within one and
one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village may be served with water supply from
individual wells, except that individual wells shall be permitted in subdivisions annexed to the Village
after the effective date hereof only after being specifically approved by the Village Board when it is
determined that connection with a public or community water supply system is not practicable, or there
is an agreement between the subdivider and the Village and a guarantee by the subdivider that all lots
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 499/649
in the subdivision will be served with a public or community water system within a specified period of
time.
B. All water distribution systems shall be constructed in accordance with standards approved by the
Environmental Protection Agency and the Village Engineer.
1. There shall be no physical connection between a potable and non-potable water supply.
2. Consideration shall be given to water reclamation and reuse in commercial and industrial tracts for
the purpose of conservation and relief of demands on existing residential supply.
3. Evidence shall be presented by the subdivider that an adequate water supply is available, or will be,
in advance of occupancy for development of individual lots and that the local utilities can
satisfactorily serve the area by the utility easements shown.
4. Water transmission mains shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter, and shall include
installation shut-off valves and fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed at maximum intervals of
four hundred feet (400') in a direct line in the parkway. The hydrants shall have a seven inch (7")
barrel and two (2) 21/2-inch base connections and one steamer connector.
C. Where installation of water mains of larger capacity than required to serve only the subdivision as
delineated in the preliminary plat is required by the Village Board to serve future growth in the vicinity
of the subdivision, the subdivider shall pay for only his portion (based on ordinance requirements for
his subdivision) of the total cost of installation, pursuant to an agreement entered into between the
subdivider and the Village. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-6: HOUSE SERVICES:
House services for sewer and water shall be constructed to connect each lot or building site with the utility
service mains for each utility as follows:
A. Such house services shall extend from the main to the property line;
B. House water service for each single-family residence shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch (3/4"),
type K, copper or approved equal and shall be terminated at a shut-off valve and box of a type
approved by the Village Engineer and located in the parkway, one foot (1') from the sidewalk line. In no
case shall the buffalo box be located in the sidewalk or driveway or buried underground;
C. Upon completion of the construction of all such house sewer and water service connections with the
utility mains, three (3) accurate maps showing the exact location of all such sewer and water mains,
together with manholes, shut-off valves and similar facilities being a part thereof, by distances in feet
from street lines, and of all such house service connections in distances in feet from side lot lines
approved by the Village Engineer shall be filed with the Village Clerk; and
D. The connection from the main to the sanitary house drain shall be six inch (6") vitrified tile or other
material approved by the Village Board. All joints shall conform to ASTM C425 or ASTM D1869. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 500/649
6-4-7: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
A. Street Grading:
1. All stumps, trees that cannot be saved, boulders and similar items in street rights of way shall be
removed.
2. Before any paving work is commenced, all street grading shall be properly completed as shown on
the grading plan and approved by the Village Engineer.
3. After grading of streets is completed and approved, and before any base course of the roadway
pavement is laid, all of the underground work such as water, sewer and gas mains, house services
connections therewith, and all underground conduits for electric and telephone lines shall be
completely installed in place and approved.
4. When considered necessary by the Village Engineer, settlement of all trench backfill shall be
accelerated by means of water introduced through holes jetted into backfilled trenches to a point
approximately two feet (2') above the top of the sewer pipe. The holes shall be jetted not greater
than six feet (6') apart unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer. The jetting process shall
conform to the standards set forth in the State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, section 603.08. Any depressions which develop within the street right of way
due to settlement of backfilling material shall be refilled and repaved at the subdivider's expense for
the trenching, in a manner acceptable to the Village Engineer.
5. The surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be laid until backfilling of all trenches dug
across the roadway has completely settled or compacted to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.
Said trenches shall be backfilled with suitable material, mechanically tamped in eighteen inch (18")
lifts, and brought to the required grade. The surface course shall not be laid until at least six (6)
months after the base course is completed.
6. Corrings, at least three (3) per block, on request of the Village Engineer, shall be taken under
Village supervision after the paving has been completed and after the subdivider has requested
acceptance of the street.
B. Roadway Pavement:
1. All streets and alleys within the subdivision shall be improved with a durable hard surface roadway.
The pavement shall be equal to or superior to a pavement consisting of a base course of crushed
limestone, gravel or pozzolanic mix of a total thickness of not less than eight inches (8") when
thoroughly compacted. The base course shall be constructed in two (2) 4-inch lifts, watered and
rolled with a ten (10) ton three-wheeled roller and vibratory compactor. Materials and method of
construction shall be in compliance with State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction for Aggregate Base Course Type B and Bituminous Surface Plant Mix Class B, and
shall be sufficient, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, to withstand the traffic that the roadways
will presumably be subjected to.
2. All street shall be improved with roadway pavements to an overall width in accordance with the
following minimum dimensions:
Pavement Width
(between back of curbs or outer
edges of roadway pavement)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 501/649
Type Of Street Residential
Subdivision
Manufacturing Or
Business Subdivisions
Row Right
Of Way
Major As Recommended As Recommended See
Section
Collector 36 feet 50 feet 6-3-2
Minor 32 feet 42 feet
Cul-de-sac 32 feet 42 feet
Frontage road 32 feet 45 feet
Thoroughfares In accordance with
Federal, State, County,
or local requirements
Half-streets Permitted, see Section
6-3-2G
Alleys 20 feet 30 feet
Roadway pavements in cul-de-sac street turn-around areas shall have a minimum diameter, measured
from faces of the outside curb or outside edges of roadway pavements of eighty feet (80') for residential
subdivisions, manufacturing and business subdivisions.
3. Roadway pavements shall be installed in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
Base Course Residential
Manufacturing
Or Business
Crushed stone Gr. 8 8 inches 10 inches
Crushed gravel Gr. 9 8 inches 10 inches
Pozzolanic mix 6 inches 8 inches
(Ord., 5-15-74)
Bituminous Surface
Binder course 11/2 inches 11/2 inches
Surface course 1 inch 11/2 inches
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1987-12, 10-12-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 502/649
Portland Cement Concrete
Pavement 6 inches 8 inches
C. Curbs And Gutters: Concrete curbs and gutters shall be constructed along the outside edges of all
street pavements of the type designated by the Village Engineer and installed in accordance with
Village standards and specifications. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
D. Access Driveways: An access driveway from the street lot line to the street pavement shall be paved.
Pavement shall be of concrete or bituminous surface Class B construction installed in accordance with
Village standards and specifications. (Ord., 11-27-1978)
E. Side Strips (Parkway): Side strips shall be required on both sides of all streets. They shall be graded
and prepared for seeding by the subdivider with at least four inches (4") of topsoil. Median strips shall
be considered as side strips unless paved. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
F. Public Sidewalks:
1. Installation: Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street in residential subdivisions
containing lots less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area. Sidewalks may be required
by the planning and zoning commission on one side or both sides of a street in subdivisions
containing lots one-half (1/2) acre or more in area. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2. Regulations: Sidewalks shall be located twelve inches (12") from the street right of way lines and
shall be constructed in accordance with the following:
a. Materials: All sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete with twenty eight (28)
day compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds. Minimum slump, three inches (3").
All concrete shall be air entrained. Other admixtures shall be approved by the village engineer;
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
b. Residential Districts: For subdivisions approved after the effective date hereof: Minimum width,
five feet (5'). For subdivisions approved prior to the effective date hereof: Minimum width, four feet
(4'). Minimum thickness: Five inches (5"). (Ord. 2016-12, 3-22-2016)
3. Commercial Districts: Minimum width, five feet (5'). Minimum thickness, six inches (6"). (Ord. 1992-
13, 9-22-1992)
G. Street Lighting: A street lighting system shall be installed in business, manufacturing and residential
subdivisions. Location, type and method of installation of streetlights shall be in accordance with
standards and specifications recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved by
the village board. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
H. Street Trees: Trees may be planted along all streets where trees do not exist. Trees shall have a trunk
diameter, measured twelve inches (12") above the ground, of not less than two and one-half inches
(21/2"), and shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart. The plantings shall be restricted to
thornless honey locusts, sugar maples, hackberries, pin oaks, sycamores and/or other trees approved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 503/649
by the village board. Chinese elm, box elder, willow, poplar and similar brittlewood species are
prohibited. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
I. Street Signs: An appropriate street sign shall be erected at each street intersection within the
subdivision. The type of sign and the location thereof shall be subject to the approval and direction of
the village board. Sign regulations shall be as set forth in title 5, chapter 13 of this code. (Ord., 5-15-
1974; amd. Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
6-4-8: PEDESTRIANWAYS:
For subdivisions approved before the effective date hereof, paved walks shall have a width not less than
four feet (4') and shall be installed in accordance with the village sidewalk specifications. For subdivisions
approved after the effective date hereof, paved walks shall have a width not less than five feet (5') and
shall be installed in accordance with the village sidewalk specifications. (Ord. 2016-12, 3-22-2016)
6-4-9: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. All utility distribution lines for telephones, electric and gas service in the subdivision shall be placed
underground. Installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders,
rules and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission now or hereafter effective, and the
subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations now and hereafter effective
and filed with said commission pursuant to the Illinois public utilities act, for any public utility whose
service will be required for the subdivision with respect to the provisions of such facilities.
B. Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within easements or dedicated public
ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer
boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-10: AS BUILT PLANS:
Upon completion of the installation of improvements in a subdivision, one set of tracings on cloth or equal
material suitable for use in reproduction, which shows all improvements as actually installed in the field,
shall be filed with the village clerk. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-11: PROTECTION AND REPAIR OF EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider, his contractors and suppliers, shall be jointly and severally responsible so that existing
improvements and the property of the village are not damaged or rendered less useful or unsightly by the
operations of the subdivider, his contractors or suppliers. This provision is intended to include damage or
nuisance with respect to the land, improvements or landscaping of the village; damage to existing streets,
sidewalks, curb and gutter, parkways by passage thereover of equipment or trucks or by excavation for
any purpose; the spillage or tracking of earth, sand or rock onto existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters or parkways; the washing by stormwater of earth or sand onto streets, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters or parkways into catch basins; damage to water mains, sanitary sewers, culverts or storm sewers.
To reduce or localize the possibility of damage to streets by heavy trucking, the village president shall
instruct the subdivider as to the streets to be used for access to the subdivision by equipment and trucks
and the subdivider shall be responsible for enforcement of this instruction upon his contractors and their
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 504/649
suppliers. The subdivider shall make provisions to prevent washing of earth or sand onto sidewalks,
streets, curbs and gutters and into catch basins by stormwater. Where deemed advisable, the village
president shall have the power to require, either prior to commencement of construction or after
construction is in process, that the subdivider post a surety to guarantee repair or damages or abatement
of nuisances. Where need for surety becomes apparent after construction is in process, the village
president shall have the power to order construction discontinued until surety has been posted. Expenses
incurred by the village in repairing damages, cleaning streets, catch basins and sewers shall be deducted
from the surety. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
Chapter 5
SCHOOL SITE DONATIONS
6-5-1: DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES OR FOR PAYMENTS OF FEES IN LIEU
THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each subdivider or developer may be required to
dedicate land for school sites to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
development, or cash contributions in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option
of the village, when in the discretion of the village the development will impact the applicable school
districts, in accordance with the following criteria and formula: (Ord. 2006-34, 8-22-2006)
A. Criteria For Requiring School Site Land Dedication:
1. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by the
subdivision shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The
land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining a ratio of: a) estimated children to be
served in each school classification over the b) maximum recommended number of students to be
served in each school classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to the c) minimum
recommended number of acres for a school site of each such school classification as stated herein.
The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school
sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such school classification.
2. School Classification And Size Of School Site: School classifications and size of school sites within
or serving the village shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria:
School Classification
By Grades
Maximum Number
Students For
Each Such School
Classification
Minimum
Number Of
Acres Of Land
For Each School
Site For Such
Classification
Elementary schools,
grades kindergarten through
5 (K-5)
600 students 17 acres
Junior high schools,
grades 6 through 8 (6-8)
900 students 30 acres
High schools, grades 1,500 students 60 acres
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 505/649
9 through 12 (9-12)
3. Location: The location of the site to be dedicated shall be determined by the village board of
trustees upon recommendation of the board of education of the school district having or to have
jurisdiction of the school to be erected on the site taking into account the comprehensive school plan
and/or the standards adopted by the affected school district as a guideline in locating sites. The
village board of trustees shall not select the site without allowing opportunity for the board of
education of the school district affected to make a recommendation with respect thereto. (Ord. 1995-
29, 9-26-1995)
B. Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of School Sites:
1. Requirement And Use Of Contributions: Where the development is small, as used herein, and the
resulting site is too small to be practicable or when the available land is inappropriate for a school
site, and it is determined by the village not to require the dedication of land, the village may require
the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication. In considering
whether a development is small, as used herein, the village may consider whether the total number
of the proposed dwelling units will produce less than the maximum number of students for one
school of each school classification in accordance with this chapter. The cash contributions in lieu of
school sites shall be paid to the village prior to the issuance of building permits, and shall be
determined based on the fair market value of land, the demographic information and school site size
requirements in effect at the time of application for the building permit. The village shall turn over
any and all funds actually collected for such fees to the appropriate school districts annually. Such
contributions shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate
and future needs of children from that subdivision or development or for the improvement to any
existing school sites and buildings which serve such needs. Improvement under this section shall be
liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the development of parking lots;
sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets; collector streets; internal roadways; connections with
sewer, water and electrical lines; playgrounds; recreation grounds; and athletic fields. Improvement
shall also include the purchase of any material, goods or equipment necessary to said development
and construction. Improvement shall further include the construction of buildings; additions to
existing school buildings; remodeled or renovated noninstructional spaces in classrooms and the
purchase of prefabricated classroom units to be used at a school site. (Ord. 2006-34, 8-22-2006)
2. Fair Market Value As Basis Of Contribution: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on
the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified in this section that
otherwise would have been dedicated as school sites. It has been determined that the present fair
market value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is forty five thousand dollars
($45,000.00) per acre and such figure shall be used in making the calculation for school
contributions unless the subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of any
such objection the subdivider or developer shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value
of such improved land in the area of his subdivision or other evidence thereof and final
determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the village
board based upon such information submitted by the subdivider and from other sources which may
be submitted to the village board by the school districts or others. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995; amd.
Ord. 2002-16, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2006-27, 6-27-2006; Ord. 2012-21, 8-28-2012)
C. Criteria For Requiring Land Dedication And A Contribution: There will be situations in subdivisions
when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a school site. That portion
of the land within the subdivision falling within the school location shall be dedicated as a site as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 506/649
aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would
have been required to be dedicated.
2. A major part of the school site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed
from the development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication,
and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall also be required to fulfill the obligations of that
development. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-2: DENSITY:
The following table of population is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in
family size for newly constructed residential units as determined by the Illinois school consulting service
and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash
contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider. In the event a
subdivider files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate population listed below, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the
subdivision, and, in that event, final determination of the density formula shall be based upon such
demographic information submitted by the subdivider, and from other sources which may be submitted to
the village board, and upon consideration of such information as most accurately and fairly represents
current demographic trends. It is recognized that population density, age distribution, and local conditions
change over the years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary. TABLE OF
ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION
Children Per Unit
Preschool
Elementary
Junior
High
Total High
School
Type Of Unit
0-4 Years
Grades K-5
5-10 Years
Grades
6-8
11-13
Years
Grades
K-8
5-13
Years
Grades
9-12
14-17
Years
Adults
(18+)
Total
Per Unit
Detached singlefamily
2 bedroom 0.113 0.136 0.048 0.184 0.020 1.700 2.017
3 bedroom 0.292 0.369 0.173 0.542 0.184 1.881 2.899
4 bedroom 0.418 0.530 0.298 0.828 0.360 2.158 3.764
5 bedroom + 0.283 0.345 0.248 0.593 0.300 2.594 3.770
Attached singlefamily
1 bedroom -- -- -- -- -- 1.193 1.193
2 bedroom 0.064 0.088 0.048 0.136 0.038 1.752 1.990
3 bedroom 0.212 0.234 0.058 0.292 0.059 1.829 2.392
4 bedroom + 0.323 0.322 0.154 0.476 0.173 2.173 3.145
Apartments
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 507/649
Efficiency -- -- -- -- -- 1.294 1.294
Apartments
(cont.)
1 bedroom -- 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 1.754 1.758
2 bedroom 0.047 0.086 0.042 0.128 0.046 1.693 1.914
3 bedroom + 0.052 0.234 0.123 0.357 0.118 2.526 3.053
Note:There are only 3 significant categories provided in this chart. Because of the similarity of yields of all
types of attached single-family dwelling units, only 1 category is provided. The same is true with
apartments; thus only 1 category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of detached
and attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be necessary.
(Ord. 2002-16, 5-28-2002)
6-5-3: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES:
Nothing herein contained shall limit the authority of the village to require the designation and reservation
of school sites, or other public lands as a condition to approval of any plat of subdivision where such land
is to be acquired by condemnation within one year from final plat approval as set forth under division 12 of
article 11 of the Illinois municipal code1. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-4: COMBINATION WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT:
Where the subdivision is less than forty (40) acres, a school site which is to be dedicated should, where
possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining subdivisions in order to produce usable school
sites without hardship on a particular subdivider. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-5: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for
its intended purpose. Grading on sites dedicated for school uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding
land. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-6: IMPROVED SITES:
All school sites donated pursuant to this chapter shall be fully improved by the subdivider. All property
dedicated shall be in a fully improved condition ready for service of electricity, gas, water and sewer
service; streets, including sidewalks, enclosed drainage, curbs and gutters shall be installed in
compliance with the ordinances of the village. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-7: PREREQUISITE TO ANNEXATION AGREEMENT:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof or combination of both as required by this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 508/649
chapter may also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the village when in the
discretion of the village the development will impact the applicable school districts, and provisions therefor
shall be incorporated in any annexation agreement governing such land. Additionally, the village shall
notify the appropriate school districts when a party submits a proposed annexation agreement to the
village and the village determines there will be an impact, so that the school districts may discuss
dedication issues with said party. (Ord. 2006-34, 8-22-2006)
6-5-8: TIME OF PAYMENT:
The dedication of land shall be made at the time of final plat approval by the board of trustees of the
proposed subdivision. Cash contributions shall be made at the time of the issuance of the building permits
for the subject residential dwelling units. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-9: METHOD OF PAYMENT:
The cash contributions required hereunder shall be made by check payable to the village and shall be
deposited with the village. The village clerk shall keep a record of these receipts. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-
1995)
6-5-10: INDEMNIFICATION, HOLD HARMLESS AND RELEASE:
The village shall not collect funds under this chapter for any taxing body which does not, prior to the
effective date hereof, enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the village which provides that such
taxing body will hold harmless, indemnify and release the village upon such terms and conditions as are
acceptable to the village. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-11: ACCOUNTING OF FUNDS:
Each district receiving funds under this chapter shall annually make a written report to the village detailing
the amount of funds received and how such funds were expended. This report shall be provided to the
village prior to December 31 of each year. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-12: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The village shall review this chapter every three (3) years to determine whether the land value and
demographic information herein set forth is consistent with the current values. Additionally, three (3) years
after the effective date hereof, any or all affected school districts may submit a demographic study based
upon local information and data for the village's consideration. The village may, at its sole option, adopt
such a local study to be used for calculations under this chapter. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
Chapter 6
PARK SITE DONATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 509/649
6-6-1: DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS OR FOR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU
THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for park and recreation purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents
of the development, or cash contributions in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the
option of the village in accordance with the following criteria and formula: (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
A. Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreational Land Dedication:
1. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear
directly upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total requirement shall be twenty five
(25) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:
Types Of
Recreation Areas
Size Range
Minimum Acres
Per 1,000 People
a. Play lot Minimum 12,000
square feet
Not applicable
b. School-park
(neighborhood
playground)
Minimum park
of 5 acres
5.83
c. Neighborhood
park
Minimum 31/2
acres
4.17
d. Districtwide
park or play field
Minimum 4 acres
up to 30 acres
5.83
e. Community wide
recreation park
Minimum 12 acres
up to 30 acres
9.17
25 acres of land
per 1,000 people
(Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-18, 4-11-2006; Ord. 2013-25, 9-24-2013)
2. Location: The location of the site to be dedicated shall be determined by the board of trustees upon
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission taking into account the suitability of the site
for park and recreational purposes or development and its relationship to population concentrations.
A park site adjoining all elementary school sites of not less than five (5) acres shall be considered a
requirement. A central location which will serve equally the entire development is more desirable. In
large developments these sites can be located throughout the development according to the village
of Minooka comprehensive plan.
3. Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: When subdividers or developers provide
their own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it may have the effect of reducing the
demand for local public recreational services. The reason for this policy is understood to be the
village's concern that such private open space is difficult or impossible to develop and maintain,
irrespective of the developers' assurances, since ownership usually is surrendered to the adjacent
owners or a homeowners' association, who may not have the personnel or the financial resources
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 510/649
for maintenance and improvement. There may, nevertheless, be instances in which the public is
better served by providing for private open space in lieu of public open space. Credit for private
open space may be allowed only where a determination has been made by the village board of
trustees that private open space or recreational areas, in lieu of or in conjunction with publicly
dedicated open space or recreational areas will, by reason of the type of development, better serve
the interests of the public than where wholly public dedications are required. Where allowed, a
substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of
improvement and the installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer, as
part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to be
installed, must be approved by the village, and before any credit is given for private recreation
areas, the subdivider or developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas will be
permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private
swimming clubs and any other private recreation facilities are included in this provision. When an
adjustment for private recreation acres is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park
land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision and then subtract the credit to
be given. In all cases the extent of credit to be given by private open space shall be determined by
the village board of trustees.
B. Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Park And Recreational Land Dedication:
1. Requirement And Use Of Contributions: Where the development is small and the resulting site is
too small to be practicable or when the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational
purposes, the village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of
the land dedication required. The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation land dedication
shall be paid to the village prior to or upon the issuance of building permits for any building or
structure in the subdivision, and shall be determined based on the fair market value of land, the
demographic information and park site size requirements in effect at the time of application for the
building permit. Such contributions shall be used solely for the acquisition of park and recreation
land as hereinabove classified, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the
residents of that subdivision or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreation land
which already serves such needs. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
2. Fair Market Value As Basis Of Contribution: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on
the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified in this section that
otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation sites. It has been determined that the
present fair market value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is forty five thousand
dollars ($45,000.00) per acre and such figure shall be used in making any calculation herein unless
the subdivider files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection the subdivider shall
submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his
subdivision or other evidence thereof and the final determination of the fair market value per acre of
such improved land shall be made by the village board based upon such information submitted by
the subdivider and from other sources which may be submitted to the village board. (Ord. 2003-07,
2-25-2003; amd. Ord. 2005-60, 11-22-2005; Ord. 2012-21, 8-28-2012)
3. Criteria For Requiring Land Dedication And A Contribution: There will be situations in subdivisions
when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise when:
a. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as a location of a park site. That portion of
the land within the subdivision falling within the park location shall be dedicated as a site as
aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that
would have been required to be dedicated.
b. A major part of the park site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed
from the development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by
dedication, and cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 511/649
6-6-2: DENSITY:
The following table of population is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in
family size for newly constructed residential units as determined by the Illinois school consulting service
and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash
contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider. In the event a
subdivider files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate population listed below, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the
subdivision, and, in that event, final determination of the density formula shall be based upon such
demographic information submitted by the subdivider, and from other sources which may be submitted to
the village board, and upon consideration of such information as most accurately and fairly represents
current demographic trends. It is recognized that population density, age distribution, and local conditions
change over the years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary. TABLE OF
ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION
Children Per Unit
Preschool
Elementary
Junior
High
Total High
School
Type Of Unit
0-4 Years
Grades K-5
5-10 Years
Grades
6-8
11-13
Years
Grades
K-8
5-13
Years
Grades
9-12
14-17
Years
Adults
(18
plus)
Total Per
Unit
Detached singlefamily
2 bedroom 0.113 0.136 0.048 0.184 0.020 1.700 2.017
3 bedroom 0.292 0.369 0.173 0.542 0.184 1.881 2.899
4 bedroom 0.418 0.530 0.298 0.828 0.360 2.158 3.764
5 bedroom plus
0.283 0.345 0.248 0.593 0.300 2.594 3.770
Attached singlefamily
1 bedroom -- -- -- -- -- 1.193 1.193
2 bedroom 0.064 0.088 0.048 0.136 0.038 1.752 1.990
3 bedroom 0.212 0.234 0.058 0.292 0.059 1.829 2.392
4 bedroom plus
0.323 0.322 0.154 0.476 0.173 2.173 3.145
Apartments
Efficiency -- -- -- -- -- 1.294 1.294
Apartments
(cont.)
1 bedroom -- 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 1.754 1.758
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 512/649
2 bedroom 0.047 0.086 0.042 0.128 0.046 1.693 1.914
3 bedroom + 0.052 0.234 0.123 0.357 0.118 2.526 3.053
Note:There are only 3 significant categories provided in this chart. Because of the similarity of yields of all
types of attached single-family dwelling units, only 1 category is provided. The same is true with
apartments; thus only 1 category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of detached
and attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be necessary.
(Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-3: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
Nothing herein contained shall limit the authority of the village to require the designation and reservation
of other recreational land, school sites, or other public lands as a condition for approval of any plat of
subdivision where such land is to be acquired by condemnation within one year from final plat approval as
set forth under division 12 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code1. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-4: COMBINATION WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT:
Where the subdivision is less than forty (40) acres, a park or recreational site which is to be dedicated
should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining subdivisions in order to produce
usable park or recreational sites without hardship on a particular subdivider. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-5: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for
its intended purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly
from surrounding land. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-6: IMPROVED SITES:
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets
(including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable
provisions made therefor, and all other improvements shall be made as may be required by the
subdivision code. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-7: PREREQUISITE TO ANNEXATION AGREEMENT:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof or combination of both as required by this
chapter shall also be a matter of policy of the village and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any
annexation agreement governing such land. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-8: TIME OF DEDICATION OR PAYMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 513/649
The dedication of land shall be made at the time of final plat approval by the board of trustees for the
proposed subdivision. Cash contributions shall be made at the time of the issuance of the building permits
for the subject residential dwelling units. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-9: METHOD OF PAYMENT:
The cash contributions required hereunder shall be made by check payable to the village and shall be
deposited with the village clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
Chapter 7
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
6-7-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this Chapter are intended for special situations in which:
A. Special amenities and benefits to the Village beyond those required by this and other Village
ordinances can be achieved by allowing more flexible design than is otherwise permitted by such
requirements; or
B. Properties with unique constraints such as environmentally sensitive areas or infill parcels require a
more flexible approach to land use control to make possible development that is sensitive to such
constraints. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-2: OBJECTIVES:
A. To promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the location of structures.
B. To promote an efficient use of land to facilitate sustainability in the arrangement of buildings, circulation
systems, utilities, open space and natural resources.
C. To preserve existing natural resources and landscape features and to utilize them in a manner
harmonious with the development.
D. To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and other public facilities than
would otherwise be provided under conventional development.
E. To provide for the aesthetic and functional harmony of various types of buildings, land uses, and
landscape elements. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-3: PERMITTED USES IN A PUD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 514/649
A. Residential PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter in the R Districts and may include
any uses permitted by right, conditional uses, or accessory uses in the underlying R District. A
maximum of ten percent (10%) of the gross site in an R District may be devoted to commercial uses
provided these uses are permitted by right in the B1 District or as conditional permitted uses in the B1
District.
B. Commercial PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter in the B Districts and may include
any uses permitted by right, conditional permitted uses, or accessory uses as provided in the
underlying B District.
C. Industrial PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter in the I Districts and may include
any uses permitted by right, conditional permitted uses, or accessory uses as provided in the
underlying I District.
D. Mixed use PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter, provided that the underlying
district boundaries conform with the uses being proposed except that ten percent (10%) of the gross
site area of an R zoned portion of the PUD may be devoted to uses permitted in the B1 District.
E. The uses included in any proposed PUD are subject to the review and approval procedures specified
herein and shall not be deemed to be permitted by right. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR FILING:
No development shall be filed as a planned unit development unless it:
A. Is at least one acre in size, and
B. Is initially under the same ownership or control. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-5: PROCEDURE:
A planned unit development shall be granted as a conditional permitted use to the zoning district(s) in
which it is located. The process for a planned unit development shall be as follows:
A. Pre-Application:
1. Prior to filing a formal application, the applicant thereof should meet with the appropriate Village
staff to discuss the proposed development. The applicant should be able to provide a concept of the
PUD at this time. Staff will advise the applicant at this time of all applicable officially adopted
policies, standards, regulations and procedures.
2. A concept review before the Village Planning and Zoning Commission may be directed at the
discretion of Village staff or upon the request of the applicant. A concept review provides the
Commission an opportunity to determine what additional information will be necessary concerning
the application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 515/649
B. Preliminary Plat Of Planned Unit Development: Procedure for the submission of the preliminary plat for
a planned unit development shall be identical to the preliminary plat procedure described in Section 6-
2-1 of this Title except that it shall be accompanied by an application for a conditional permitted use for
a planned unit development in accordance with the procedures for conditional permitted uses
established in Section 5-11-9 of this Code.
C. Conditional Permitted Use For Planned Unit Development: Concurrent with the application for
preliminary plat for a planned unit development, the applicant shall submit an application for a
conditional permitted use for a planned unit development. The conditional use permit shall be
approved contingent upon final PUD approval.
D. Final Plat Of Planned Unit Development: Procedure for submission of the final plat of planned unit
development shall be identical to the final plat procedure described in Section 6-2-1 of this Title. (Ord.
1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION:
A. Pre-Application: The following items need to be provided by the applicant for a pre-application
conference review to occur:
1. General Site Information: Data regarding site conditions, land characteristics, available community
facilities and utilities, and other related information.
2. Concept Plan: A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed location, land uses, streets,
buildings, and other related information.
B. Preliminary Plat Of Planned Unit Development:
1. Required Information: In addition to the requirements for preliminary plat set forth in Section 6-2-2 of
this Title, the following items and information are required for the submission of a planned unit
development:
a. Statement Of Objectives: A statement of the objectives to be achieved by the PUD. This
statement should provide the rationale behind the assumptions and choices of the
developer/applicant. This statement should explain the benefits to the Village that will result from
the PUD.
b. Statement Of Character: Explanation of the character of the PUD and the manner in which it has
been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations.
c. List Of Variances: A list of the variances from the zoning and subdivision ordinances that are
being employed in the proposed PUD.
d. Design Schedule: A list of the area, lot width, yard, setback and bulk requirements applicable to
the PUD.
e. Preliminary Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing all landscape improvements (both
plantings and hardscape) being proposed in the PUD. Details should be provided for landscape
design elements intended for screening or buffering as well as for any unique landscape design
features such as entry features, parks, etc.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 516/649
2. Optional Additional Information: In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission or Village Board
may request at any time during the review process that the applicant provide any of the following
additional items:
a. Architectural Plans: If directed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant shall
submit preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings that shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow an understanding of the style of the development except for single-family detached
structures proposed to be constructed on lots in compliance with all applicable zoning district
requirements.
b. School Impact Analysis: Provide information on the student count to be generated by the PUD
and the financial impact on the local school districts.
c. Tax Impact Analysis: Provide information on the taxes to be generated by the proposed project
and the cost for the various taxing bodies to provide the necessary services.
d. Traffic Analysis: Provide information on the traffic to be generated by the PUD and the adequacy
of the local transportation and thoroughfare to handle the anticipated volumes. Also an analysis
may be necessary of the internal streets, drives, parking, sidewalks and pathways.
e. Covenants And Restrictions: Provide any proposed covenants and restrictions, agreements or
provisions that will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the PUD.
C. Final Plat Of Planned Unit Development: In addition to the requirements for final plat set forth in
Section 6-2-4 of this Title, the following items and information are required for the submission of a final
plat of planned unit development:
1. Landscaping Plans: Final landscape plans and landscape details.
2. Covenants And Restrictions: Provide the final covenants and restrictions, agreements or provisions
that will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the PUD. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-
1997)
6-7-7: CHANGES:
A planned unit development shall be constructed in complete accordance with the approved preliminary
and final plat of planned unit development and all supporting data. Major changes to an approved
preliminary or final plat of planned unit development require the resubmission and reconsideration of the
planned unit development according to the process set forth herein for preliminary and final plat approval.
With the aid of the following criteria, the Zoning Officer shall be responsible for determining whether a
change is classified as major or minor. Minor changes shall, at the direction of the Zoning Officer, be
brought before the Planning and Zoning Commission for final action but shall not require a new public
hearing.
A. Criteria For Major Change: A major change is one that alters the concept or intent of the planned unit
development. This includes, but is not limited to:
1. For A Residential PUD:
a. Any change in the location, size or type of dwelling units or land uses.
b. Any increase in the number of dwelling units from that in the approved preliminary plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 517/649
c. Any change, greater than ten percent (10%), in the height of any building or structure in the PUD
other than single-family detached dwelling units.
d. Any change in the functional classification of a roadway.
e. Any reduction in the acreage of open space.
2. For A Nonresidential PUD Or Nonresidential Portion Of A PUD:
a. Any change in the location or type of land use.
b. Any change in the type, number or location of a building.
c. Greater than a ten percent (10%) increase in the height of a building.
d. Any change in the functional classification of a roadway.
e. Any reduction in the acreage of open space.
f. A greater than ten percent (10%) increase in the gross floor area of a nonresidential building.
g. A greater than ten percent (10%) increase in the total gross floor area of all the nonresidential
buildings in the PUD.
h. Any reduction in the total number of parking spaces for the project.
B. Criteria For Minor Change: Minor changes are changes not defined as major changes and which do
not alter the concept or intent of a PUD. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-8: DESIGN INCENTIVES:
To further creativity and excellence in design, the following incentives are offered in planned unit
developments:
A. Varied Zoning Requirements: Bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) may be varied
provided that it can be demonstrated that the variations conform to all of the review criteria contained
herein as well as those established for conditional uses and those established for subdivision plats.
B. Varied Subdivision Requirements: Dimensional and design standards for subdivisions and subdivision
improvements such as streets, blocks, sidewalks, and parkways may vary from Village and IDOT
standards established or referenced in the Village subdivision regulations provided that it can be
demonstrated that the variations conform to all of the review criteria contained herein as well as those
established for conditional permitted uses and those established for subdivision plats. Required
subdivision improvements may not vary from the required construction improvement specifications.
C. Mixed Uses: A PUD may include a variety of land uses designed and planned as part of a unified
development provided that the underlying zoning conforms to the uses being proposed. A residential
PUD in an R District may include up to ten percent (10%) of the gross site area devoted to uses
permitted in the B1 Zoning District.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 518/649
D. On-Site Density Transfer: The density permitted in a given portion of a total site may be transferred to
another portion of the site in order to preserve environmentally sensitive areas and to achieve
excellence in design provided that the gross density does not exceed the maximum allowed herein for
the underlying zoning district.
E. Density Bonuses: Design excellence in the provision of site amenities such as exceptional landscaping,
recreational facilities, preservation of architectural and historic sites, and the preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas may allow the granting of an increase in density of up to five percent
(5%).
Flexibility to suspend requirements imposed by the Village's zoning and subdivision regulations is not
conferred upon the PUD applicant as a matter of right, but in all cases subject to the finding by the Village
that the objectives of these provisions are being served by the PUD and that all applicable review
standards are being adhered to. Variations in a PUD from normally applicable standards shall not be
considered as variances as defined in this Title and shall not be required to conform to the approval
criteria herein provided for variances. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-9: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A. Maximum Density:
1. Residential PUD: The gross maximum density of a residential PUD shall not exceed the following
standard for the district in which it is situated:
R1 1 du/acre
R1A 3 du/acre
R2 4 du/acre
R3 4 du/acre for single-family detached dwellings
6 du/acre for single-family attached
12 du/acre for multi-family
R4 6 du/acre
R5 6 du/acre
R6 12 du/acre
2. Nonresidential PUD: As required in the underlying zoning district.
B. Spacing:
1. The minimum distance between single-family detached dwellings shall be ten feet (10').
2. The minimum distance between buildings other than single-family detached dwellings less than
twenty four feet (24') in height shall be fifteen feet (15').
3. The minimum distance between buildings greater than twenty four feet (24') in height shall be equal
to the height of the taller building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 519/649
C. Yards: The required yards along the periphery of the PUD shall be at least equal to that of the
underlying zoning district. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-10: REVIEW CRITERIA:
The Planning and Zoning Commission's review of the preliminary and final PUD applications shall be
based on the following criteria:
A. The PUD shall not in any way be deemed to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or
general welfare.
B. The plan of the area proposed for the PUD shall be in general conformance with the adopted
Comprehensive Plan of the Village.
C. The use or uses within the PUD shall be compatible with surrounding land uses and will not be
injurious to the use and enjoyment of other properties in its vicinity.
D. Ingress and egress to the PUD shall be provided in a manner to facilitate access by emergency
vehicles and efficient and safe traffic circulation in the vicinity and be consistent with any officially
adopted plans of the Village. Sidewalks, pedestrianways, bicycle paths and off-street parking and
loading are provided in a location and capacity appropriate to the planned uses.
E. The quality or quantity of common open spaces and landscaping provided are consistent with the
higher standards of amenity and design required of a PUD.
F. Adequate provision has been made in the form of deed restrictions, homeowners' or condominium
associations, or the like for the preservation and maintenance of any open spaces, private roads or
drives, utilities, and storm water management facilities as well as for the control of architectural review
for individual structures if necessary to implement the PUD.
G. Adequate and safe location of play areas for children as well as other recreational areas.
H. Buildings shall be located so as to ensure adequate light and air.
I. The PUD shall be of a superior design than would otherwise be permitted by the strict adherence to
otherwise applicable regulations and exceeding that which is typical of conventional development.
J. The PUD meets the minimum requirements set forth in this Chapter as well as the provisions of all
other sections of this Ordinance as well as the Village's Subdivision Ordinance, unless specifically
excluded by this Chapter or waived by the Village Board.
K. All construction shall conform to the requirements of the Village. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 520/649
Title 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
7-1-1: NUISANCE ENUMERATED:
Within the territorial jurisdiction of the Village, it is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person:
A. To so negligently conduct any business or use any premises as to create an offensive smell as may
taint the air and render it unwholesome and disagreeable to other persons.
B. To cause or to suffer the carcass of any animal or other offal, filth or noisome substance to be
collected, deposited or remain in any place to the prejudice of other persons.
C. To throw or deposit any offal or otherwise offensive matter or the carcass of any animal in any
watercourse, pond, spring or well.
D. To deposit any night soil, dead animal or other filthy, offensive or noisome substance upon any lot,
street, alley, highway, park or other place.
E. To obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of any gutter or natural drainage of any
public or private property.
F. To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets, alleys or commons.
G. To establish, maintain or carry on any offensive or unwholesome business within the limits of the
Village, or within one mile of the limits thereof.
H. To throw or deposit any straw, dirt, filth, chips, ashes or other rubbish in any alley or other public place.
I. To permit or suffer any offal, filth, refuse, animal or vegetable matter, which is liable to become putrid or
offensive or injurious to health, to remain on any premises used or occupied by him for a longer period
than four (4) hours at any one time.
J. To keep or suffer to keep, in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy condition any railroad car, building,
yard, cellar, barn, sewer, pig sty or privy.
K. To own, keep or use any railroad car, yard, pen, place or premises in or upon which cattle or swine may
be confined or kept, as to be offensive to persons residing in the vicinity of the same.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 521/649
L. To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or
manufacture which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise is offensive or
dangerous to the health of individuals or the public.
M. To locate and use, without first having obtained permission of the Village President and Board of
Trustees, to do so, any packing house, rendery, tallow chandlery, bone factory, tannery, brewery,
distillery, livery stable, blacksmith shop or foundry.
N. To erect or use habitually any house or lot for the purpose of butchering or slaughtering cattle, calves,
sheep or swine without the permission of the President and Board of Trustees.
O. To boil or render tainted lard or other animal substance so as to taint the air, render it unwholesome or
offensive.
P. To use in the erection of, or repairing of any building a scaffold or scaffolds not wide enough to ensure
the safety of the persons passing under or near the same.
Q. To suffer any bitch or slut, owned by him to run at large while in heat.
R. To suffer any horse, ox, cow, calf, hog, dog, cat or other animal owned by him or in his charge which
may come to its death in any manner, to lie for more than twenty four (24) hours after its death, in or
upon any street, alley or other ground, public or private.
S. To erect or continue any public sign indicating that any premises or building owned, occupied or in
charge of such person is used in whole or in part as a saloon or dramshop, unless such person shall
have a license to keep a dramshop, issued by the village president and the board of trustees. (1904
Code § 17.1; amd. 1997 Code)
T. To leave any vehicles parked on a village street during street cleaning or snow removal operations.
(Ord. 1978-5, 1978)
U. To demolish any structure by fire. (Ord. 1987-5, 2-25-1987)
V. In an eviction by a landlord of a tenant, it shall be a nuisance: (Ord. 1988-15, 10-10-1988)
1. For a landlord to cause tenant's goods and chattels to be removed from the landlord's premises and
deposited upon any street, alley, avenue or other public ground within the village, unless such goods
and chattels shall be enclosed within a good and sufficient container as provided in section 7-2-4 of
this title. Twenty four (24) hours shall be considered a reasonable time to remove or abate such
nuisance.
2. For the owner of goods and chattels which a landlord has caused to be removed from the landlord's
premises and deposited upon any street, alley, avenue or other public ground within the village, to
allow such goods and chattels to remain upon the public grounds. If such goods and chattels are not
enclosed in a container as provided in section 7-2-4 of this title, then twenty four (24) hours shall be
considered a reasonable time to remove or abate such nuisance. If such goods and chattels are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 522/649
enclosed within a container as provided in section 7-2-4 of this title, then seven (7) days shall be
considered a reasonable time to remove or abate such nuisance. (Ord. 1988-15, 10-10-1988; amd.
Ord. 2014-32, 12-16-2014)
W. To pull up or break down or otherwise injure any of the trees, grass, shrubbery, fences, seats, stands
or other fixtures or things in or about, or appertaining to any public square or park in the village; or to
erect any booth or other structure on any such public square or park without the written permission of
the president of the village first being obtained by such person. (1904 Code § 26.11)
7-1-2: PENALTY, NOTICE TO ABATE:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code.
Provided, that the offender shall, in every case under this chapter, be notified by some officer of the
village to remove or abate such nuisance, and be allowed a reasonable time, to be fixed by such officer in
such notice according to the nature of the nuisance, to so remove and abate the same, and upon so doing
within the time fixed by such officer, the offender shall not be subject to the penalty aforesaid, unless the
commission of such nuisance was wilful or resulted in the actual damage to the person or property
affected. (1904 Code § 17.2; amd. 1977 Code)
7-1-3: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
If any person guilty of creating, suffering or continuing any nuisance defined in this chapter shall, upon
being notified as aforesaid, neglect or refuse to remove, abate or discontinue such nuisance within the
time specified in such notice, it shall be the duty of the village police to cause such nuisance to be abated
or removed, and he shall keep an accurate account of the necessary expense incurred thereby, which
expense shall be collected from the offender by an action of debt in the name of the village, before the
proper village officer, and the removal or abatement of such nuisance by the village police and the
collection of the expenses thereby incurred, as herein provided, shall be no bar to the prosecution for the
recovery of the penalty provided in section 7-1-2 of this chapter. (1904 Code § 17.3)
7-1-4: BURNING OF WASTE MATERIALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn waste materials within the village limits, except as regulated
herein. Any person violating this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. All burning of waste materials is subject to the following regulations:
1. Burning Prohibited: Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful to burn any material,
including, but not limited to, "landscape waste" and "municipal waste" as hereinafter defined.
2. Definitions:
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery, leaves and all other materials
accumulated in the care of lawns, shrubbery and vines.
MUNICIPAL WASTE: Garbage, general household and commercial waste, industrial lunchroom or
office waste, landscape waste and construction or demolition debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 523/649
3. Exceptions: The following open burning activities are permitted within the village:
a. The setting of fires by the forest preserve district of any county on property owned or controlled by
it, to perform prescribed burning for natural community and habitat management;
b. The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when reasonable and necessary in the
judgment of the responsible government official;
c. The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire, recreational, and cooking purposes, or in domestic
fireplaces, in areas which such burning is consistent with other laws, provided that no garbage
shall be burned in such cases;
d. Small open flames for heating tar or for welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares, and the
like.
C. Fires shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any structure, with adequate provisions made to
prevent the spread of fire, or the fire shall be contained in a fireproof container located not less than
fifteen feet (15') from any structure.
D. All fires shall be constantly attended until such fire is extinguished. The person attending the fire shall
be equipped with a hose connected to a water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment, suitable to
extinguish the fire.
E. Prior to starting the fire, the appropriate fire protection district shall be notified of the location of the fire,
the nature of the materials to be burned, the date and time of the fire, and the name of the person to
be attending the fire.
F. No waste materials may be burned on any village or public street or alley.
G. It shall be unlawful to burn styrofoam, polystyrene, any other kind of plastic material, shingles, or
insulation. It shall be unlawful to burn any materials in which the above materials may be incorporated.
H. The owner of the property where the fire is to be located, the person owning the materials to be
burned, the person responsible for causing the materials to be burned, and the person attending the
fire are each jointly responsible to see that the regulations set forth in this section are not violated.
(Ord. 2003-02, 1-28-2003)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
7-2-1: SYSTEM OF COLLECTION:
The village shall provide a system of collection and disposal of garbage for the benefit of inhabitants of
the village. (Ord. 1933-3, 5-1-1933; amd. 1977 Code)
7-2-2: CONTRACT FOR COLLECTION; LETTING OF BIDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 524/649
A. The board of trustees of the village shall let a contract for the collection and disposal of garbage.
B. The finance committee of the village board may, prior to termination of the current contract term,
procure written quotations from various contractors for the contract of collecting and disposing of
garbage, and submit their recommendations to the board of trustees prior to the termination of the
current contract term. The village may also advertise for bidders for the contract for the collection and
disposal of garbage. (Ord. 2014-32, 12-16-2014)
7-2-3: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, REQUIREMENTS:
The successful bidder for the contract of collecting and disposing of garbage as aforesaid, shall collect all
garbage on all premises within the village limits at least once each week and shall transport the same
through the streets and alleys of the village in such a manner that no leakage shall occur from the vehicle
in which said garbage is transported. Said garbage, after being placed in said vehicle, shall remain
covered while the same is being transported on any street or alley within the village limits.
The successful bidder for the contract herein provided for shall remove said garbage to a place outside
the village limits. (Ord., 1985)
7-2-4: DEPOSITS OF GARBAGE:
A. No garbage of any description shall be deposited upon any street, alley, vacant lot, public grounds or
private premises within the village limits, except by direction or written permission of the board of
health of the village. It shall be the duty of the occupant of every home, hotel, tavern, eating house and
other premises to, at all times, have the garbage upon his premises collected and deposited in suitable
containers. Such containers shall be located so as to be convenient of access to the garbage collector.
B. All persons are hereby prohibited from placing any substance other than garbage within the containers
herein provided for, and shall be further required to keep ashes separate from cans and other refuse.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code. (Ord. 2014-32, 12-16-2014)
7-2-5: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, CHARGES:
A. There are hereby established charges for the collection of garbage and refuse from each family
residential unit in the village.
B. The charge shall be:
Effective Date - July 1 Cost
64 gallon container 2014 $20.32
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 525/649
2015 20.32
2016 20.93
2017 21.56
2018 22.21
2019 22.88
2020 23.57
2021 24.28
2022 25.01
2023 25.76
2024 26.53
96 gallon container 2014 20.55
2015 20.55
2016 21.17
2017 21.81
2018 22.46
2019 23.13
2020 23.83
2021 24.54
2022 25.28
2023 26.04
2024 26.82
C. The charges shall be billed bimonthly along with the water and sewer service billings. (Ord. 2014-32,
12-16-2014)
D. Provided that sufficient proof is given to the Village annually to establish that at least one head of
household of a residential unit in the Village is age sixty five (65) or older, the charge for collection of
garbage and refuse shall be reduced by two dollars ($2.00) per month for the residential unit. (Ord.
2017-29, 11-21-2017)
7-2-6: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be as set out under
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 526/649
section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1981-17, 11-23-1981)
7-2-7: VOLUNTARY RECYCLING PROGRAM:
A. Recyclables are materials having an economic value in the secondary materials market. The following
materials have such economic value: aluminum cans and articles, bimetal cans, glass containers,
corrugated paper (cardboard and paper boxes), magazines, computer printout paper, computer tax
cards, office paper, steel cans, newspaper, paper products not chemically coated.
B. There is hereby established a Recycling Program for the voluntary separating of recyclables from
garbage and rubbish in the Village of Minooka.
C. Recyclables shall be prepared and separated from other refuse as required and shall be collected by
the Village, or by its designated agent. Recyclables shall be placed either at the curbside to be
collected at times designated by the Village or shall be taken to a recycling facility.
D. Recyclable items shall become the property of the Village from time of placement of the recyclables at
the curb or in the recycling shelters. It shall be a violation of this section for any person not authorized
by the Village to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any and each
such collection in violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
It shall be unlawful for a person not authorized by the Village to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains recyclables combined with other forms of solid waste.
E. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine as set out in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
F. Any person may donate or sell recyclables to any other person whether operating for profit or not for
profit. (Ord. 1990-10, 6-12-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
Chapter 3
NOXIOUS WEEDS
7-3-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac or
other weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of land in the village except in residentially
zoned, unsubdivided land are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any
such weeds to grow or remain in such places. (1997 Code)
7-3-2: HEIGHT LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 527/649
other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding one foot (1') anywhere in the village, and such
plants or weeds exceeding such heights are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1977 Code; amd. 1997
Code)
7-3-3: NOTICE TO ABATE:
It shall be the duty of the village clerk to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant
of any such premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days from when the notice is
mailed, hand delivered, or posted on the property. (Ord. 2011-09, 3-22-2011)
7-3-4: CHARGES TO ABATE:
If the person so notified does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days after such notice, the village
clerk shall proceed to abate such nuisance by having the weeds cut. The charge for cutting weeds shall
be the total costs incurred by the village in cutting and removing the weeds. A bill for the weed cutting
charges shall be served, or caused to be served, by the village clerk upon, and shall be paid by, the
owner or occupant upon receipt. (Ord. 2016-23, 7-26-2016)
7-3-5: CHARGES, LIEN:
Charges for weed cutting shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by statute. Whenever a bill for
weed cutting remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, the village clerk may file with
the county recorder of deeds, of the county having jurisdiction, a notice consisting of a sworn statement
setting out: (Ord. 1989-15, 10-24-1989; amd. 1997 Code)
A. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof,
B. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and
C. The date or dates when such cost and expense were incurred by the city. (1977 Code)
7-3-6: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be as set out under
section 1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
Chapter 4
REMOVAL AND TRIMMING OF NUISANCE TREES
7-4-1: TREES ON VILLAGE OWNED PROPERTY OR RIGHT OF WAY CAUSING
DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE CONDITION OTHER THAN A SIGHT RESTRICTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 528/649
Where a tree is located on property owned by the village or in the dedicated public right of way, and
causes a dangerous or unsafe condition to exist, the removal and trimming of said tree shall be in
accordance with the rules and regulations formulated by the department of public works, in accordance
with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other
agreements with the village. (Ord. 2013-11, 4-23-2013)
7-4-2: TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY CAUSING DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE
CONDITION OTHER THAN A SIGHT RESTRICTION:
Where a tree located on private property causes a dangerous or unsafe condition to exist on village
owned property, in the public right of way or in a dedicated village easement, the owner of the private
property on which the tree is located shall be responsible for removing or trimming said tree so as to
abate said condition. Notice and abatement shall be in accordance with the following:
A. Notice: The department of public works shall give to the owner of the premises on which the tree is
located a written notice of the existence of the condition caused by said tree. Service of the notice
required by this section shall be by personal service or by registered mail, to the person who is listed
as the taxpayer of record for said property. Said notice shall include the following:
1. The common address for the property in question;
2. The permanent tax index number for the property in question;
3. A brief description of the condition;
4. An identification of the specific tree or trees causing the condition; and
5. A statement indicating that if the identified condition is not remedied within ten (10) days of the date
of the notice, the village may provide for abatement of the condition and bill the property owner
and/or lien the property for the reasonable cost of said abatement.
B. Abatement: If, after the giving of notice as required by this section, the property owner refuses or
neglects to remedy the condition, the village may provide for abatement of the condition by removing
and/or trimming said tree(s). The reasonable cost for said removal and/or trimming shall be billed to
the property owner.
C. Lien: If said property owner refuses or neglects to pay said bill, a lien in the amount of said costs shall
be recorded/registered with the county recorder of deeds/registrar of titles. Said lien shall be
recorded/registered within one year after such costs are incurred by the village, and shall consist of a
sworn statement setting forth the following:
1. The legal description of the property;
2. The permanent tax index number of the property;
3. The common address of the property;
4. The cost incurred in removing and/or trimming the tree(s); and
5. The date(s) on which the tree removal and/or trimming work was performed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 529/649
D. Notice Of Lien: Upon the recording/registering of said lien, a copy thereof shall be forwarded by first
class U.S. mail to the taxpayer of record for said property.
E. Emergency Removal And/Or Trimming: In cases where it reasonably appears that the condition of the
tree poses an imminent hazard, and there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any property or
person unless the tree in question is immediately trimmed and/or removed, the director of public
works, or his/her duly authorized designee, shall provide for the immediate trimming and/or removal of
such dangerous tree. The costs of such emergency trimming and/or removal shall be collected in the
same manner as provided in this section.
F. Lien Satisfaction: Upon receipt of payment consisting of the amount of the lien and the village's actual
cost for recording the lien, the village shall issue a release of lien to the person making said payment.
G. Definition Of Private Property: For purposes of this section, "private property" shall be defined to
include all property within the village which is neither owned by the village nor is dedicated right of
way. (Ord. 2013-11, 4-23-2013)
Title 8
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
8-1-1: MEMBERS, DUTIES:
A. The village president and members of the board of trustees, police chief and any police officer or
special police officer appointed at any time by authority of the village president shall constitute the
police department of the village. It shall be the duty of each member of the police force to enforce all
village ordinances relating to the preservation of the peace, health, good order and quiet of the village
and to prosecute all violations of all village ordinances. (1904 Code § 20.1; amd. 1977 Code)
B. There is hereby established the position of one deputy chief in the village of Minooka. The deputy chief
position shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of chief. The deputy chief may be appointed
from any rank of sworn, full time officers of the village's police department, but must have at least five
(5) years of full time service as a police officer in said department. A deputy chief shall serve at the
discretion of the chief and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior
to appointment to the deputy chief position. (Ord. 2002-04, 2-26-2002)
C. There is hereby established the position of police department administrator in the village of Minooka.
The police department administrator position shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of chief.
The police department administrator shall be an appointment by the chief of police, and may be
removed from office in accordance with the personnel policy manual. The compensation of the police
department administrator shall be determined from time to time by the board of trustees. The police
department administrator shall assist the chief of police in the administration and operation of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 530/649
police department, and shall perform such other law and nonlaw enforcement duties as may be
directed from time to time by the chief of police. (Ord. 2006-35, 9-26-2006)
D. All part time police officers shall serve for such term and on such conditions as may be designated by
the terms of such appointment, but the number of hours a part time officer may work within a calendar
year is restricted. Appointments may be revoked at any time, and part time police officers shall meet
the following requirements:
1. Successfully completed any training mandated by the Illinois law enforcement training and
standards board.
2. At least twenty one (21) years of age.
3. A high school graduate or equivalent.
4. Have a current and valid motor vehicle operator's license.
5. Not convicted of a felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude.
6. Submit fingerprints to the chief of police for a formal background check by the Illinois state police
and federal bureau of investigation, and pass said background check. (Ord. 2012-13, 6-26-2012)
8-1-2: SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS:
The board of trustees may, from time to time, appoint as many police officers and special police officers
as they may deem necessary, who shall hold their offices during the pleasure of the village board, but not
to exceed the municipal year in which they are appointed. (1904 Code § 6.12; amd. 1977 Code)
8-1-3: CALL FOR ASSISTANCE:
Any police officer of the village may call to his assistance any person over the age of twenty one (21)
years to assist him in the execution of any legal process, or in making an arrest of any offender against
the ordinances of the village or the laws of the state of Illinois, or to assist in the preservation of the public
peace, and if such person so summoned neglects or refuses to aid and assist in taking, arresting or
securing any person against whom there may have been issued any civil or criminal process, or neglects
or refuses to aid and assist in retaking or securing who, after having been arrested or confined, may have
escaped from any such arrest or imprisonment, or neglects or refuses to aid and assist in preventing any
breach of the peace or the commission of any criminal offense, being thereto lawfully required by any
police officer of the village concerned in the administration of justice, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1904 Code § 6.12; amd. 1977 Code)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
8-2-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. Enumerated: A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 531/649
1. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach
of the peace; or
2. While acting as a collection agency as defined in the "collection agency act" or as an employee of
such collection agency, and while attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to
the alleged debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
3. Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the department of public health under the
nursing home care act; or
4. Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report under article II of "an act in relation to victims of
violence and abuse", approved September 16, 1984, as amended; or
5. Knowingly does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture, or display that
under the circumstances creates a clear and present danger of a breach of peace or imminent
threat of violence; or
6. Knowingly fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to be a peace officer under
circumstances under which three (3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in
the immediate vicinity that are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm; or
7. Knowingly assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to
disturb the public peace; or
8. Wilfully makes or assists in the making of any noise or diversion that disturbs or tends to disturb the
peace or good order of a school session or class while on public or private grounds adjacent to any
building in which a school or any class is in session; or
9. Engages in fighting, threatening or tumultuous behavior upon any school property, public or private;
or
10. Wilfully makes or assists in the making of any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or noises,
caused by any horn, bell, radio, loudspeaker, vehicle, motorcycle, dirt bike, or other such instrument,
which are of such character, intensity and duration as to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the village. (Ord. 2007-38, 7-24-2007)
B. Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses
to comply with any provision of this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
8-2-2: DAMAGING PROPERTY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, injure or destroy
any property within the village, whether such property is owned by the state, county, village or any
other governmental body, or owned by any private person. Any person violating this provision shall be
punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
B. Any person who shall wantonly break the glass in any streetlamp or injure the burner thereof, or any
part, wire or support thereof, or who shall, without proper authority from the village president and
board of trustees, either light or extinguish the burner of any lamp in the village, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. (1904 Code § 14.1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 532/649
8-2-3: WEAPONS, DISCHARGING:
No person shall fire or discharge any gun, cannon, musket, rifle, fowling piece, pistol, air gun or firearm of
any description, or release or fire any projecting type instrument such as an arrow within the limits of the
village, except in cases of necessity or in the performance of a public act or lawful duty, without first
having obtained permission from the village president for that purpose. (Ord. 1985-19, 10-28-1985)
8-2-4: PLAYING BALL IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball, raise or fly any kite or ride any bike, skateboard and roller
skates in any part of the village devoted to business purposes, or in any street, alley or other public place
in any portion of the village, to the disturbance or annoyance of any citizen or person passing along any
such street, alley or other public place. (1904 Code § 22.13; amd. 1997 Code)
8-2-5: POSTING HANDBILLS, INJURING PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, cut, write or otherwise place any handbill, notice or any
written or printed matter upon any bridge, approach to a bridge, fence, wall, stone, post, tree, building or
other public place without the consent of the owner of said property, or to break any window or in any
manner to injure any building, fence, sidewalk or tree. (1904 Code § 6.9)
8-2-6: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
A. Public Indecency: A person commits the offense of public indecency if they knowingly or intentionally,
in a public place: 1) engage in sexual intercourse; 2) engage in deviate sexual conduct; 3) appear in a
state of nudity; or 4) fondles the genitals of himself/herself or another person.
B. Definitions:
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, female breast with less than
a full opaque covering of any part of the nipple, the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state
or that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn "thong" type bikini bottom.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is present or likely to be
present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public.
Public places include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and
commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the public at large
or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), hotels, motels,
restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by religious, social,
fraternal or similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or
temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. Public place shall not include enclosed single
sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities,
enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors'
offices, churches, synagogues or similar places when used for circumcisions, baptisms or similar
ceremonies, portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and
customarily expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a person appearing in a state of nudity
as a model in a class operated by: 1) a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 2) a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 533/649
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college. (Ord.
1999-03, 3-9-1999)
C. Violation; Penalty:
1. In addition to all other remedies, a person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any provision of this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
for each offense and may be enjoined from continuing the conduct determined to be public
indecency.
2. A person who knowingly or intentionally encourages or facilitates another person's commission of
the offense of public indecency shall be deemed to have committed the offense itself.
3. A club, restaurant, theater or other place where violations of this section occur shall be deemed a
public nuisance which shall be subject to abatement. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
D. Interpretation:
1. This section is patterned after Indiana public indecency statute upheld by the United States
supreme court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456 (1991). It is the intent
of the village that this section be interpreted in the same manner as said statute.
2. It is the intent of the village that the definition of "public place" set forth above shall be interpreted to
be no more broad than the definition of public place set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9
as upheld by the Illinois supreme court in People v. Garrison, 82 Ill.2d 444, 412 N.E.2d 483 (1980).
(Ord. 1999-03, 3-9-1999)
8-2-7: FIREWORKS:
A. Nuisance: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person, firm, copartnership or corporation to
knowingly possess, offer for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks; provided, however,
that the president and village board may issue a permit for pyrotechnical and consumer displays.
B. Definitions:
FIREWORKS: Any explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances, or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in
which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs or other fireworks of like construction and
any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing any
explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects, or any tablets or
other device containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing
visual effects, and shall include the terms "consumer fireworks", "display fireworks", and "flame
effects" as defined in the fireworks use act, 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1.
The term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; sparklers; trick
noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads"
and "auto burglar alarms"; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of explosive compound are used, provided
they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 534/649
explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20) grain
of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
C. Permits:
1. Pyrotechnic Displays:
a. Each pyrotechnic display shall be conducted by a licensed lead pyrotechnic operator. Applications
for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of
the date of the pyrotechnic display. No pyrotechnic display permit shall be transferable.
b. Permits shall be signed by the chief of the fire department providing fire protection to the area of
display, or his or her designee, and must identify the lead pyrotechnic operator.
c. The applicant seeking the pyrotechnic display permit must provide proof of liability insurance in a
sum not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), naming the village of Minooka as an
additional insured, to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any
act or omission on the part of such person, firm, or corporation or any agent or employee thereof.
d. A permit shall be issued only after the chief of the fire department providing fire protection
coverage to the area of display, or his or her designee, has inspected the site and determined that
the display can be performed in full compliance with the rules adopted by the state fire marshal
and that the display shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the village from adopting more stringent rules.
2. Consumer Displays:
a. Each consumer display shall be handled by a competent individual who has received training
from a consumer fireworks training class approved by the office of the state fire marshal.
Applications for consumer display permits shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the date of the display. No consumer displays permit shall be transferable.
b. Permits may be granted hereunder to any adult individual applying for a permit who provides
proof that he or she has received the requisite training. The village is authorized to conduct a
criminal background check of the applicant as a condition of issuing a permit at the applicant's
expense.
c. A permit shall be issued only after inspection of the display site by the fire chief providing fire
protection coverage to the area of display, or his or her designee, to determine that the display is
in full compliance with the rules adopted by the state fire marshal. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the village from adopting more stringent rules.
D. Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any of the following:
1. The sale at wholesale of any fireworks for supervised displays by any approved resident
manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber in accordance with regulations of the U.S. bureau of
alcohol, tobacco and firearms (see title 27, code of federal regulations, subchapter C) and the U.S.
department of transportation;
2. The manufacture, transportation or storage of fireworks at a manufacturing facility, and the testing of
fireworks under the direction of its manufacturer provided permission for such testing has been
obtained from the village;
3. The sale, transportation, handling or use of industrial pyrotechnic devices or fireworks such as
railroad torpedoes, fuses, automotive, aeronautical and marine flares and smoke signals;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 535/649
4. The manufacture, storage or use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe operation of railroads,
trucks, aircraft, or other instrumentalities of transportation;
5. The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater, for signal or ceremonial purposes,
in athletics or sports, or legal power tools;
6. The transportation, handling, or use of pyrotechnic devices by the armed forces of the United
States;
7. The use of pyrotechnics in training by the fire service, law enforcement or similar government
agencies; and
8. Fireworks devices distributed to farmers, ranchers, or growers through a wildlife management
program administered by the U.S. department of the interior (or by equivalent state or local
government agencies); and such distribution is in response to a written application describing the
wildlife management problem that requires use of such devices, is of a quantity no greater than
required to control the problem described, and is where other means of control is unavailable or
inadequate.
E. Owner Of Real Property: If the owner of real property on which any of the prohibited activities as set
forth in this section is present while the prohibited activity or activities occurs, said owner shall also be
deemed to have committed an offense. (Ord. 2007-29, 6-26-2007)
F. Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, any person, firm, copartnership or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
8-2-8: TRESPASS:
A. Violation: A person commits the offense of trespass when knowingly or intentionally:
1. Enters upon the land of another, including public property, when the person, prior to such entry,
receives notice that such entry is forbidden; or
2. Remains upon the land of another, including public property, after receiving notice to depart; or
3. Enters upon the land of another, including public property, and remains thereon with a malicious and
mischievous intent after receiving notice to depart.
B. Notice: A person has received notice within the meaning of subsection A of this section if the person
has been notified personally, either orally by an official in the performance of his or her official duties or
by an owner or occupant, or in writing, including a valid court order, or if a printed or written notice
forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
property or the forbidden part thereof.
C. Exception: This section does not prohibit a person from entering upon the land of another, including
public property, for emergency purposes or to a peace officer or other official of a unit of government in
the performance of his or her official duties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 536/649
D. Definitions: For purposes of this section:
EMERGENCY: A condition or circumstance in which an individual is or is reasonably believed by the
person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily harm or in which property is or is reasonably
believed to be in imminent danger of damage or destruction.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned by the Village or the government or one of its agencies,
divisions, or entities, including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, schools,
libraries, trails, ponds, lakes, parkways or parking areas and other property regularly used by the
general public, as opposed to land held by an individual, a corporation or private entity trust for the
benefit of the owners (private property). (Ord. 2011-06, 2-22-2011)
E. Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for
each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
8-2-9: CANNABIS, SYNTHETIC CANNABIS, AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any
parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted
from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature
stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is
incapable of germination.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: 1. A drug, substance, or immediate precursor in the schedules of
article II of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/201 et seq., or
2. A drug or other substance, or immediate precursor, designated as a controlled substance by
the department through administrative rule, and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
2,5-dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylthio-phenethylamine
3-fluoromethcathinone
4-fluoromethcathinone
4-methoxymethcathinone
5-Methoxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine
AM-694 (1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(2-iodophenyl)methanone)
CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol), where side chain
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 537/649
n=5; and homologues where side chain n=4, 6, or 7)
CP 47,497 and its C6, C8 and C9 homologs (2-[1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-
2-yl)phenol)
HU-210, Dexanabinol ((6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol, its isomers, salts, and salts of isomers)
HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrahydrobenzo[
c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-211, Dexanabinol (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol)
JWH-015 ((2-methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenyl-methanone)
JWH-018 (1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-073 (1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-251 (2-(2-methylphenyl)-1-(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-ethanone)
MDPV (3,4-Methyenedioxypyrovalerone)
Mephedrone (4-Methylmethcathinone)
Methylone (3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone)
RCS-8, BTW-8 and SR-18 (1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-3- (2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
Any compound structurally derived from 3-(1-naphthoyl)indole or 1H-indol-3-yl-(1-
naphthyl)methane by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl,
alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl whether or not further
substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any
extent
Any compound structurally derived from 3-(1-naphthoyl)pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen
atom of the pyrrole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2-(4-
morpholinyl)ethyl, whether or not further substituted in the pyrrole ring to any extent, whether or
not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent
Any compound structurally derived from 1-(1-naphthylmethyl)indene by substitution at the 3-
position of the indene ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2- (4-
morpholinyl)ethyl whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent, whether or
not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent
Any compound structurally derived from 3-phenylacetylindole by substitution at the nitrogen
atom of the indole ring with alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2- (4-
morpholinyl)ethyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or
not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent
Any compound structurally derived from 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol by substitution at the 5-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 538/649
position of the phenolic ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2-(4-
morpholinyl)ethyl, whether or not substituted in the cyclohexyl ring to any extent
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG: A substance:
1. The chemical structure of which is substantially similar to the chemical structure of a controlled
substance in schedule I or II;
2. Which has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that
is substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system of a controlled substance in schedule I or II; or
3. With respect to a particular person, which such person represents or intends to have a
stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is substantially
similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous
system of a controlled substance in schedule I or II.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than
methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/10, the
methamphetamine control and community protection act, which are intended to be used unlawfully
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a
controlled substance in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., the cannabis control
act; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., the Illinois controlled substances act; or 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/1 et seq., the methamphetamine control and community protection
act. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance;
2. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species
of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance;
3. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or controlled substances;
4. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled
substance by private persons;
5. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis,
synthetic cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body including, where
applicable, the following items:
a. Water pipes;
b. Carburetion tubes and devices;
c. Smoking and carburetion masks;
d. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 539/649
e. Carburetor pipes;
f. Electric pipes;
g. Air driven pipes;
h. Chillums;
i. Bongs;
j. Ice pipes or chillers; or
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this
section.
SYNTHETIC CANNABIS: An herbal and chemical product, whether described as tobacco, herbs,
incense, spice, or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the
purpose of being smoked, which mimics the effects of the active ingredient in cannabis and
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and contains a cannabinoids receptor agonist as follows:
CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)phenol)
HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-dimethyl-4-
bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl]methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-5-pentyl-2,5-
cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole)
JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone)
JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)ethanone)
JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl)indole)
JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole)
RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methanone)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 540/649
RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)ethanone)
WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo[1,2,3-de)-1,4-
benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
Street names for synthetic cannabis may include, but are not limited to, the following:
Black mamba strawberry
Black mamba tangerine
Black mamba vanilla
Cloud nine incense
Flying buddha aqua
Flying buddha golden
Flying buddha nirvana
Flying buddha rose
Flying buddha royal
Flying buddha rubia
Flying buddha zen
Formula 420
K2 blonde
K2 citron
K2 huckleberry
K2 pineapple
K2 pink
K2 sky
K2 solid sex
K2 standard
K2 summit
K2 thai dream
K2 ultra
K2 ultra incense
Kronic skunk blend
Pottpouri
Purple haze max
Quick fix plus
Smoke buddy
Spice
Triad blue label 1
Wickedspice
B. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any person who may, under federal or state law, possess,
manufacture, distribute, dispense, or ingest the substances regulated by this section. Furthermore, if a
violation is a felony, it shall be prosecuted under appropriate federal and/or state law and not this
section.
C. Synthetic Cannabis And Controlled Substance:
1. Beginning on January 1, 2012, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver, barter,
give away, gift, or publicly display for sale or otherwise transfer any product substance containing
synthetic cannabis, controlled substance, or controlled substance analog.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 541/649
2. Beginning on January 1, 2012, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess or ingest
any substance containing synthetic cannabis, controlled substance, or controlled substance analog.
(Ord. 2011-24, 11-22-2011)
D. Possession Of Cannabis:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess not more than ten grams (10 g) of
cannabis.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess more than ten grams (10 g) but not more
than thirty grams (30 g) of cannabis. (Ord. 2016-31, 9-21-2016)
E. Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of
drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis,
synthetic cannabis, or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis, synthetic
cannabis, or a controlled substance for that use. (Ord. 2011-24, 11-22-2011)
F. Penalty:
1. A person convicted of violating subsection C1 of this section shall be fined not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense.
2. A person convicted of violating subsection C2 of this section shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense.
3. A person convicted of violating subsection D1 of this section shall be fined not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
4. A person convicted of violating subsection D2 of this section shall be fined not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense.
5. A person convicted of violating subsection E of this section shall be fined as follows:
a. When the drug paraphernalia is seized alone or during a violation of subsection (a) of section 4 of
the cannabis control act (as amended by Public Act 099-0697), the fine for possession of such
drug paraphernalia shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
b. Except as provided in subsection F5a of this section, the fine shall be not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and not more than as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
(Ord. 2016-31, 9-21-2016)
Chapter 3
MINORS
8-3-1: CURFEW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 542/649
A. Loitering Of Minors: It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age who has not been
emancipated by court order (hereinafter referred to as "minor") to be present at or upon any public
assembly, building, place, store or highway at the following times:
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Saturday;
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on
the following day.
B. Defenses: It is a defense to a violation under subsection A of this section that the minor engaged in the
unlawful conduct while:
1. Accompanied by and supervised by the minor's parent, legal guardian or other responsible
companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian;
2. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence;
3. In a motor vehicle, train, or bus involved in interstate travel; or
4. Participating in, going to, or returning from, without any detour or stop:
a. Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of
age to perform;
b. A school recreational activity;
c. A religious event;
d. An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious
bodily injury, loss of life, or substantial damage, the resulting state calling for immediate action,
and includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident;
e. An activity involving the exercise of the minor's rights protected under the first amendment to the
United States constitution or article 1, sections 3, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois,
or both; or
f. An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education,
training, or other care under the supervision of one or more adults.
C. Parents: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, custodian, or other person to knowingly permit a
person in his custody or control to violate subsection A of this section; provided however that the
defenses enumerated in subsection B of this section do not apply.
D. Owners Of Amusement Places: It is unlawful for any person operating places of amusement and
entertainment, including, but not limited to, pool halls, arcades and similar businesses, to permit any
minors to enter or remain in such places of amusement and entertainment during the hours prohibited
under this section; provided however that the defenses enumerated in subsection B of this section do
not apply.
E. Officer Investigation: A citation for violation of subsection A of this section may be issued by a police
officer if he reasonably believes that a violation has occurred only after investigation and, based on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 543/649
any response and other circumstances, none of the defenses enumerated in subsection B of this
section apply. (Ord. 2004-15, 4-27-2004)
8-3-2: SMOKING MATERIALS1:
(Rep. by Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
8-3-3: TRUANCY PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is enrolled in grades one through
twelve (12) who: 1) is required by law to attend school and/or 2) is subject to the compulsory
attendance requirements of the Illinois school code and/or 3) is enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school within the corporate limits of the village, to absent himself or herself from attendance
at school without parental or school permission or valid cause. Parental permission shall refer to and
include permission obtained from a parent, legal guardian, or other adult person standing in loco
parentis and having custody and control over such person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Any
person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the offenses of truancy and be subject
to the penalties hereinafter set forth in this section.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who induces or attempts to induce any child to be absent from
school unlawfully, or who knowingly employs or harbors, while school is in session, any child absent
from school in violation of this section.
C. A valid cause for absence from school shall include illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in
the immediate family, family emergency, and shall include other situations beyond the control of the
person so absenting himself or herself from school as determined by the school district; provided that
parental permission for absence due to such cause is obtained, in writing, from the parent and is
submitted to the proper school authorities, according to their regulations, within twenty four (24) hours
after such absence, not including weekends. (Ord. 2004-04, 1-27-2004)
D. In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any provision of subsection A or B of this section shall be sentenced as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code, or in lieu of a fine, complete a corresponding amount of public service work.
If it is the first offense, a violator may be assigned to work six (6) hours of school assigned tasks in lieu
of such fine. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
ANIMAL: Every living creature, other than man, which may be affected by rabies.
ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT: The Will County, Grundy County or Kendall County animal control
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 544/649
department.
ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: Any facility approved by the police chief or his designee or animal control
department for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted cats, dogs or other animals; also used interchangeably with "pound".
BUSINESS DAY: Any day including holidays that the animal control facility is open to the public for animal
reclaims.
CAT: All members of the family felidae.
CONFINED: Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner or his/her agent, to an escape proof
building, house, or other enclosure away from other animals and the public.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog when unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or
custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and
unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal in a
public place.
DOG: All members of the family canidae, male or female, four (4) months of age or older. Excluding
animals classified as wild (e.g., wolves, coyotes) or crossbred (e.g., coydogs).
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with
other measures that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the
enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and
bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is
a room within a residence, the door must be locked. A vicious dog may be allowed to move about freely
within the entire residence if it is muzzled at all times.
FERAL CAT: A cat that: a) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not
socialized, or b) is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized or lives on
a farm.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or other animal seized has
been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further includes contact of saliva with any break or
abrasion of the skin.
HOUSING REQUIREMENTS: The provision of:
A. A fenced area of adequate size such that the animal may move freely and relieve himself away
from the food and water supply,
B. Fresh clean water,
C. A crate or kennel large enough to permit the animal to stand, turn around easily and to lie down
comfortably, and
D. If chained, the animal should be in a harness and must have the ability to move about without
becoming tangled or injured, must be ten feet (10') off the property line at the full extent of the chain,
and must not pose a nuisance by prolonged barking or by lunging at passersby.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody and located at the animal control facility.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection of an antirabies vaccine approved by the department of
agriculture of the state of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 545/649
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of an
animal and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such animal under control.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A person trained by an accredited medical school who is licensed to
practice veterinary medicine by the state in which they establish a practice of veterinary medicine.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who
has an animal in his/her care, or acts as the custodian of an animal.
PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of physical condition.
POLICE ANIMAL: An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or agency in the course of
the department or agency's work.
POLICE CHIEF OR HIS DESIGNEE: The village of Minooka police chief or his designee.
RUNNING AT LARGE: Any animal found which is not secured by a leash, or not confined within the real
property limits of its owner.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes
death, serious or protracted disfigurement, protracted impairment of health, impairment of the function of
any bodily organ, or plastic surgery.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or
death or any individual dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog upon three (3) separate
occasions. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-2: INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES:
A. Dogs: Every owner of a dog four (4) months or more of age shall have each dog inoculated against
rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Every dog shall have a second rabies vaccination within one year of
the first. Terms of subsequent vaccine administration and duration of immunity must be in compliance
with the department of agriculture of the state of Illinois. Evidence of such rabies inoculation shall be
entered on a certificate which shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccine.
Veterinarians who inoculate a dog shall procure serially numbered tags, one to be issued with each
inoculation certificate. Only one dog shall be included on each certificate. The tag must be attached to
a collar or harness and worn at all times by the dog for which the certificate and tag have been issued.
B. Cats: Every owner of a cat in a residential district shall cause their cat, four (4) months or more of age,
to be inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as may be established by
regulations pursuant to the Illinois animal control act. Evidence of such rabies inoculation shall be
entered on a certificate and which shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the
vaccine. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-3: REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS:
There shall be no requirement of a village license for a dog or cat. However, it shall be unlawful to permit
any dog to be on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place unless such dog has a collar firmly
attached around its neck with a county license tag for the current year attached to such collar. (Ord. 2006-
36, 10-10-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 546/649
8-4-4: KENNELS:
A. Annual Inspection: Kennels shall be subject to, at a minimum, an annual inspection by the police chief
or his designee in cooperation with the animal control department to ensure compliance with this
chapter and other local and state regulations.
B. Regulations: Kennels shall be sanitary, with proper ventilation, adequate nutrition, housing, humane
care and treatment, including required rabies vaccinations and registrations, for all animals.
C. Removal: The court upon finding evidence of a violation of this chapter may order removal by the
police chief or his designee or animal control department or the appropriate state authority of all
animals until the violation is corrected. The owner of the animals shall be ordered to pay the cost of
housing the animals until the violation is corrected. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-5: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to allow or cause an animal
to "run at large". An animal will be considered to be "running at large" when it is off or outside the
premises of its owner, unless it is controlled as follows:
A. By a line or leash not more than eight feet (8') in length, provided that the line or leash is held by a
competent person who has the capacity to control the animal.
B. The animal is confined within a vehicle being driven, parked or stopped. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-6: APPREHENSION OF ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
Any animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be apprehended and
impounded. For this purpose, the police chief or his designee or animal control department shall utilize
any existing or available animal control facility. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-7: POSSESSION OF RUNNING AT LARGE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the knowledge and consent of the owner, to retain possession
of any "running at large" animal for more than forty eight (48) hours without first reporting such possession
to the police chief or his designee and providing their name, address, a description of the animal, and a
statement of the circumstances under which possession of the animal was obtained. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-
10-2006)
8-4-8: SURRENDER OF RUNNING AT LARGE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains possession of a "running at large animal" to refuse to
surrender such animal to the police chief or his designee or animal control department when requested to
do so. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 547/649
8-4-9: CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS:
All female dogs shall be confined to an enclosure at all times during the estrus period. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-
10-2006)
8-4-10: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep a dog, cat or other animal which by unusual or
prolonged barking, howling or other noise disturbs the peace and quiet of any person. For the purpose of
this section, unusual or prolonged noise shall include, but not be limited to, animal noise which continues
in a substantially uninterrupted manner for ten (10) minutes or more or which occurs more than five (5)
times in one hour. The mailing of a notice to a keeper of an animal that such animal has engaged in
unusual or prolonged barking, howling or other noise shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the
keeper is knowingly keeping such an animal in the case of any charges brought against such keeper
under this section after the mailing of such a notice. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-11: ANIMAL BITES:
The police chief or his designee shall investigate all bites by dogs or other animals. In the event a
noninoculated animal bites a person, said animal shall be quarantined at any approved location, for a
period of ten (10) days, and it shall be the duty at the owner's expense to have the animal examined by a
physician or licensed veterinarian at the commencement and termination of the ten (10) day period. If
such animal, during this period, shall die or shall show definite signs of illness, it shall be the duty of the
owner or person having custody of the animal to turn the dog over to the police chief or his designee or
animal control department so that it can be determined whether or not the dog has rabies. Inoculated
animals may be quarantined in the home of the owner if the bite is below the shoulders, and, after
inspection by the police chief or his designee or animal control department, the location is deemed
satisfactory for confinement. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-12: VICIOUS DOG:
A. Vicious Dog Determination: In order to have a dog deemed vicious, the police chief or his designee or
animal control department must give notice of the infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the
owner, conduct a thorough investigation, interview any witnesses, including the owner, gather any
existing medical records, veterinary medical records or behavioral evidence, and make a detailed
report recommending a finding that the dog is a vicious dog and give the report to the state's attorney's
office and the owner. The police chief or his designee, animal control department, state's attorney, or
any citizen of the county in which the dog exists may file a complaint in the circuit court to deem a dog
to be a vicious dog. Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary
behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant to the court's determination of whether the
dog's behavior was justified. The petitioner must prove the dog is a vicious dog by clear and
convincing evidence. The police chief or his designee or animal control department shall determine
where the animal shall be confined during the pendency of the case. If a dog is found to be a vicious
dog, the dog shall be spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of the finding at the expense of its owner
and microchipped, if not already, and is subject to enclosure. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall not
be released to the owner until the police chief or his designee or animal control department approves
the enclosure. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog without court
approval. Whenever an owner of a vicious dog relocates, he or she shall notify the police chief or his
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 548/649
designee and animal control department and the administrator of the county animal control where he
or she has relocated.
B. Justified Conduct: A dog shall not be declared vicious if the court determines the conduct of the dog
was justified because:
1. The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or
offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog, or upon the property of the owner or custodian of
the dog;
2. The injured, threatened, or killed person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or physically
threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the past tormented, abused, assaulted, or physically
threatened the dog or its offspring; or
3. The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or member
of its household, kennel, or offspring.
C. Exceptions: No dog shall be deemed vicious if it is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or
guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is specific as to breed. Guide dogs
for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or
police owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while
the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section, each such dog
shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
owner or keeper of such exempted dog to notify the police chief or his designee and animal control
department of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the
police chief or his designee and animal control department advised of the location where such dog will
be stationed. The police chief or his designee and animal control department shall provide police and
fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify such
departments of any address changes reported to him or her.
D. Enclosure: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found to be
a vicious dog unless the dog is kept in an enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed
out of the enclosure are:
1. If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the dog;
2. In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog's life is threatened; or
3. To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely
muzzled and restrained with a leash not exceeding six feet (6') in length, and shall be under the
direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its residence.
E. Impoundment: Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to an
enclosure shall be impounded by the police chief or his designee or animal control department. If the
owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the county in which the owner resides
within fifteen (15) working days, the dog may be euthanized. Upon filing a notice of appeal, the order
of euthanasia shall be automatically stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner shall bear
the burden of timely notification to the police chief or his designee and animal control department in
writing of an appeal. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-13: DANGEROUS DOG:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 549/649
A. Dangerous Dog Determination: The police chief or his designee, after a thorough investigation,
including sending, within three (3) days of becoming aware of an alleged infraction, notification to the
owner of the alleged infraction, the initiation of an investigation, and affording the owner an opportunity
to meet with the police chief or his designee, gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence,
interviewing witnesses, and making a detailed written report, may deem a dangerous dog. No dog
shall be deemed a dangerous dog without clear and convincing evidence. The owner shall be sent
immediate notification of the determination by registered or certified mail that includes a complete
description of the appeal process. If deemed dangerous, the police chief or his designee shall order
the dog to be spayed or neutered within fourteen (14) days at the owner's expense and microchipped,
if not already, and one or more of the following as deemed appropriate under the circumstances and
necessary for the protection of the public:
1. Evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or
another recognized expert in the field and completion of training or other treatment as deemed
appropriate by the expert. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated with
evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; or
2. Direct supervision by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older whenever the animal is on public
premises.
3. Order the dangerous dog to be muzzled whenever it is on public premises in a manner that will
prevent it from biting any person or animal, but that shall not injure the dog or interfere with its vision
or respiration.
B. Justified Conduct: A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the police chief or his designee after
investigation determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
1. The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or offense upon the
owner or custodian of the dog;
2. The threatened person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its
offspring;
3. The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking or threatening to attack dog or its
offspring; or
4. The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or a member
of its household, kennel, or offspring.
Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or another
recognized expert may be relevant to the determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
C. Exceptions: Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped,
and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a
person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this
section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies and performing duties as expected.
It shall be the duty of the owner of the exempted dog to notify the police department of changes of
address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the police chief or his designee
advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The police chief or his designee and animal
control department shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted
dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes reported to him or her.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 550/649
D. Control: It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any dangerous dog to leave the
premises of its owner when not under control by leash or other recognized control method.
E. Appeal: The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this section may file an appeal in
the circuit court within thirty five (35) days of receipt of notification of the determination, for a de novo
hearing on the determination. The proceeding shall be conducted as a civil hearing pursuant to the
Illinois rules of evidence and the code of civil procedure, including the discovery provisions. After a
hearing, the court may make a determination of dangerous dog upon proof by clear and convincing
evidence. The determination of the circuit court may be appealed pursuant to the civil appeals
provisions of the Illinois supreme court rules. Until the order has been reviewed and at all times during
the appeal process, the owner shall comply with the requirements set forth by the police chief or his
designee, animal control department or the court. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-14: INHUMANE TREATMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of cruelty to animals by:
A. Overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating or cruelly killing
any animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
B. Cruelly working any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the
same to be done, or by abandoning such animal.
C. Unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper
food, drink, shelter, or housing requirements.
D. Carrying or driving, or causing to be carried or driven or kept, any animal in an unnecessarily cruel
manner.
E. By allowing any animal to stand or be on any street or alley or other public place an unreasonable
length of time without food or drink.
F. The use of an animal to fight another animal for sport or pleasure. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-15: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty of the police chief or his designee or animal control department to impound in an
approved animal control facility any animal over which possession is obtained under the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-16: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
When any animal has been impounded in an animal control facility, the police chief or his designee or
animal control department shall give written notice to the owner, if known, at such owner's last known
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 551/649
address. Testimony of the police chief or his designee or animal control department who mails such notice
shall be evidence of the receipt of such notice by the owner of the animal. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-17: COST OF IMPOUNDMENT:
The owner is liable for the cost of impoundment when the animal is impounded for any of the following
reasons:
A. Failure to provide sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food and water.
B. Failure to provide shelter sufficient for the animal to maintain its body heat and functions without
drawing upon the necessary constituents of its own body.
C. Failure to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
D. Failure to provide humane care and treatment.
E. Failure to redeem any impounded animal whose ownership can be proven by the animal control
department.
F. The animal is left unattended inside vehicles when the outdoor temperatures are dangerous to the
animal's health.
G. The animal is captured outside of the owner's property running at large. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-18: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS:
The owner of any impounded animal may redeem such animal upon compliance with the following
conditions:
A. Presenting proof of current registration and inoculation of the dog or cat; or
B. Obtaining and paying for the registration and inoculation of the dog or cat, if required; and
C. Payment for all expenses incurred during the impoundment, apprehension, or confinement.
D. Compliance with the Minooka zoning ordinance.
E. No animal shall be released to an individual representing a rescue group unless the group has been
licensed by the department of agriculture of the state of Illinois or incorporated as a not for profit
organization. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 552/649
8-4-19: DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS:
A. Any animal that has bitten a human being and cannot be confined by its owner, if known, or by the
animal control facility, may be destroyed by the village of Minooka police department, its authorized
designee, or the animal control department.
B. Any animal surrendered to the animal control facility by its owner, or any animal impounded under the
provisions of this chapter, which has not bitten a person shall, unless sooner redeemed, be held at the
animal control facility for a period of at least three (3) days, including Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, if the owner of said dog is unknown. If the owner of said animal is known or can be
reasonably determined, the animal will be held for a period of at least seven (7) days including
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
C. The police chief or his designee or animal control department may dispose of an impounded animal not
redeemed, by either:
1. Placing the animal in an adoptive home; or
2. Selling the animal; or
3. Destroying the animal in a humane manner. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-20: ABANDONMENT:
No person shall knowingly abandon any animal whether healthy, old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled on
their own property without daily care or by abandonment off the owner's premises where it may suffer
injury, hunger, exposure or become a public charge. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-21: UNCLAIMED OWNED ANIMALS:
The owner of an impounded animal who fails to claim such animal within the time limits specified in this
chapter is responsible for all expenses incurred, when proof of ownership is established. (Ord. 2006-36,
10-10-2006)
8-4-22: DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL DEFECATION:
No defecation or manure shall be dumped or left on any street, alley, sidewalk, nor on any open area or
lot in any portion of the village; provided however that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit the
use of manure as fertilizer for lawns and gardens in keeping with ordinary and customary practices, in a
manner that does not create a nuisance. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-23: DEFENSE OF LIVESTOCK:
Any owner seeing his or her livestock, poultry, or equidae being injured, wounded, or killed by a dog not
accompanied by or not under the supervision of its owner, may kill such dog. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 553/649
8-4-24: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
The police chief or his designee shall maintain records of all animals apprehended and/or impounded.
Such records shall be maintained for at least one year following disposal of each animal and shall contain
at least the following information:
A. A complete description, including photograph if available, of the animal. At a minimum the description
must include color, size, sex and a description of any tags.
B. The manner and date of acquisition of the animal.
C. The manner and date of disposal of the animal.
D. The name and address of the person adopting, or purchasing, the animal.
E. A record of all fees and/or fines received in relation to the animal.
F. The reason for disposal of the animal and the manner used. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-25: ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
For the purpose of making inspections hereunder, the police chief or his designee or animal control
department, or any law enforcement officer may enter upon private premises, provided that the entry shall
not be made into any building that is a person's residence, to apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a
dangerous or vicious dog or other animal, or an animal thought to be infected with rabies. (Ord. 2006-36,
10-10-2006)
8-4-26: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent the
village, or any of its duly authorized agents, from instituting any other form of action at law or in equity to
enforce the provisions, or to prevent or abate violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-27: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be effective on and after October 10, 2006. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
Chapter 5
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 554/649
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle, or any part thereof, in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle
incapable of being driven safely or unlicensed (except vehicles for sale by new and used motor vehicle
dealers and repair shops), or left for such a time and under such circumstances as to reasonably appear
to have been abandoned or deserted. A vehicle is unlicensed when it does not have a current set of valid
license plates from the state in which the vehicle is registered displayed on the vehicle.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police or authorized representative.
HIGHWAY OR STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel or located on public
school property1.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days,
the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have
been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own
motor power. Inoperable motor vehicle shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or
repair operations2.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an
agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession, then such
conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter3.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street or highway which is built up with
structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred
feet (100') for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more4. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-2: TIME LIMIT FOR LEAVING VEHICLES ON PROPERTY WITHIN THE VILLAGE:
A. A vehicle, or any part thereof, which is on a highway and is abandoned, burned, inoperable, partially
dismantled, unattended, or wrecked and creating a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to
the highway, or on a highway and impeding traffic by its physical appearance, is declared a nuisance
and unlawful5.
B. A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned on a highway in an urban district that remains ten (10) hours
or more, is declared a nuisance and unlawful6.
C. A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned or left unattended on a highway, outside of an urban district,
that remains twenty four (24) hours or more, is declared a nuisance and unlawful7.
D. A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned on public or private property, other than a highway, in view of
the general public, except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle, that remains
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 555/649
seven (7) days or more, is declared a nuisance and unlawful8.
E. A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned, discarded, inoperable, junked, partially dismantled, or
wrecked, on private property, and in view of the general public, by any person in charge or control of
said vehicle and property, that remains thirty (30) days or more, is declared a nuisance and unlawful.
This shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the lawful operation of such
business enterprise, or to an operable historic vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age9. (Ord. 2010-
07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-3: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT VEHICLES:
The chief of police is authorized to enter upon public or private property at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspecting vehicles reasonably believed to be in violation of this chapter, and affix to such
vehicle, in a conspicuous location, in the form of an adhesive sticker, notice informing the owner of the
violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the chief of police from entering public or private
property for purposes of carrying out duties under this chapter or to interfere in the lawful performance of
duties under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-4: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
A. When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is on a highway and abandoned, burned, inoperable, partially
dismantled, unattended, or wrecked and creating a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to
the highway, or on a highway and causing the impeding of traffic by its physical appearance, the chief
of police is hereby authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle in accordance with all
applicable laws10.
B. When a vehicle or any part thereof, is abandoned on a highway in an urban district that remains ten
(10) hours or more, the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle
from the highway in accordance with all applicable laws11.
C. When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned or left unattended on a highway, outside of an urban
district, that remains twenty four (24) hours or more, the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove
or have removed said vehicle from the highway in accordance with all applicable laws12.
D. When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned on private or public property, other than a highway,
in view of the general public, except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle,
that remains seven (7) days or more, the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or have
removed said vehicle, in accordance with all applicable laws; provided however that no vehicle shall
be removed and impounded until five (5) days after the chief of police gives written notice of the
intention to impound the vehicle, if the vehicle has not been brought into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter at the end of such time. Such notice shall be given by:
1. Affixing a "police tow" notice on the vehicle; and
2. By personally serving a copy of the notice on the owner of the vehicle; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 556/649
3. Sending notice by regular and certified mail to the owner of such vehicle at their last known address
if the owner is reasonably ascertainable; or
4. Sending notice by regular and certified mail to the owner of such property, if the owner is reasonably
ascertainable13.
E. When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned, discarded, inoperable, junked, partially dismantled,
or wrecked, on public or private property, and in view of the general public, by any person in charge or
control of said vehicle and property, that remains thirty (30) days or more, the chief of police is
authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle or any part thereof, in accordance with all
applicable laws; provided however that no vehicle or any part thereof shall be removed and
impounded until after the chief of police serves a notice of intention to impound the vehicle and after
the accused had the opportunity for a hearing in the circuit court with competent jurisdiction. Such
notice shall be given in the following manner:
1. Affixing a "police tow" notice on the vehicle; and
2. Personal service of the notice on the owner or any person in charge or control of said property; or
3. Sending notice by regular and certified mail to the owner or any person in charge or control of said
property.
Upon obtaining an appropriate court order, the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed said vehicle. The enforcement of this subsection is stayed when a hearing and/or
decision is pending.
F. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-203 et seq., and the provisions of this chapter.
G. The chief of police may tow or cause to be towed any vehicle inoperable, abandoned, parked, or
otherwise kept in violation of the provisions of this chapter to a suitable storage area.
H. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the fees and expenses of towing, storage,
impounding and enforcement. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-5: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
The notice under this chapter may contain the following information:
A. The name of the owner of the vehicle, if available;
B. A description of the vehicle (if applicable);
C. Location of the vehicle (if applicable);
D. The nature of the violation; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 557/649
E. The right to a pretow hearing (if applicable). (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-6: RECORD SEARCHES:
When the identity of the owner of a vehicle is not known, the police department will cause:
A. The vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by the secretary of state for the purpose of
obtaining the required ownership information; and/or
B. The stolen motor vehicles files of the state police and the national crime information center (NCIC) files
to be searched by a directed communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information on the
vehicle. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-7: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES; RECLAIMED VEHICLES:
A. Disposal of unclaimed vehicles shall be as set forth in the motor vehicle code of Illinois, as amended.
B. Any time before a vehicle is sold or disposed of as provided in this chapter, the owner of the vehicle
may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department and the commercial towing service
having custody of the vehicle, proof of ownership or proof of right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released until all fees and expenses of towing, storage, impounding and enforcement
have been paid, and shall be in addition to any fines assessed in violation of this chapter, unless
prohibited by law which requires the release of the vehicle without paying such charges. The village, in
an action at law, may collect said fees and expenses. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-8: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with the provisions of this chapter shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Chapter 6
FALSE ALARMS
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to define and abate false alarms as public nuisances. False alarms are
hereby declared to be a detriment to the safety and public welfare of the people of this Village. (Ord.
1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 558/649
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter:
ALARM: Any audible, visual, electronic or other signal indicating the occurrence of an emergency.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any device designed to detect the occurrence of an emergency and to transmit an
alarm, or any device designed to transmit an alarm upon being activated by a person. Alarm systems
include, but are not limited to, burglar alarms, hold-up alarms, fire alarms, automatic dialing systems and
systems utilizing an operator or central location to which signals are transferred.
ALARM USER: The property owner or person in control of any building, structure or facility or portion
thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM: Any alarm system which upon being activated automatically transmits
by telephone line a recorded message or code signal indicating the occurrence of an emergency, or the
need for a response to an emergency.
EMERGENCY: The occurrence of fire, smoke or combustion; unlawful forced entry or burglary; robbery or
other violent crime; flood, tornado, earthquake or other natural disaster.
FALSE ALARM: The transmission by an alarm system of an alarm when an emergency does not exist.
False alarms shall not include alarms activated by:
A. Criminal activity or unauthorized entry;
B. Earthquake, hurricane or tornado winds causing structure damage to the protected premises;
C. Flooding of the protected premises;
D. Lightning;
E. Fire causing damage to the protected premises;
F. Occasional telephone line malfunction, not repeated unrepaired line trouble.
If a false alarm has been identified to the Minooka Police Department to be a false alarm, or authorized
system test, or resulting from any other nonemergency cause, prior to the time that a Minooka police
officer is dispatched to investigate the alarm, then the alarm shall not be considered a false alarm for the
purposes of this Chapter.
There shall be a rebuttal presumption that an alarm is a false alarm if the Police Department officers
responding to the alarm check the premises upon which the alarm system is installed, according to
standard Minooka Police Department procedures, and do not discover any evidence of an unauthorized
entry, criminal activity or other emergency.
A false alarm transmitted by a newly installed or modified alarm system shall not be considered a false
alarm for the purposes of this Chapter, if the false alarm is transmitted within fourteen (14) days of the
installation or modification to the alarm system.
KEY HOLDER: A person authorized by the alarm user to have access to the protected premises and
alarm system by use of a key or combination.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, firm, association or other entity. (Ord.
1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 559/649
A false alarm as defined in this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-
1993)
8-6-4: RESPONSE TO ALARMS:
A. Whenever an alarm system is activated, thereby calling an emergency response to the location by a
member of the Police Department or Fire Department, the police officer responding to the alarm shall
inspect the area protected by the system and determine whether or not the alarm was a false alarm.
B. If the police officer in charge of the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be
false, the officer shall make a report of the false alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed or
delivered to the alarm user advising of the false alarm. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-5: AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEMS:
A. Information on File: Alarm users of automatic dialing systems are required to fill out and file an
information card with the Minooka Police Department and with the agency which is being called by the
automatic dialer. The information card shall contain the names of all key holders with regard to the
premises and alarm system; and the names of two (2) contact persons, together with their work and
home addresses, and their work, home, pager and other telephone numbers at which they may be
reached. The purpose of this requirement is to have information as to the location and whereabouts of
a contact person, plus other information, readily available to the Police Department in the event of an
emergency or other situation.
B. Length of Message: Messages transmitted by automatic dialing systems shall be no longer than forty
five (45) seconds in length with an automatic cutoff at the end of the message. The message must
contain the location of the building, not the mailing address. Messages longer than that allowable
under this Chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Violations of the provisions of this
Section shall be considered a petty offense. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-6: OUTSIDE AUDIBLE ALARMS:
All outside audible alarms on burglar alarm systems are required to be of the "resetting type" and capable
of being deactivated by a key holder. All outside audible alarms on burglar alarm systems that continue to
signal for more than thirty (30) minutes are considered a nuisance, and an alarm user maintaining such
an alarm system shall be guilty of a petty offense. Outside audible alarms on fire alarm systems are not
required to be of the "resetting type". All alarm users of fire alarm systems on business or manufacturing
establishments, as defined in this Code, shall provide the Minooka Police Department with a list of the key
holders for their premises. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-7: FALSE ALARM PENALTY:
A. General Penalty: Except as specifically limited hereafter, any person convicted of a violation of any
section or provision of this Chapter shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for any one offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 560/649
B. Fire Alarm Systems: No alarm user of fire alarm systems shall permit, allow or suffer their fire alarm
system to transmit a false alarm. There shall be no penalty under this Chapter for the first two (2) false
alarms within any twelve (12) month period, although warnings may be issued. In the event of three (3)
false alarms from premises on which the alarm user maintains a fire alarm system, within any twelve
(12) month period, the fine shall be not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00). In the event of four (4)
false alarms from premises on which the alarm user maintains a fire alarm system, within any twelve
(12) month period, the fine shall not be less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In the event of
five (5) or more false alarms from premises on which the alarm user maintains a fire alarm system,
within any twelve (12) month period, the fine shall not be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
C. Burglar Or Hold-Up Alarm Systems: No alarm user of burglar or hold-up alarm systems shall permit,
allow or suffer the burglar or hold-up alarm system to transmit a false alarm. There shall be no penalty
under this Chapter for the first three (3) false alarms within any twelve (12) month period, although
warnings may be issued. In the event of four (4) false alarms from premises on which the alarm user
maintains a burglar or hold-up alarm system, within any twelve (12) month period, the fine shall be not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00). In the event of five (5) false alarms from premises on which the
alarm user maintains a burglar or hold-up alarm system, within any twelve (12) month period, the fine
shall not be less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In the event of six (6) or more false alarms
from premises on which the alarm user maintains a burglar or hold-up alarm system, within any twelve
(12) month period, the fine shall not be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-
1993)
Chapter 7
VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
8-7-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. Any motor vehicle used in connection with the following shall be declared a public nuisance and
subject to seizure and impoundment under this chapter:
1. A
violation
of:
625
ILCS
5/6-
101
Operating a motor vehicle with an expired license, permit, or a restricted driving permit if
the period of expiration is greater than 1 year, or operating a motor vehicle without ever
having been issued a driver's license or permit.
625
ILCS
5/6-
303
Driving while driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended
or revoked, except a person whose driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended only for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or a violation
of 625 ILCS 5/13 et seq., the emissions inspection law.
2. A
violation
of:
625
ILCS
Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or
compounds or any combination thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 561/649
5/11-
501
3. A person who is found to be in control of a motor vehicle against whom a warrant has been issued by a
circuit court for failing to appear to answer charges that the person was: a) operating a motor vehicle with
an expired driver's license (625 ILCS 5/6-101); b) operating a motor vehicle while that person's license
was suspended or revoked (625 ILCS 5/6-303); or c) operating a motor vehicle while under the influence
of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof (625
ILCS 5/11-501). (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
4. A violation of:
720 ILCS 5/11-6 Indecent solicitation of a child.
720 ILCS 5/11-26 Traveling to meet a minor.
720 ILCS 5/12-2 Aggravated assault.
720 ILCS 5/12-3.05 Aggravated battery.
720 ILCS 5/12-7.3 Stalking.
720 ILCS 5/16-25 Retail theft, when the full retail value of the merchandise exceeds
$150.00.
720 ILCS 5/18-1 Robbery.
720 ILCS 5/18-2 Armed robbery.
720 ILCS 5/19-1 Burglary.
720 ILCS 5/19-3 Residential burglary.
720 ILCS 5/20-1 Arson.
720 ILCS 5/20-1.1 Aggravated arson.
720 ILCS 5/20-2 Possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices.
720 ILCS 5/21-1 Criminal damage to property.
720 ILCS 5/25-1(a)
(1) or 5/25-1(d)
Mob action.
(Ord. 2012-15, 6-26-2012)
5. A violation of:
720 ILCS 550/4 Possession of more than 30 grams of any substance containing
cannabis.
720 ILCS 550/5 Manufacture, delivery, or possession with intent to deliver or manufacture
prohibited.
720 ILCS 550/5.1 Cannabis trafficking.
720 ILCS 550/5.2 Delivery of cannabis on school grounds.
720 ILCS 550/8 Unauthorized production or possession of Cannabis sativa plant.
(Ord. 2016-31, 9-21-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 562/649
6. A violation of:
720 ILCS 570/401 Manufacture of controlled or counterfeit substance or controlled
substance analog prohibited.
720 ILCS 570/401.1
Controlled substance trafficking.
720 ILCS
570/402(a),
570/402(b), or
570/402(c)
Possession of controlled or counterfeit substance.
(Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
7. A violation of:
720 ILCS 600/3.5 Possession of drug paraphernalia, except where the drug paraphernalia
is seized alone or during a violation of subsection (a) of section 4 of the
cannabis control act.
(Ord. 2016-31, 9-21-2016)
B. Any motor vehicle which is used in connection with the following shall be declared a public nuisance
and subject to seizure and impoundment under this chapter:
A violation of:
720 ILCS 5/24-1 Unlawful use of weapon.
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5 Reckless discharge of a firearm.
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1 Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition.
720 ILCS 5/24-3.3 Unlawful sale or delivery of firearms on the premises of any school.
This subsection shall not apply when the exemptions are satisfied as set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-2.
C. Any motor vehicle which is used or operated in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an
offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/36-1 of the criminal code, shall be declared a nuisance and subject to seizure and
impoundment under this chapter. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-2: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle
according to police department procedures. When the motor vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify
or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself or herself as the
owner or lessee of the vehicle, or the person who is found to be in control of the motor vehicle at the time
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 563/649
of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle
owner's right to request a hearing. Said motor vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the
hearings provided for in this chapter, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts with the village a cash
bond as set forth in section 8-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-08 - ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. Go to
new ordinance.
8-7-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
In addition to all other remedies, the owner of record of such motor vehicle subject to seizure and
impoundment shall be liable to the village for an administrative fee as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. This chapter is in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or
federal laws or any ordinance that relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any
fee in this chapter shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be assessed or imposed by a court
for any criminal charges. This chapter shall not apply:
A. If the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered;
B. If the motor vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of
the person in control of the motor vehicle; or
C. If the motor vehicle is subject to successful forfeiture proceedings under 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes
150/1 et seq., the drug asset forfeiture procedure act; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq., the
seizure and forfeiture of vessels, vehicles and aircraft act; or state or federal forfeiture laws.
For purposes of this chapter, the "owner of record" or "owner" of a motor vehicle is the record
titleholder as registered with the secretary of state, state of Illinois, or similar entity in a different state
or a lessee who has possession, use, control and responsibility of the vehicle. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-
2011)
8-7-4: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
A. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, a motor vehicle shall continue to be impounded until:
1. The administrative fee, plus any applicable towing and storage charges, are paid, in which case
possession of the motor vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the
motor vehicle;
2. A finding that a violation of this chapter did not occur after a probable cause hearing or an
administrative hearing; or
3. The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as
provided by law.
B. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder or other person shall be legally
entitled to take possession of a motor vehicle impounded under this chapter until the civil fees
applicable under this chapter have been paid. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 564/649
8-7-5: PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING:
If the owner of a motor vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter requests a probable cause hearing, said
owner must make a request for said probable cause hearing within forty eight (48) hours of the seizure
and impoundment. Said request shall be made in person and in writing at the police department
administrative offices, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. using the probable cause tow hearing request form. If the request for a probable cause
hearing is timely filed, the chief of police or his designee shall conduct such probable cause hearing within
twenty four (24) hours after the request, or by a date mutually agreeable to the parties, Monday through
Friday, excluding holidays, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. All interested persons shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the probable cause hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the probable cause hearing, the
chief of police or his designee determines there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the chief of police or his designee shall
order the continued impoundment of the motor vehicle, as provided in this chapter, unless the owner of
the motor vehicle posts with the village a cash bond as set forth in section 8-7-3 of this chapter. However,
if the chief of police or his designee finds that no such violation occurred, the chief of police or his
designee shall order the return of the motor vehicle or cash bond, but the owner shall be responsible for
any towing and storage charges. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
Within ten (10) days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, or within ten
(10) days after the conclusion of forfeiture proceedings, the village shall notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by personal service, the owner of record of the date, time and location of an
administrative hearing, unless the owner affirmatively waives the right to a hearing. The notice shall state
the fees that may be imposed, and that a motor vehicle not released by cash bond and remaining in the
village may be sold or disposed of by the village in accordance with applicable law. The hearing shall be
conducted and held, unless the motor vehicle was subject to successful forfeiture proceedings pursuant to
applicable state or federal forfeiture laws, no later than forty six (46) days after the motor vehicle was
seized, unless continued by the owner or by order of the hearing officer; or unless the motor vehicle was
subject to unsuccessful forfeiture proceedings, in which case the hearing shall be conducted and held,
unless continued by the owner or by order of the hearing officer, no later than forty six (46) days after the
conclusion of the forfeiture proceedings. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the state of Illinois for a minimum of three (3) years. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the
request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the
hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the motor vehicle, operated with the
permission, express or implied, of the owner, was used in the commission of any of the violations set forth
in this chapter, and that none of the exceptions apply, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the
owner of record of the motor vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the amount as
set forth in section 8-7-3 of this chapter, which shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village. If the
owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default order finding the
owner of record of the motor vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the amount as
set forth in section 8-7-3 of this chapter, which shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village, and a
copy of which default order shall be sent to the registered owner via certified mail, return receipt
requested. If a cash bond has been posted, the bond shall be applied. If a motor vehicle has been
impounded when such administrative fee is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a judgment on the
debt and enforce such judgment against the motor vehicle as provided by law. However, if the hearing
officer finds that no such violation occurred, the hearing officer shall order the return of the motor vehicle
or cash bond, but the owner shall be responsible for any towing and storage charges. All final decisions of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 565/649
the hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-
101 et seq., the administrative review law. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-7: FAILURE TO PAY:
If the administrative fee and towing and storage charges are not paid:
A. After the time for an administrative hearing has expired, or
B. Within thirty five (35) days after entry of an administrative fee against an owner of record after an
administrative hearing and the owner did not file a petition for administrative review, or
C. Within thirty five (35) days after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of
the village,
the village shall be authorized to dispose of said vehicle (including contents and license plates) in the
manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
Title 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
9-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
A. In order to control and regulate traffic within the village there is hereby adopted the Illinois vehicle code,
being particularly 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein.
B. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-40-1 and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208(a)(7),
the village hereby adopts Illinois Compiled Statutes chapter 625, act 5, chapter 15, including, but not
limited to, its numbering system, size, weight, load regulations, permits, and violations/penalties, by
reference and it is incorporated as a part of this code as if set out at length herein.
C. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-80-2 and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208(a)(2)
and 5/11-208(a)(15), the village hereby adopts 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-401(d) and 5/3-815,
including its numbering system, schedules and violations/penalties, by reference and it is incorporated
as a part of this code as if set out at length herein. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-2010)
9-1-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, POLICE OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 566/649
A. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in
accordance with the ordinances of the village, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer
invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-3: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove
any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon,
or any other part thereof. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-4: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, EXCEPTIONS:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except
as follows:
A. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules
governing such movement.
B. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair.
C. When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-
1960)
9-1-5: PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right; and upon
roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the
other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (Ord. 1960-
2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-6: OVERTAKING VEHICLE ON THE LEFT:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction,
subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left
thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle.
B. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall
give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 567/649
speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
C. No person shall pass another vehicle within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection or within one
hundred feet (100') of a railroad crossing.
D. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing
another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely
made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction
or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction, or within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection or railroad crossing. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-
1960)
9-1-7: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent,
having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway.
(Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-8: STARTING PARKED VEHICLES:
No person shall start or place in motion a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until
such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-9: WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED:
A. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a roadway unless and until such movement
can be made with reasonable safety, and then only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding
the horn, if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in
the manner provided by law, in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by
the vehicle before turning.
C. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate
signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give such signal. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-10: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way to
other vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through street or which are approaching so
closely on said through street as to constitute an immediate hazard; but said driver having so yielded may
proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 568/649
9-1-11: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS, STREETS:
A. The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right of way sign shall reduce the speed of his vehicle to
not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have
entered the intersecting highway either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on
said intersecting highway as to constitute an immediate hazard; but said driver having so yielded may
proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. (Ord. 60-2, 3-1-1960)
B. "Yield right of way" means the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting
roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left; provided,
that when the roadway is clear, the vehicle may proceed into the intersection.
C. The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by this section as right of way streets are
hereby declared to be right of way streets. The driver of a vehicle approaching the entrance to a right
of way street shall yield the right of way to other vehicles on a right of way street which have entered
the intersection or which are approaching from the right or the left so close as to constitute a hazard,
unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions
of the police officer shall be complied with.
D. Adequate official yield right of way signs designating the right of way streets shall be erected. (Ord.
1958-4, 4-1-1958; amd. 1997 Code)
9-1-12: STOP STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the village designated as stop streets are hereby declared to be stop
streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at an intersection with a stop street, and shall cautiously
proceed, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop, which are with the intersection or approaching so
close as to constitute a hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty,
in which event the directions of the police officer shall be complied with. (Ord. 1958-4, 4-1-1958; amd.
1997 Code)
9-1-13: ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM ALLEY, PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley or a private road or driveway shall
yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said highway. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-14: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
A. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right
of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within
any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
B. Whenever any vehicle is stopped, at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection, to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 569/649
9-1-15: FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
The driver of any motor vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any emergency
apparatus traveling in response to a call closer than five hundred feet (500'). (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-16: PARKING IN PROHIBITED PARKING SPACES:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following places:
A. In an alley or alleyway so as to interfere with traffic or emergency vehicles traveling through the alley.
B. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant or so as to block the use of a fire hydrant.
C. On a roadway so as to impair the vision of traffic at an intersection.
D. On the left of any roadway.
E. In zones marked "No Parking". (Ord. 2012-14, 6-26-2012)
F. In parking spaces designated for "Handicapped Parking" in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-1301.3 or in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.5. (Ord. 2013-04, 1-22-2013)
G. In areas designated and posted "No Overnight Parking". This shall apply to any municipal parking
areas or any private areas falling within the guidelines of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-209.
H. In areas designated and posted by sign, during the hours, dates and/or time period specified on said
sign.
I. Upon any portion of a sidewalk so as to encroach or otherwise obstruct the sidewalk, unless the
sidewalk has been designated and posted as a permitted parking area.
J. On a crosswalk.
K. In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers. (Ord. 2012-14, 6-26-2012)
L. In a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve
inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except upon those streets that have been marked
for angle parking where the vehicle is parked at the angle to the curb indicated by the marking. (Ord.
2015-23, 9-22-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 570/649
9-1-17: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. No person shall drive any vehicle upon any public highway of the village at a speed which: 1) is greater
than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the highway, or
endangers the safety of any person or property; or 2) is greater than the applicable maximum speed
limit established by this section. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching
and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a
hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with
respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall
be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the
highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
B. Unless otherwise posted by a uniform traffic sign, the maximum speed limits on all streets which are
within the corporate limits of the village and which are not under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois
department of transportation and for which any county or highway commissioner does not have the
maintenance responsibilities, shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour in a residential district and fifteen
(15) miles per hour in an alley. Signs may be installed at the entrances to subdivisions indicating a
speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
C. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of his
vehicle or in compliance with law. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-24-2014)
9-1-18: BICYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any street, alley or other public place within the village to ride any
bicycle at a greater rate of speed than ten (10) miles per hour; or to wilfully or heedlessly ride any bicycle
so that the same shall strike against any person or against any other vehicle; or to ride any bicycle without
having a suitable bicycle bell or whistle attached thereto so as to be readily sounded for the purpose of
warning persons of his approach; or to wilfully or heedlessly fail to reasonably sound such bell or whistle
to warn any pedestrian whom he shall meet or pass; or to ride any bicycle one hour after sunset and until
one hour before sunrise without having securely attached thereto a lighted lamp, the rays of which can be
distinctly seen ahead of such bicycle; or in any manner to ride or propel any bicycle along and upon any
sidewalk. (1904 Code § 22.20)
Bicycles shall be prohibited from being ridden or parked on the sidewalk on the north side of Mondamin
Street beginning seventy five feet (75') east of the east line of Wabena Street through the east line of
Osceola Street. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1990-13, 10-11-1990)
9-1-19: DISTRACTED DRIVING:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section:
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE: An electronic device, including, but not limited to, a
handheld wireless telephone, handheld personal digital assistant, or a portable or mobile computer,
but does not include a global positioning system or navigation system or a device that is physically or
electronically integrated into the motor vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 571/649
NEGLIGENTLY OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE: Operating a motor vehicle on a roadway while
using an electronic communication device.
B. Distracted Driving Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to negligently operate
a motor vehicle upon any roadway in the Village.
C. Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
1. A law enforcement officer or operator of an emergency vehicle while performing his or her official
duties;
2. A driver using an electronic communication device for the sole purpose of reporting an emergency
situation and continued communication with emergency personnel during the emergency situation;
3. A driver using an electronic communication device in handsfree or voice operated mode, which may
include the use of a headset;
4. A driver of a commercial motor vehicle reading a message displayed on a permanently installed
communication device designed for a commercial motor vehicle with a screen that does not exceed
ten inches tall by ten inches wide (10" x 10") in size;
5. A driver using an electronic communication device while parked on the shoulder of a roadway;
6. A driver using an electronic communication device when the vehicle is stopped due to normal traffic
being obstructed and the driver has the motor vehicle transmission in neutral or park;
7. A driver using two-way or citizens band radio services;
8. A driver using two-way mobile radio transmitters or receivers for licensees of the Federal
Communications Commission in the amateur radio service;
9. A driver using an electronic communication device by pressing a single button to initiate or
terminate a voice communication; or
10. A driver using an electronic communication device capable of performing multiple functions, other
than a handheld wireless telephone or handheld personal digital assistant (for example, a fleet
management system, dispatching device, citizens band radio, or music player) for a purpose that is
not otherwise prohibited by this section.
D. Violation; Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code for each offense. (Ord. 2014-24, 7-22-2014)
9-1-20: PROHIBITED PARKING; VEHICLES OBSTRUCTING VISION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck, van, camper or any vehicle that tends to restrict or
obstruct the vision toward oncoming traffic of drivers of parked vehicles at the following locations in
Minooka, Illinois:
In adjacent parking space on the north side of Mondamin Street, from Osceola Street to Wabena Avenue,
and on Mondamin Street west of Massasoit Street to the north-south alley between Mondamin Street to
St. Mary's Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 572/649
In an adjacent parking space on the north side of Mondamin Street, from Wabena Street east to the northsouth
alley between Mondamin Street and St. Mary's Street.
In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense.
(Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
9-1-21: VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITATIONS; EXCEPTIONS; PERMIT:
A. Maximum Weight On Nondesignated Roads: All Municipal roads shall be classified as nondesignated
unless State or County designated, signposted, as provided by ordinance, or as set forth in this
chapter. The maximum weight permitted on all nondesignated Municipal roads shall be five (5) tons,
except for the following:
40 ton:
East Minooka Road (Ridge Road to North Tabler Road)
Grainger Way
McLindon Road (Twin Rail Drive to Minooka Road)
Mid Point Road
North Internationale Parkway
Ottawa Drive
Ridge Road
Serena Court
South Internationale Parkway
Twin Rail Drive
West Mondamin Street (Ridge Road to Minooka Road)
8 ton:
Bell Road
Brannick Road
County Line Road
East Mondamin Street
Hare Road
Holt Road
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 573/649
Industrial Avenue
North Tabler Road
South McLindon Road (Twin Rail Drive to U.S. Route 6)
Wabena Road (Holt Road to McEvilly Road)
Wildy Road (Ridge Road west to the Village limits) (Ord. 2018-23, 8-28-2018)
B. Vehicles With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits On A Nondesignated Municipal
Road: It shall be unlawful to operate on any nondesignated Municipal road any motor vehicle with a
gross weight, including load, in excess of maximum weight limits, or in excess of special weight limits
provided for by ordinance and signposted without having first obtained an overweight permit from the
Police Chief or his designee.
This subsection shall not apply to the following:
1. Any road which has been designated by the Village as a construction entrance;
2. Garbage trucks, tow trucks, school buses, ambulances, firefighting vehicles, snowplows, street
maintenance vehicles, local delivery box trucks (trucks with a boxlike cargo area that may or may
not be separated from the cab of the truck and used primarily for local deliveries of baked goods,
beverages, food, ice, milk, parcels or packages), emergency vehicles; and
3. Vehicles traveling from an origin point within the Village to a destination outside the Village, or
vehicles traveling to a destination within the Village, and the origin point or destination is on a road
on which the vehicle would be otherwise prohibited, so long as the vehicle deviates from the road(s)
on which the vehicle is permitted by the shortest permissible route.
Except that any of the aforesaid vehicles in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds must first
obtain an overweight permit from the Police Chief or his designee. (Ord. 2010-22, 8-24-2010)
C. Vehicles With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Eighty Thousand Pounds On A Designated Municipal
Road: It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle with a gross weight, including load in excess of eighty
thousand (80,000) pounds on a designated Municipal road, without first having obtained an overweight
permit from the Police Chief or his designee. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-2010)
D. Application For Overweight Permit: Application for all overweight permits shall be submitted through
the Village's designated third-party vendor and shall include at a minimum: (Ord. 2018-05, 1-23-2018)
1. The type of vehicle(s);
2. The weight to be transported;
3. The content to be transported;
4. The number of trips required;
5. The route to be taken by the vehicles;
6. The destination of the vehicles within the Village; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 574/649
7. The name of the carrier, if different than the applicant. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-2010)
E. Issuance Of Overweight Permit: Upon submission of the overweight permit application and required
payment through the Village's designated third party vendor, the Police Chief or his or her designee
may authorize issuance of the overweight permit, subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 2018-05, 1-
23-2018)
1. In consideration of seasonal or other time limitations, the Police Chief or his designee shall restrict
the number or time of daily trips authorized by each overweight permit, as is consistent with the
public safety.
2. In establishing the routes to be traveled, the Police Chief or his designee may establish the most
direct and shortest route consistent with the public safety, taking into consideration existing traffic,
the character of the road or roads, and the configuration of the terrain.
3. All overweight permits shall be nontransferable and shall be valid only for the applicant or his agent
or employee and the specific vehicle listed on the application.
4. Every overweight permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or agent of the Village.
5. No refunds of the overweight permit fee shall be made to the applicant following the issuance of an
overweight permit.
6. The applicant shall comply with all Village, State, County, and township ordinances, regulations and
requirements.
7. Altering or falsifying a permit will revoke overweight permit privileges for twelve (12) months. (Ord.
2010-10, 2-23-2010)
F. Fee Schedule For Overweight Permit, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Maximum Weight
Limits On A Nondesignated Municipal Road: Overweight permits for a motor vehicle with a gross
weight, including load, in excess of maximum weight limits but a gross weight equal to or less than
eighty thousand (80,000) pounds, or in excess of special weight limits provided for by ordinance and
signposted, may be applied for and may be granted in accordance with the following schedule:
1. Single trip permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00).
2. Round trip permit: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
3. Thirty (30) day permit: Seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 2010-22, 8-24-2010)
4. Applicable transaction fees charged by the Village's authorized third-party vendor may be added to
amounts paid pursuant to the fee schedule.
G. Fee Schedule For Overweight Permit, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Eighty Thousand
Pounds: Overweight permits for a motor vehicle with a gross weight, including load in excess of eighty
thousand (80,000) pounds may be applied for and may be granted according to the fee schedule as
set forth in section 9-1-1 of this chapter, to which may be added applicable transaction fees charged
by the Village's authorized third-party vendor. (Ord. 2018-05, 1-23-2018)
9-1-22: EXHIBITION DRIVING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 575/649
A. Any person who shall engage in any "exhibition driving" as herein defined, upon any highway or street
or any other place open to the general public, including any area designated for the parking of motor
vehicles, shall upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for any one offense.
(Ord., 4-14-1980; amd. 1997 Code)
B. "Exhibition driving" is defined as the driving of a motor vehicle in such a manner or out of the usual flow
of traffic, whether or not other traffic is present, so as to likely attract the attention of the public,
whether or not there is anyone present and shall consist of one or more of the following acts:
1. Rapid acceleration.
2. Squealing, peeling or burning of the tires.
3. The swaying of a motor vehicle from side to side, commonly referred to as "fishtailing".
4. Racing or running the engine of a motor vehicle at such high revolutions per minute, combined with
the engaging of the gears, causing excessive or unusual noise.
5. Unnecessary and excessive changing of lanes.
6. The emission of any unreasonably loud or raucous or disturbing noise from the engine or exhaust
system of any motor vehicle. (Ord., 4-14-1980)
9-1-23: PROHIBITED PARKING; TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, BOATS AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any of the following on any public street, alley, roadway,
highway or other public way, or on any village property, within the village: any trailer, camping trailer, travel
trailer or mobile home; any recreational vehicle or boat; or any utility trailer or trailer used for hauling,
including, but not limited to, trailers designed to haul equipment, snowmobiles, motorcycles or boats.
(Ord. 1994-5, 4-12-1994)
9-1-24: PROHIBITED PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any highway, street, or alley within the
village when snow shall have accumulated to a depth of two inches (2") or more on such highway, street,
or alley. It shall be unlawful to so park from the time of such accumulation until the snow has been
removed. In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. Members of the police department are
hereby authorized to cause any vehicle parked in violation of this section to be removed from the highway,
street, or alley, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, pursuant to applicable statutes. (Ord. 2011-29,
12-20-2011)
9-1-25: ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibition: No person shall operate or cause to be operated at or upon any municipal road any
compression/release engine brake (engine braking) on any vehicle. For purposes of this section, a
compression/release engine brake (engine braking) is a mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 576/649
the braking or deceleration of any vehicle by converting engine power to compressed air which results
in additional, excessive, loud or explosive noise from such vehicle. (Ord. 2005-06, 2-8-2005)
B. Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for
each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
9-1-26: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-22, 8-24-2010)
9-1-27: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
A. Violations, Penalties Generally: Unless otherwise stated, any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-10,
2-23-2010)
B. Penalty, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits On A Nondesignated
Municipal Road: Any person who violates this section operating a vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of maximum weight limits on a nondesignated municipal road, in addition to any other fines
and penalties as provided by law/ordinance, shall be fined a minimum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) and a maximum as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code; except that a vehicle with a gross
weight in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds may be subject to the fines and penalties as set
forth in subsection C of this section. Prior to release of a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the
maximum weight limits as set forth in section 9-1-21 of this chapter on a nondesignated road, a
sufficient bond must be posted. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-22, 8-
24-2010)
C. Penalty, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Prescribed Weight Limits: Any person who violates
this section operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of prescribed weight limits, in addition to
any other fines and penalties as provided by law/ordinance, shall be subject to the fines and penalties
as follows:
1. Weight: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-111, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and
either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person
charged with a violation of any of these provisions who pleads not guilty shall be present in court for
the trial on the charge. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, as enforced by the village, including, but not limited to, a maximum axle
or gross limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in accordance with paragraphs (g) or (h) of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, in addition to any surcharge, court costs, and fees, shall be
fined according to the following schedule:
Pounds
Overweight
Fine
Up to and $100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 577/649
including
2,000
From 2,001
- 2,500
270.00
From 2,501
- 3,000
330.00
From 3,001
- 3,500
520.00
From 3,501
- 4,000
600.00
From 4,001
- 4,500
850.00
From 4,501
- 5,000
950.00
From 5,001
or more
The fine shall be computed by assessing $1,500.00 for the first 5,000 pounds
overweight and $150.00 for each additional increment of 500 pounds overweight
or fraction thereof.
In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of four (4) or more violations of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 within any twelve (12) month period shall be fined an additional
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the fourth and each subsequent conviction within
the twelve (12) month period. Provided, however, that with regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth
or subsequent conviction shall mean a fourth or subsequent conviction attributable to any one
employee-driver1.
2. Width, Height, Length Of Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102, 5/15-103 or 5/15-107, the owner or driver of such vehicle
shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either may be prosecuted for such violation. Any
person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102,
5/15-103 or 5/15-107, shall be fined for the first or second conviction an amount equal to not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and for the third and
subsequent convictions by the same person, firm or corporation within a period of one year after the
date of the first offense, not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00)2.
3. Sentence Of Permit Moves: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a
permit issued under the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 through 5/15-319, as
enforced by the village, by operating under a fraudulent permit or under a permit not specifically
covering the move, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a business offense
and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. When any
person, firm or corporation is convicted of such violation, the permit shall be null and void and such
person, firm or corporation shall be fined in an amount not less than ten cents ($0.10) per pound for
each pound the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds the gross weight of such vehicles allowable
under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in
addition to any penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301(j) as
enforced by the village3.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 578/649
4. Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Axle Weights: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation
of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301
through 5/15-319, as enforced by the village, by operating with axle weights in excess of those
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a business
offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any
person, firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be fined in an amount not less than two
cents ($0.02) nor more than five cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess weight on such
axle or tandem axle in excess of the weight authorized in the permit when the excess is one
thousand (1,000) pounds or less; not less than five cents ($0.05) nor more than ten cents ($0.10)
per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds
and is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less; not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen
cents ($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand
(2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; and not less than fifteen cents ($0.15)
nor more than twenty cents ($0.20) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds three thousand (3,000) pounds. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to
any penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301(j) as enforced by the
village4.
5. Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Gross Weight: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation
of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301
through 5/15-319, as enforced by the village, by operating with the gross weight in excess of that
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a business
offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any
person, firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be fined in an amount not less than two
cents ($0.02) nor more than five cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess weight in excess
of the gross weight authorized in the permit when the excess is one thousand (1,000) pounds or
less; not less than four cents ($0.04) nor more than seven cents ($0.07) per pound for each pound
of excess weight when the excess exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand
(2,000) pounds or less; not less than seven cents ($0.07) nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per pound
for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds and is
three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen cents
($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand
(3,000) pounds and is four thousand (4,000) pounds or less; not less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor
more than twenty cents ($0.20) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds four thousand (4,000) pounds and is five thousand (5,000) pounds or less; and not less
than seventeen cents ($0.17) nor more than twenty five cents ($0.25) per pound for each pound of
excess weight when the excess exceeds five thousand (5,000) pounds. Penalties for violations of
this section shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-301(j) as enforced by the village5.
6. Registration, Second Division Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of subsection (d) of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-401, in that a vehicle and load are
operated in this state and the appropriate fees and taxes have not been paid, or the vehicle and
load exceed the registered gross weight for which the required fees and taxes have been paid by
two thousand one (2,001) pounds or more, the operator or owner shall be fined according to the
schedule as provided in subsection C1 of this section; provided, that for any unregistered vehicle or
vehicle displaying expired registration, no fine shall exceed the actual cost of what the appropriate
registration for that vehicle and load should have been as set forth below, regardless of the route
traveled:
SCHEDULE OF FLAT WEIGHT TAX REQUIRED BY LAW
Gross Weight In Pounds Including Vehicle And
Maximum Load
Class
Total Fees Each Fiscal
Year
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 579/649
8,000 and less B $ 98.00
8,001 to 12,000 D 138.00
12,001 to 16,000 F 242.00
16,001 to 26,000 H 490.00
26,001 to 28,000 J 630.00
28,001 to 32,000 K 842.00
32,001 to 36,000 L 982.00
36,001 to 40,000 N 1,202.00
40,001 to 45,000 P 1,390.00
45,001 to 50,000 Q 1,538.00
50,001 to 54,999 R 1,698.00
55,000 to 59,500 S 1,830.00
59,501 to 64,000 T 1,970.00
64,001 to 73,280 V 2,294.00
73,281 to 77,000 X 2,622.00
77,001 to 80,000 Z 2,790.00
The owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either the owner
or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person charged with a
violation of any of these provisions who pleads not guilty shall be present in court for the trial on
the charge6. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-2010)
D. Penalty, Violation Of Unauthorized Use Of Persons With Disabilities' Parking Places:
1. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a)
shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to any costs or charges connected with
the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
1301.3. It shall not be a defense to a charge under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3 that
either the sign posted pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3 or the intended
accessible parking place does not comply with the technical requirements of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-301, department regulations, or local ordinance if a reasonable person would be made
aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the place is reserved for a person with
disabilities.
2. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a-1)
a first time shall be fined six hundred dollars ($600.00). Any person found guilty of violating 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a-1) a second or subsequent time shall be fined one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any person who violates 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a-
2) is guilty of a class A misdemeanor and shall be fined two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 580/649
3. Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from any person who commits a violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3. Any police officer may seize the disability license plate
upon authorization from the secretary of state.
E. Penalty, Violation Of Use Of Fictitious Or Unlawfully Altered Disability License Plate Or Decal:
1. Any person convicted of a violation of paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5), or (7) of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.5(b) shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor and fined not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first offense and shall be guilty of a class 4 felony and fined
not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a second or subsequent offense.
2. Any person convicted of a violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.5(b)(6) is guilty of a
class A misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first
offense and not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a second or subsequent offense.
3. Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from any person who commits a violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.5. Any police officer may seize the disability license plate
upon authorization from the secretary of state. (Ord. 2013-04, 1-22-2013)
9-1-28: SUSPENSION OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES:
A. Authorization: The village is hereby authorized to prepare and send to the secretary of state certified
reports as authorized by section 6-306.5(c) of the vehicle code7 seeking suspension of driving
privileges for owners of a registered vehicle who have failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
as a result of ten (10) or more violations of the village's vehicular standing, parking or compliance
regulations or for owners who are more than fourteen (14) days in default of a payment plan pursuant
to which a suspension had been terminated under subsection (c) of section 6-306.5, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5(c).
B. Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension Pursuant To 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.3(b)(6): Notice shall be sent to the person liable for failure to complete a required traffic education
program or to pay any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on ten (10) or more parking
violations (or combination of 5 or more automated traffic law violations). The notice shall state that
failure to complete a required traffic education program or to pay the fine or penalty owing, or both,
within forty five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the village notifying the secretary of state
that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-306.5 of the vehicle code. The notice shall also state that the person may obtain a photostatic
copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to
the village along with a request for the photostatic copy. The notice of impending driver's license
suspension shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded
with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States post office approved database.
C. Procedures For Challenge To Certified Report: Any owner may challenge a certified report on grounds
which are limited to the following: that either: 1) the person had not been the owner or lessee of the
vehicle receiving ten (10) or more standing, parking or compliance violation notices on the date or
dates such notices were issued, or 2) the person has already paid the fine or penalty for the ten (10) or
more standing, parking, or compliance violations indicated on the certified report. The procedures for a
challenge shall be as follows: Said owner may make a request for a hearing on a challenge within five
(5) business days from the date of the notice of the certified report from the secretary of state. Said
request shall be made in person and in writing at the police department administrative offices, Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays, from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. ("business
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 581/649
hours"). If the request for a hearing is timely filed, the chief of police or his designee shall conduct a
hearing on the challenge of the accuracy of the certified report within twenty four (24) hours after the
request, or by a date mutually agreeable to the parties and during business hours. All interested
persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the chief of
police or his designee determines that there is sufficient evidence in favor of the challenge, the
secretary of state shall be notified accordingly. If after the hearing, the chief of police determines that
there is not sufficient evidence in favor of the challenge, the challenge shall be denied and no further
notice shall be required to the secretary of state.
D. Notice To The Secretary Of State: The village shall notify the secretary of state if after making a
certified report the person named in the report has paid the previously reported fine or penalty or has
entered into a payment plan pursuant to which the village has agreed to terminate the suspension, or
whenever the village determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such
notification shall also be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein.
(Ord. 2015-32, 12-15-2015)
Chapter 2
VEHICLE LICENSES
9-2-1: DEFINITION:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Includes automobiles and all other vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, except traction engines and road rollers, the cars of electric and steam railways and other motor
vehicles running only upon rails or tracks, but nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to apply to or
affect bicycles or tricycles or such other vehicles as are propelled exclusively by human muscular power.
(Ord., 10-22-1979)
9-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEES:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or a motor bicycle who resides within the Village shall be
required to pay each year to the Village Clerk a tax or license fee for each motor vehicle or motor bicycle
used on any public street or highway within the Village.
The annual fees to be paid for vehicle licenses shall be as follows:
Through April 30 After April 30
Passenger vehicles
(except two-wheeled vehicles)
$5.00 $10.00
Trucks, commercial vehicles, motor
homes, campers and recreational
licensed vehicles 7.50 15.00
Two-wheeled vehicles 3.00 6.00
Persons 65 years of age or over are
entitled to one license for any of the
abovementioned vehicles at the following
rates: 0.50 1.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 582/649
Licenses for all other vehicles shall be
at those rates shown above.
Nonresident licenses shall be issued for any vehicle for a fee of $1.00. (Ord., 10-22-1979)
A transfer sticker shall be issued for any vehicle for a fee of $1.00 (Ord. 1987-2, 1-26-1987)
9-2-3: TIME OF PAYMENT, LICENSE YEAR:
The license fee or tax as set forth in Section 9-2-2 hereof shall be due and payable annually in advance
on or before April 30 of each fiscal year and the license shall be for one year; provided, that each owner
or operator of such a motor vehicle or motor bicycle coming into possession of such vehicle or bicycle
after the expiration of six (6) months of the fiscal year pay one-half (1/2) the annual fee provided for. (Ord.,
10-22-1979)
9-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, ISSUANCE:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle desiring a license for such motor vehicle or
motor bicycle shall file an application with the Village Clerk, upon a form prescribed by him, setting forth
the name and address of the applicant and a description of the motor vehicle or motor bicycle for which
the license is desired. Upon the payment by the applicant of the fee prescribed, the Clerk shall issue or
cause to be issued a license which shall be attested by the Clerk, authorizing the use of such motor
vehicle or motor bicycle within the Village until the expiration of such license. (Ord., 10-22-1979)
9-2-5: VEHICLE TAG:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle who receives such license shall receive at the
time of payment of the fee a Village vehicle tag without charge therefor; such vehicle tags shall be
numbered serially and bear the number and the year for which the license is issued. Each Village vehicle
tag shall be kept attached to the windshield of the vehicle for which it was issued, in the lower right-hand
corner so as to be readily readable at all times which such vehicle is operated on any public highway in
the Village, and shall be attached in such manner that it cannot be removed without physical destruction.
(Ord., 1985; 1997 Code)
9-2-6: PENALTY:
A. Any person who fails to purchase a vehicle license on or before April 30 of each year shall be
assessed a penalty of twice the purchase price of the license for the late purchase. (Ord. 1987-1, 1-
26-1987)
B. Notwithstanding provisions of subsection A, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Village Code. (Ord., 1985)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 583/649
Title 10
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
10-1-1: STREET GRADES, SIDEWALK LINES:
A. All grades or elevations hereafter established by the village or which are hereinafter fixed or referred to
shall be measured from and have reference to a datum or horizontal plane which is six hundred
sixteen and seventy six one-hundredths feet (616.76') below the top of the southeast corner of the iron
plate at the base of the southeast leg of the village water tower located on lot 3, block 1, Gardner's
Addition to Minooka, and which plane and bench mark are hereby established.
B. In establishing grades, the elevations fixed at various points and known as street grades shall be the
grades of the curbing at said points; the center of the roadways of streets shall also coincide or
conform to such grades; only varying therefrom with the necessity of proper drainage and according to
the location of the summits and inlets in pavements.
C. Sidewalk grades, unless otherwise especially provided for by independent plots and ordinances, shall
also conform to and be coincident with, the established curb grade on any street at the curb line, and
shall have a slope or rise of one-third of an inch (1/3") for every foot (1') of horizontal distance
measured from the roadway face of the curb to and towards the adjacent property line. (Ord. 1926-3,
10-26-1926)
D. The inside of a sidewalk shall be parallel to and one foot (1') from the adjacent property line. (Ord.
1926-3, 10-26-1926; amd. 1997 Code)
E. In no case shall a grade be given for the building of any sidewalk in the village until such grade is
established by ordinance in the manner herein provided. (Ord. 1926-3, 10-26-1926)
10-1-2: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalks within the village shall be built by or under the direction of the public works committee and in
such manner as the president and board of trustees may provide. (1904 Code § 24.1; amd. 1977 Code)
The village president and board of trustees may, from time to time, order the construction of sidewalks
whenever they may deem the public interest requires it, specifying the manner in which the sidewalks
shall be constructed and designate the width of the same. (1904 Code § 24.2)
10-1-3: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, place or construct, or cause to be built, erected, placed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 584/649
or constructed in whole or in part upon any street, alley, avenue, public land or place within the village,
any house, shed, pen, fence, wall, foundation, cellar or any structure whatever. (1904 Code § 26.2)
10-1-4: STAGNANT WATER:
All lots or parcels of land within the limits of the village shall be so drained or graded by the owners or
occupants thereof as to prevent water standing thereon; and the owner or occupant of each and every lot
or parcel of land whereon such standing or stagnant water shall be notified in writing by the chairman of
the public works committee of the village to fill up, grade or drain the same within a reasonable time, so as
to prevent any such stagnant or standing water. Any such person so notified who shall fail to comply with
such notice shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty; and in case of continued failure or
neglect of such owner or occupant, after being duly notified as aforesaid, and in case such owner of such
lots or parcels of ground is a nonresident, such filling up, draining or grading such lots or parcels of
ground shall be done by the chairman of the public works committee and the cost thereof shall be borne
by said lots or parcels of ground, and collected in a manner provided by law. (1904 Code § 26.7)
10-1-5: EXCAVATIONS OF PUBLIC WAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1-6: MAILBOXES:
A. Mailbox Specifications: Mailboxes and their installation shall conform to the specifications of the U.S.
postal service, guidelines issued by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO), and "U.S. mail" and "approved by the postmaster general" standards, which are
incorporated herein by reference. Address numbers must be inscribed in contrasting color in neat
letters and numerals not less than one inch (1") high on the side of the box visible to the carrier's
regular approach or on the door if boxes are grouped.
B. Unapproved Mailboxes: For purposes of this section, an "unapproved mailbox" is defined as a mailbox
which is not approved by the U.S. postal service, whose installation does not comply with
specifications of the U.S. postal service or guidelines issued by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), or which is a masonry mailbox stand.
C. Limitations On Unapproved Mailboxes: Citizens must seek approval from the public works
superintendent or his designee prior to the installation of any unapproved mailbox. Unapproved
mailboxes must conform to the same requirements as approved manufactured boxes relative to flag,
size, height, strength, and quality of construction, shall not present or create an unreasonable,
dangerous or hazardous obstruction, and shall comply with the specifications as set forth by the public
works superintendent or his designee. Masonry mailbox stands are allowed only on residential streets
with a speed limit no greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour, and shall not be permanently
mounted (with footings or otherwise) to the ground. An appropriate waiver and/or release holding the
village harmless must be executed and the approval from the postmaster (if applicable) shall be filed
with the village clerk.
D. Notification: Upon notification by the U.S. postal service or the village, the postal patron shall remove
any mailbox that is found to violate the intent of the specifications and guidelines as set forth herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 585/649
E. Replacement Of Mailbox: If any mailbox was installed and properly maintained in accordance with the
specifications of the U.S. postal service and guidelines issued by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and is damaged or knocked down by the village's
snow removal or other village maintenance activities, the village will: 1) repair the mailbox (temporarily
or permanently) or 2) reimburse the resident for the cost of materials for the standard type mailbox and
post and it shall be the responsibility of the resident to purchase and install the mailbox and/or post.
The village's liability per occurrence is limited to the actual cost of a standard "approved by the
postmaster general" mailbox (selected at the village's discretion), or a cash settlement not to exceed
fifty dollars ($50.00), and any difference in cost between the damaged and replacement mailbox will
not be reimbursed. (Ord. 2007-45, 10-23-2007)
Chapter 1A
CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS
OF WAY
10-1A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities
on rights of way within the village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights of way and the village
as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the
village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and
places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities
lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility
facilities;
5. Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and materials that increase
impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the village's residential
neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities
locations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 586/649
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within the public rights of way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and
operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in
any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may
require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of way. Utilities that are
not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an
agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a
telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between
the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or
extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted
prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering
this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when
the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to regulate
its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 587/649
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical
conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical
conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe
use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope,
and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external
corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Minooka.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration,
enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way
or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may
include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or
permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or
loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in
the vicinity of the right of way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of
facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 588/649
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails,
wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles,
conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility"
shall not include any facility owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an
antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it
is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration,
location, or other characteristics, is determined by the superintendent of public works to pose an
unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or
petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or
streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and
embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended
from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the
pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 589/649
facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 10-1A-4 and 10-1A-5 of
this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products
including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply
convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per
square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified,
the period shall be thirty (30) calendar days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or
federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, easement, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the
construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly
used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility and/or drainage
easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or
personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not
include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than
between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries,
when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the
gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 10-1A-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement
edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the
pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering
principles, practices and experience.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village of Minooka superintendent of public works or his
or her designee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of
mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 590/649
information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive
service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider
to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined
in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission
(47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in
the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground
casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law
of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide
a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the
superintendent of public works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour
telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 10-1A-8 of this
chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within any village right of way which: 1) changes the location of the
facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 591/649
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or
within the right of way, without first filing an application with the superintendent of public works and
obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises
where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided
by the village clerk and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate.
The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each
page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly
authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers,
e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses
to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to
be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village clerk:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be
employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent
injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies,
including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended
response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the superintendent
of public works and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the superintendent of public works finds that additional information or
assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an
engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and
regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 10-1A-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 10-1A-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 10-1A-21 of this
chapter); and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 592/649
10. Such additional information or a preconstruction meeting as may be reasonably required by the
village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements
of subsection C of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to
the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable
television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of
public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by
law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other
jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and
operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection
agency, division of public water supplies, have been satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of water pollution control and other local or state
entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size,
maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the
construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications
for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the superintendent of public works within a reasonable time after
filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the superintendent of public works shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the superintendent of public works is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the superintendent of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In
all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
superintendent of public works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 593/649
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village clerk that it intends to commence work governed
by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall
consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and
intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the village clerk
not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The superintendent of
public works shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used
and constructed.
2. In the event that the superintendent of public works fails to provide such specification of location to
the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the village
clerk by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new
construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in
the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant
to section 10-1A-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village clerk an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding
the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A
of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And
Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization
under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after
submission to the village clerk, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has
complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the village authorizes a
permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of
others who may have an interest in or adjacent to the public rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this
chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will
perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be
held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance
as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the
permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations,
procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction,
and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 594/649
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the
permittee from complying with other requirements of the village and all applicable statutes, laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations
identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee
shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village clerk within ninety (90) days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the
locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in
accordance with section 10-1A-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to
the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right of way or constructing any facility in the right of way shall
secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, consultants, agents,
representatives, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1 and A2
of this section.
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and
underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed
operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing
the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination
of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess
coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by
the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 595/649
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the
village clerk within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section
shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to
renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Village Clerk, by registered mail or certified
mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent
to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village clerk of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10)
days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the village clerk evidence of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required by subsection A of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A
utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village clerk evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection
A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers'
compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village
and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and
enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state
of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class
size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, consultants, agents,
representatives, and employees harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or
defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or
wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way,
and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or
breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord.
2007-56, 12-19-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 596/649
10-1A-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this
section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to
comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village
may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a
consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village clerk in the form, at the permittee's
election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the village board, or an unconditional letter of
credit in a form acceptable to the village board. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to
this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village clerk and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered
by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be
drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably
estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the superintendent of public works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs, including attorney fees, that the village estimates are likely
to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. The reasonably estimated cost as
described above shall be multiplied by one hundred twenty five percent (125%) to establish the
security fund amount. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed
in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in
one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
superintendent of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a
single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit.
The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that
would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for,
and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the
security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 597/649
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has
been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village determines can be remedied by an
expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any
amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the
amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund
be returned to the permittee by the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village,
provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the
permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on
deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law.
In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein,
shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or
damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of
said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to
all other rights of the village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no
action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the
village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary
recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2007-56,
12-19-2007)
10-1A-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within the public rights of way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and
approved plans.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 598/649
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written
notice of revocation or suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the superintendent of public works with evidence that no cause exists for the
revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice,
providing written proof of such correction to the superintendent of public works within five (5)
working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the
public rights of way and restore the rights of way to the satisfaction of the village providing written
proof of such removal to the superintendent of public works within ten (10) days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this
subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may
issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth
within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of
subsection C of this section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the
deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure
the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in
all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village clerk no less than thirty (30) days prior to the
transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new
owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this
chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current
ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner
shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the
name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 599/649
10-1A-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control
and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among
differing principles and standards required by this chapter, the superintendent of public works shall
determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision
shall be final. If requested, the superintendent of public works shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-
19-2007)
10-1A-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in
IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing
warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state,
and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work
on the public rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially
or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 10-1A-20 of this chapter, the
utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 600/649
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection
requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility
facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the
superintendent of public works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible
interference with the use of the right of way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon,
and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the
usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of
or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes,
equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner,
regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines
of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right
of way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum
distance of two feet (2') behind the face of the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with
minimum distance of four feet (4') outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not
within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') of the right of way line or as
near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of
way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8')
from and parallel to the right of way line;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 601/649
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are
impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed
in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near
the right of way line as practicable and not more than five feet (5') from the right of way line and
any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') of the right of way line or
as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch
lines or curb lines of village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle
passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree
(90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may
cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of
electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm. code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the
clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility
may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service
life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an
underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker
shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be
located within particular rights of way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of
way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 602/649
2. The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from
view. Cable and video service providers shall bear the sole responsibility of installation, replacement
and maintenance of all required screening and landscaping, so long as the facilities remain in the
right of way.
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials,
to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely
affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single pole
construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light
standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has
demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means
shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure.
Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially
those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are
not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway
structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of
the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation
system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual
quality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 603/649
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration
of trees or terrain features visible to the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property
owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 2007-56,
12-19-2007)
10-1A-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking: All work shall be done in accordance with the applicable articles of section 552
of the IDOT "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at
a minimum distance specified by the superintendent of public works from the edge of the
pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in
advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected
by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it
will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or
jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") in diameter shall be
accomplished by directional drilling or with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the
auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1").
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be
accomplished by either jacking, directional drilling, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe
method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to
be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in
accord with the applicable portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with
requirements for pipeline testing. Only one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench
at any time unless special permission is obtained from the superintendent of public works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be
protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the
trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing excavated
material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road
location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the
village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 604/649
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its
full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall
be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of
the facility. If so ordered by the superintendent of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall,
within ten (10) calendar days of such order, remove any pavement and backfill material to the top
of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
superintendent of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only
if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
subsection A4 is permitted under section 10-1A-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall
apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with
granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the superintendent of public
works.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary
repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
c. All pavement removals shall be accomplished by straight, full depth saw cuts.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last
seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and
unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed
loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') of the right of way line. No
aboveground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular
section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits
unless continuous pipe or village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may
be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased
regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty
(60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 605/649
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located
so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the
amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (as determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be
constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois
administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission)
entitled "rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national
electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole
construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may
be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for
maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to
boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or
bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of
"moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the
opening for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and
March 15 of the current year, also known as snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current
year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities
shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after
placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities
other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move
the opening for the pipe;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 606/649
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of
the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if
prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in a village approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of
the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules,
and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to
the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation
piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines,
sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed
the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground
facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall be provided with a vegetation free area
extending one foot (1') in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the superintendent of public works. With the approval of the superintendent of public
works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The
housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those
meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the
appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior
written approval of the superintendent of public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe,
conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way
maintenance or damage to the right of way and other property. If material is to be stored on right of
way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous
materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 607/649
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be
discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the superintendent of public works when emergency work is
required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact
JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an
excavation or when requested by the village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree
trimming and vegetation control activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws
and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village as
permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with
facilities in the right of way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and
regulations specifically governing same, or as required under this chapter, shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in
addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include
assurance that the work will be supervised and accomplished by competent workers who are
experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be
tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of
damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture
will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized
removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be
taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist
of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 608/649
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on
or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the
utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works that such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own
expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter
the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any
utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the
public rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following
circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by
applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of
this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or
franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or
move any facilities located within the rights of way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or
removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights of way of the village,
the utility shall notify the village clerk within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the
village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the superintendent of public
works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
In the event that the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving
notice of abandonment to the village clerk, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-
19-2007)
10-1A-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 609/649
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten
(10) days after any portion of the rights of way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction
or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of entrances
and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by
the superintendent of public works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period
provided in this section may be extended by the superintendent of public works for good cause shown.
(Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be
maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures
for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take
immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on
the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder
of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the
facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the superintendent of public works or
his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been
taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs.
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village
police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable
and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village clerk a description of the repairs
undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2007-56,
12-19-2007)
10-1A-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter
must do so in writing to the superintendent of public works as a part of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The superintendent of public works shall decide whether a variance is
authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 610/649
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The superintendent of public works may authorize a variance
only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular
right of way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision
from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the
superintendent of public works may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. Denial Of A Variance: A permit shall be deemed rejected and, if applicable, the forty five (45) day time
period as set forth in section 10-1A-5 of this chapter shall be immediately tolled, upon the right of way
manager's denial of a request for a variance.
F. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including
denial of a variance, made by the superintendent of public works under the provisions of this chapter,
shall have the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as the village
board may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village clerk within
thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The village board
shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the village board's next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village board shall timely decide the
appeal by a vote of a majority of the commissioners present at said meeting. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-
2007)
10-1A-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code; and a separate violation shall be deemed committed for each
violation, and on each day during and on which a violation occurs or continues. There may be times when
the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot
perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages
and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of
the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost
apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village
may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 611/649
Chapter 1B
MINOOKA ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM
10-1B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Minooka adopt-a-highway program is to allow private citizens to support the village's
antilitter efforts by allowing groups to adopt sections of public highways within the village for the purpose
of litter collection. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADOPTED SECTION: A length of municipal, township, county, or state right of way within the village's
geographic jurisdiction and identified by the village as a safe, adoptable section of right of way for
adoption by a group. Sections of rights of way may be determined inappropriate for adoption for safety
reasons. No interstate highway shall be an adopted section.
DEPARTMENT: The public works department of the village of Minooka.
GROUP: Members or employees of civic or not for profit organizations, and commercial or private
enterprises, who have requested to participate, or are participating in, the Minooka adopt-a-highway
program.
GROUP COORDINATOR: The individual selected by a group to serve as its liaison with the village.
GROUP PRESIDENT: The individual who is the recognized leader, president, or chairman for a group.
LITTER: Any unsightly or offensive matter that may include, but is not limited to, disposable packaging,
containers, cans, bottles, paper, ashes, and cigar and cigarette butts. Litter does not include hazardous,
heavy, large items, or carcasses. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-3: DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT:
A. The public works department shall oversee every aspect of the Minooka adopt-a-highway program. As
part of such oversight, the department shall:
1. Consider each application for adoption filed with the village as set out in section 10-1B-4 of this
chapter.
2. Determine what specific sections of public rights of way within the village's geographic jurisdiction
are adopted by any given group pursuant to said group's adoption agreement.
3. Erect signs at each end of every adopted section with the name or acronym of the group displayed.
In so doing, the department shall ensure that all such signs conform with the requirements of section
35 of the Illinois adopt-a-highway act1.
4. Provide each group with such trash bags as are necessary to complete litter collection activities on
their respective adopted section in conformance with said group's adoption agreement.
5. Provide each group with such safety apparel as is necessary to protect all of the group's members,
employees, agents, and volunteers engaged in litter collection on said group's adopted section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 612/649
6. Provide each group with such warning signage as is necessary to caution the public during litter
collection activities on the group's adopted section, and pick up such warning signage within a
reasonable time after the group's litter collection activities have been completed.
7. Remove filled trash bags from an adopted section as soon as practical after litter collection has
occurred. Beyond such removal of trash bags, the department shall not be responsible for collecting
or removing any litter from any adopted section except under unusual circumstances such as to
remove large, heavy, or hazardous items.
8. Develop the safety training programs that are to be utilized by group coordinators in compliance
with section 10-1B-6 of this chapter and section 25 of the Illinois adopt-a-highway act2. Such safety
training programs shall be appropriate for the various types of roadway that may be adopted within a
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-4: APPLICATION, ACCEPTANCE, AND REJECTION:
A. Any group wishing to participate in the Minooka adopt-a-highway program must complete the village's
application form in its entirety and return such completed form to the public works department.
B. The department shall consider every application filed by every group and shall approve or reject each
such application within fourteen (14) business days after receipt of the same. In determining whether
to approve or reject any particular group's application, the department shall consider the group's ability
to comply fully with the obligations imposed on it pursuant to its adoption agreement, this chapter, and
the Illinois adopt-a-highway act, as well as any and all other factors that the department deems
relevant to its determination.
C. Upon deciding whether to approve or reject any group's application, the department shall provide the
group coordinator and group president of the applicant group with written notice of such approval or
denial, directed to the group's address as reflected in its application. Under no circumstances will a
notice delivered to the group's address pursuant to this section be deemed invalid or ineffective by
virtue of the fact that either the group coordinator or group president do not reside at said address.
(Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-5: ADOPTION AGREEMENT:
A. In the event that the department approves any group's application, the group coordinator and group
president shall execute a written adoption agreement with the village that provides for the group's
participation in the Minooka adopt-a-highway program.
B. Said adoption agreement shall be in the form prescribed from time to time by the department, but shall,
at a minimum, contain the following:
1. An acknowledgment by the group of the hazardous nature of the work involved in participating in the
adopt-a-highway program;
2. An agreement to comply with the terms and conditions in the act and any other terms and
conditions required by the sponsoring jurisdiction;
3. An agreement that the group, its members, employees, agents, and volunteers shall assume all
liability for and hold the state of Illinois and state's agents or employees harmless from any and all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 613/649
claims of action resulting from the group's members', employees', agents', or volunteers' work in the
program, except for the negligent acts of the state of Illinois, the state's agents, or the state's
employees;
4. An agreement that the group, its members, employees, agents, and volunteers shall assume all
liability for and hold the village of Minooka and the village's agents or employees harmless from any
and all claims of action resulting from the group's members', employees', agents', or volunteers'
work in the program, except for the negligent acts of the village and the village's agents or
employees;
5. An agreement that the group, its members, employees, agents, and volunteers are jointly and
severally bound by the terms and conditions set forth in the agreement; and
6. The respective responsibilities of the group and the village as set forth in section 10-1B-6 of this
chapter and in sections 25 and 30 of the Illinois adopt-a-highway act3. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-6: PARTICIPATING GROUP'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Groups participating in the Minooka adopt-a-highway program shall:
1. Obey and abide by all laws and regulations relating to safety, including the village's adopt-a-highway
rules, regulations, and safety guidelines, as well as all other terms and conditions contained in the
group's adoption agreement;
2. Provide one adult supervisor for every five (5) youths when persons under age eighteen (18) are
present on an adopted section;
3. Not allow any person under the age of ten (10) to be a member of the group of persons who will be
engaged in litter collection on the adopted section;
4. Require all group members, agents, and volunteers to attend a safety meeting conducted by the
group before participation in any litter collection along an adopted section;
5. Require the group coordinator, or his or her designee, to conduct group safety meetings and to
receive safety training as required by the department;
6. Adopt its adopted section for a minimum of two (2) years;
7. Collect litter along any adopted section adopted by the group at least four (4) times a year;
8. Require the group coordinator to provide prior notice, as required by the department, whenever the
group intends to collect litter along its adopted section;
9. Require the group members, agents, and volunteers to properly wear any safety apparel provided
by the village at all times that litter collection is ongoing along an adopted section;
10. Be responsible for prohibiting the group's members, employees, agents, and/or volunteers from
possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of alcohol or drugs while engaged in litter
collection on an adopted section;
11. Maintain a first aid kit and an adequate supply of drinking water while the group's members,
employees, agents, and/or volunteers are collecting litter along an adopted section;
12. Place litter in trash bags provided by the department and collect all filled trash bags at a location
along the adopted section as designated by the department; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 614/649
13. Not subcontract or assign its duties or responsibilities to any other group or organization. (Ord.
2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-7: REVOCATION:
In the event that any group violates any provision of this chapter, the Illinois adopt-a-highway act, or the
village's rules, regulations, or safety guidelines as set out from time to time by the department, the
department may revoke any and all adoption agreements that the group may have with the village. Upon
such revocation, the department shall provide the group coordinator and group president of the applicant
group with written notice of such revocation directed to the group's address as reflected in its application.
Under no circumstances will a notice delivered to the group's address be deemed invalid by virtue of the
fact that either the group coordinator or group president does not reside at said address. (Ord. 2016-36,
12-13-2016)
Chapter 1C
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
10-1C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and
collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rightsof-
way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is
consistent with Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 835/1, et al. (Ord.
2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-2: CONFLICTS WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent
possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency
signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized
national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety
Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless
facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as
any applicable fee for the review of such application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 615/649
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless
facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC
153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service
other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended;
a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications
carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings,
properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the
National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to
a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or
resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four
inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an
exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or
complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other
entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local
government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to
and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley,
or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each
antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached
directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 616/649
in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, groundbased
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service
provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
VILLAGE UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network, including: a) equipment associated with wireless
communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility
includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: a) the structure or improvements on,
under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic
cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications
service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless
facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the
Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of
customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed
or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of
supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-
28-2018)
10-1C-4: PERMITTED USE:
Small wireless facilities are permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
section 10-1C-19 of this chapter regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated: a) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or b) outside rights-ofway
in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An applicant shall obtain required permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. (Ord. 2018-
25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-6: PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 617/649
An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
A. Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with
the Village's Small Wireless Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
1. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a
structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989;
2. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and
photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures
on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;
3. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of
the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by
the application as it is proposed to be installed;
4. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility;
5. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by
the application, if approved; and
6. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions
contained herein, to the best of the applicant's knowledge.
7. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole or wireless
support structure owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless provider shall provide
legally competent evidence of the consent of the property owner, and, if not the same, the owner of
such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-7: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees are imposed as follows:
A. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to
collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.
B. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless
facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
collocation.
C. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 618/649
refundable. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-8: APPLICATION/PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from
a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
A. Routine maintenance;
B. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same
size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with
subsection 10-1C-6A4 of this chapter; or
C. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities
suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable
Safety Codes. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-9: WORK WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY AFFECTING TRAFFIC:
Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that
affect traffic patterns or require lane closures. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-10: COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATION:
Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is
complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the
missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide notification to
the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in
the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-
2018)
10-1C-11: TOLLING:
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time
the applicant provides the missing information. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
A. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
B. A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay. (Ord. 2018-
25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-12: CONSOLIDATED APPLICATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 619/649
A. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be
allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
B. If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility
collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are
denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated
application. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-13: APPLICATION PROCESS:
The Village shall process applications as follows:
A. The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
B. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support
structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on
a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the
application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application. However, if an
applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant
shall notify the Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed
approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided
herein.
C. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole
shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve
or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a completed
application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed
approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of
the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the
Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this section. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-14: DENIALS:
A. The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
B. If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or
the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 620/649
support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the wireless provider.
C. The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application
conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the
day the Village denies an application. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-15: RESUBMITTALS:
A. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application
once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after
the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised
application within thirty (30) days of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period.
B. The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.
C. Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this
revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small
wireless facility. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-16: DURATION OF PERMITS:
The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be
renewed for equivalent durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the
new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any provision, condition or
requirement contained in this chapter. If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable Village code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of
renewal. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-17: MEANS OF SUBMITTING APPLICATIONS:
Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery
at the Village Hall, 121 McEvilly Road, Minooka IL. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-18: POLE ATTACHMENT AGREEMENT:
Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the
Village for the initial collocation on a Village utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits
to collocate on a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter
into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 621/649
10-1C-19: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on Village utility poles for future
public safety uses, for the Village's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines that the
Village utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
B. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small
wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and
conditions of this Code. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contractors
that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in
accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.
C. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of
the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for
public safety communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes
such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR
90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based
on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations
cited herein. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
D. Collocation Restrictions; Exceptions: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities
on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the
antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications
space on the Village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. For purposes of this
subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric
supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as
published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
E. Code Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code
provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
F. Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally
applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements
that apply to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
G. Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions section, a
wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole,
or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 622/649
However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a
new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing
utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on
reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses a collocation
proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this
paragraph.
H. Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10')
above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are
collocated may not exceed the higher of:
1. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only
wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is
located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village,
provided the Village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300')
of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
2. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
I. Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in
excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation,
the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth
in section 10-1A-21 of this title in the case of construction/installation within the Village right-of-way
and in cases in industrial or commercial districts outside of the Village right-of-way as provided in
section 5-11-6 of this Code.
J. Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are
imposed by a contract between the Village and a private property owner that concern design or
construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the rightof-
way.
K. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing
requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted
equipment located in the right-of-way. The applicant may apply for a variance in conformance with
procedures, terms and conditions set forth in section 10-1A-21 of this title.
L. Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or
regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the
modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval. The applicant may apply
for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in section 10-1A-21 of
this title.
M. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within
one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless
provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 623/649
or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider
has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power
or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village
grants an extension in writing to the applicant. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-20: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
A. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local
government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support
structure without the consent of the property owner and, if not the same, the owner of the pole or
wireless support structure;
B. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district
for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district,
excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the
jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code;
or
C. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra
Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-
102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or
electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such
utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act. For the purposes of this
subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities
Act. Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: 1) to obtain
a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or 2) to obtain any
required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small
wireless facilities subject to this chapter. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-21: PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small
wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility
poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the
Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this chapter. A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village makes available under this
chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two (2) or more
years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and
terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under
this paragraph. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 624/649
10-1C-22: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on
a Village utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or b)
the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility
pole. If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the
permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-
28-2018)
10-1C-23: ABANDONMENT:
A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90)
days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the
owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within
ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to
the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village utility poles or through whatever actions are
provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider
shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction
of the Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-24: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Will County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act and this chapter. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning
rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village
shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per year per Village utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the
dispute. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-25: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from
personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or
occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted
under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless
against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Village or its
employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the
Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-26: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 625/649
insurance:
A. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or
rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of
Village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. The
wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability
policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general
liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. A wireless provider may self-insure all or a
portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for
the name of additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
Chapter 2
RAILROADS
10-2-1: OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit any locomotive engine, railroad car or train of
cars to stop on or remain upon any street or railroad crossing within the Village so as to obstruct such
crossing for a longer period than ten (10) minutes at any one time. (1904 Code § 23.2)
10-2-2: LIGHTS REQUIRED:
Every locomotive engine, railroad car or train of cars running in the nighttime on any railroad track within
the Village shall have and keep, while so running, a brilliant and conspicuous light on the advancing end
of such locomotive engine, car or train. (1904 Code § 23.3)
10-2-3: FIRE ENGINES CROSSING TRACKS:
In case any fire engine or other vehicle carrying firemen or fire apparatus, in responding to any alarm of
fire, shall find it necessary to cross any railroad track at any street crossing within the Village, any engine
or train of cars standing on such crossing shall immediate vacate such crossing and allow a passageway
for such fire engine or vehicle. (1904 Code § 23.4)
10-2-4: SOUNDING WHISTLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the whistle of any locomotive engine to be sounded
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 626/649
within the Village, except to give necessary signals; or to make any loud or unnecessary noise by letting
off steam from any locomotive engine. (1904 Code § 23.5)
10-2-5: MAINTAIN CROSSINGS:
Every railroad corporation operating any railroad within or through the corporate limits of the Village shall,
at the intersection of any street or highway within the Village with such railroad, construct and maintain
crossings or viaducts and the approaches thereto so that at all times they shall be safe as to persons and
property. (1904 Code § 23.6)
Whenever any railroad corporation shall neglect to construct or maintain any of its crossings and
approaches as provided in this Section, it shall be the duty of the President of the Village Board to notify,
in writing, the nearest agent of said corporation of the condition of said crossing or approaches, and direct
the same to be constructed, altered or repaired in such manner as the Board of Trustees shall deem
necessary for the safety of persons and property. (1904 Code § 23.7)
If any such railroad corporation shall, after having been notified as provided in this Section, neglect or
refuse to construct, alter or repair such crossing or approaches within thirty (30) days after such notice,
then the Village Board shall forthwith cause such construction, alteration or repairs to be made, and such
railroad corporation shall be held responsible for all necessary expense incurred in making such
construction, alteration and repairs and in addition thereto shall be liable to a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for such neglect, which fine shall be enforced by the Village Board, in the name of the people of
the State of Illinois, before any court of competent jurisdiction in the County of Grundy and/or Will. Such
fine, when collected, shall be paid into the Village Treasury. (1904 Code § 23.8)
10-2-6: FLAGMEN OR BELLS AT CROSSINGS:
Whenever, in the opinion of the Village Board, it shall be deemed necessary to require any railroad
corporation operating any railroad within or through the corporate limits of the Village, to station a flagman
or place bells at the intersection of any public street or highway within the Village with such railroad, it
shall, by ordinance so find and shall herein direct the President of the Village Board to notify any agent of
the corporation using or operating such railroad that a flagman or bells is necessary at such crossing, and
it shall be the duty of such railroad corporation, within sixty (60) days thereafter, to place and retain a
flagman or place bells at such crossing, said flagman shall perform the duties usually required of flagmen.
(1904 Code § 23.9)
Any railroad company refusing or neglecting to place flagmen or bells as required by this Section shall be
fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day that it shall neglect or refuse to do so; and it shall be the duty
of the Village Board to enforce the payment of such fine by suit in the corporate name of the Village
before any court of competent jurisdiction in the County of Grundy. All moneys collected on account of
any such fines shall be paid into the Village Treasury. (1904 Code § 23.10)
10-2-7: COMMITTING OFFENSES ON RAILROAD CARS, NEAR DEPOT:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, being a minor, to climb, jump, step, stand upon or cling to, or in any
way attach himself to any locomotive engine or car either stationary or in motion, upon any part of the
track of any railroad within the limits of the Village, unless in so doing he shall act in compliance with
law or by permission of the agents of, or under the lawful rules and regulations of the corporation then
owning or managing such railroad; or to remain within or around any railroad depot or railroad building
in the Village without having obtained permission from the person in charge thereof so to do. (1904
Code § 22.11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 627/649
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to run, jump or play upon the depot platform or grounds or climb
upon to take hold of, or in any manner interfere with any railroad car, baggage or freight upon the
railroad grounds within the Village, except by permission of an agent of the railroad company, or in
pursuance of his business as a passenger or shipper or receiver of freight or baggage, or to annoy or
disturb any traveler or citizen at or near any depot building or platform. (1904 Code § 22.12)
Chapter 3
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
10-3-1: SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The existing waterworks system presently being operated in and for the Village, in its entirety, together
with all subsequent additions, improvements and extensions that may hereafter be made thereto, and the
existing sanitary sewerage system presently being operated in and for the Village, in its entirety, together
with all additions, improvements and extensions that may hereafter be made thereto, be and the same are
hereby declared to be a combined system to be operated in combination in and for the Village. Said
combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be maintained and operated as a single utility, and
charges or rates shall be established for the use and service of such combined system and which shall be
reasonable and commensurate with the service performed by said combined system, and shall be
sufficient at all times to pay the cost of the operation and maintenance of said combined system, to
provide an adequate depreciation fund and to pay the principal of and interest on all revenue bonds which
may be issued by the Village and which by their terms are made payable from the revenues to be derived
from the operation of said combined system. The Village shall be responsible and shall pay for the
maintenance of water lines up to the buffalo box at the user's service connection. The Village shall be
responsible and shall pay for the maintenance of sewer lines to the connection by the user to the main
sewer line. The user shall be responsible for, and shall pay for, the maintenance of water lines from the
buffalo box to the user's premises, and the maintenance of sewer lines from and including the connection
to the main sewer line to the user's premises. (Ord., 1985)
10-3-2: SUPERINTENDENT:
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be the Superintendent of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system and the sewage treatment plant for the Village. Said Superintendent shall obtain an
operator's certificate from the State, and shall perform such general duties as may be prescribed from
time to time by the Village Board. (Ord. 1966-1, 5-3-1966; amd. 1997 Code)
10-3-3: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS; APPLICATION, FEE:
A. Application And Fee For Water Service Connections: Every person desiring a new water service tap
shall make application therefor in writing to the Village Clerk. Such application shall state the location
of the premises, the legal description, the size of the pipe required and the approximate location where
such service will enter the premises. Taps or connections to the water mains will then be under the
supervision of the Superintendent. Taps shall be paid for before they are made, and no person other
than an authorized person shall make any such tap or connection. The fees for such taps or
connections shall be as follows:
1. Single-Family Dwelling: One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 628/649
2. Multiple-Family Dwelling: One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per dwelling unit. (Ord.
2013-09, 4-23-2013)
3. Commercial Business Rate:
a. Population Equivalent To Be Provided: Each applicant for a commercial business tap or
connection shall provide the Village with an estimate of the population equivalent of the
anticipated commercial use. One "population equivalent" is defined to be the use of one hundred
(100) gallons of water per day.
b. Minimum Fee: A minimum fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be charged
for any tap or connection with an estimated population equivalent of up to and including 3.5 (i.e.,
an anticipated use of up to 350 gallons per day). In the event that the estimated population
equivalent exceeds 3.5, an additional fee of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) shall apply for
each estimated population equivalent, or portion thereof, in excess of the aforementioned 3.5 (this
fee shall not be pro-rated), provided however that under no circumstances shall the tap or
connection fee for a restaurant exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). Once the applicant pays
the tap or connection fee based upon their submitted estimated population equivalent, the
applicant's "estimated population equivalent" shall become the "allocated use" associated with the
premises, subject to the change in use provision set forth in subsection A3c of this section.
c. Change In Use:
(1) If, at any time after the owner of any premises has paid the connection fee and established a
commercial water service tap for said premises as provided for in subsection A3b of this
section, the owner of said premises applies for a subsequent building permit for any project that
will likely result in a water use population equivalent in excess of the allocated use associated
with said premises, such building permit shall not be approved or issued until the applicant pays
any required change in use fee as set forth in subsection A3c(3) of this section.
(2) In the event that the Building Officer and inspector for the Village determines that the issuance
of a building permit is likely to increase the population equivalent of the actual use on any given
premises above the allocated use associated with said premises, the Building Officer shall,
before granting or issuing said permit, instruct the applicant to provide the Village with an
estimate of the population equivalent of the anticipated use on the premises after the project for
which the building permit has been requested has been completed.
(3) In the event that the applicant's estimated population equivalent, as set forth in subsection A3a
of this section, exceeds the allocated use associated with the premises, the building inspector
shall assess a change in use fee in the amount of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for each
population equivalent, or portion thereof, that the estimated population equivalent exceeds the
allocated use associated with the premises (this fee shall not be pro-rated).
(4) Once the applicant pays any change in use fee, as required by subsection A3c(3) of this
section, the estimated population equivalent that gave rise to said fee shall become the new
"allocated use" associated with the premises.
(5) No change in use fee anticipated by this section shall be imposed upon premises being
operated as a restaurant to the extent that such change in use fee would cause the total tap or
connection fees (including all change in use fees) paid in connection with such premises to
exceed an aggregate of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). (Ord. 2017-25, 10-24-2017)
4. Schools, Churches And Other Nonprofit Organizations: Six hundred dollars ($600.00).
At the time an application is made for a building permit for a single-family residence, one-half (1/2) of
the said fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk. The other one-half (1/2) shall be paid before the tap or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 629/649
connection is made.
At the time an application is made to the President and Board of Trustees for approval of a final plat
of a new subdivision, one-half (1/2) of said fee for all proposed units within said subdivision shall be
paid to the Village Clerk. The other one-half (1/2) shall be paid before the taps or connections are
made.
The expense of labor and materials to install said tap or connection, to bring the water lines to the
property line of the premises, and all other labor and materials shall be paid for by the applicant.
Prior to, or at the same time, the tap or connection is made to the water main, an authorized
employee of the Village waterworks shall install a water meter for the premises, upon payment by
the applicant to the Village Clerk of the actual cost thereof. No person other than an authorized
employee of the Village waterworks shall install such water meter and payment of said charge shall
be made before it is installed.
B. Application And Fee For Sewer Connections: Every person desiring to connect house drainage or
sewerage of any kind to the Village sewer system shall make application in writing for a permit to the
Village Clerk. Such application shall state the location of the premises, the legal description and the
approximate location where such connection will enter the premises. All connections shall be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent. The fees for such taps or connections shall be as follows:
1. Single-Family Dwelling: Three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00).
2. Multiple-Family Dwelling: Three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) per dwelling unit. (Ord.
2013-09, 4-23-2013)
3. Commercial Business Rate:
a. Population Equivalent To Be Provided: Each applicant for a commercial business tap or
connection shall provide the Village with an estimate of the population equivalent of the
anticipated commercial use. One "population equivalent" is defined to equal use producing a load
of wastewater equivalent to one hundred (100) gallons of wastewater per day containing two
hundred (200) parts per million five (5) day biological oxygen demand and two hundred fifty (250)
parts per million suspended solids.
b. Minimum Fee: A minimum fee of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) shall be
charged for any tap or connection with an estimated population equivalent of up to and including
3.5 (i.e., an anticipated discharge of up to 350 gallons per day). In the event that the estimated
population equivalent exceeds 3.5, an additional fee of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) shall
apply for each estimated population equivalent, or portion thereof, in excess of the
aforementioned 3.5 (this fee shall not be pro-rated), provided however that under no
circumstances shall the tap or connection fee for a restaurant exceed fourteen thousand dollars
($14,000.00). Once the applicant pays the tap or connection fee based upon their submitted
estimated population equivalent, the applicant's "estimated population equivalent" shall become
the "allocated capacity" associated with the premises.
c. Change In Use:
(1) If, at any time after the owner of any premises has paid the connection fee and established a
commercial sewerage service tap for said premises as provided for in subsection B3b of this
section, the owner of said premises applies for a subsequent building permit for any project that
will likely result in a sewage discharge population equivalent in excess of the allocated capacity
associated with said premises, such building permit shall not be approved or issued until the
applicant pays any required change in use fee as set forth in subsection B3c(3) of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 630/649
(2) In the event that the Building Officer and inspector for the Village determines that the issuance
of a building permit is likely to increase the population equivalent of the actual discharge
generated by any given premises above the allocated capacity associated with said premises,
the Building Officer shall, before granting or issuing said permit, instruct the applicant to provide
the Village with an estimate of the population equivalent of the anticipated rate of discharge that
will be generated by the premises after the project for which the building permit has been
requested has been completed.
(3) In the event that the applicant's estimated population equivalent, as set forth in subsection B3a
of this section, exceeds the allocated capacity associated with the premises, the building
inspector shall assess a change in use fee in the amount of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for
each population equivalent, or portion thereof, that the estimated population equivalent exceeds
the allocated capacity associated with the premises (this fee shall not be pro-rated).
(4) Once the applicant pays any change in use fee, as required by subsection B3c(3) of this
section, the estimated population equivalent that gave rise to said fee shall become the new
"allocated capacity" associated with the premises.
(5) No change in use fee anticipated by this section shall be imposed upon premises being
operated as a restaurant to the extent that such change in use fee would cause the total tap or
connection fees (including all change in use fees) paid in connection with such premises to
exceed an aggregate of fourteen thousand dollars ($14,000.00). (Ord. 2017-25, 10-24-2017)
4. Schools, Churches And Other Nonprofit Organizations: Six hundred dollars ($600.00).
At the time an application is made for a building permit for a single-family residence, one-half (1/2) of
the said fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk. The other one-half (1/2) shall be paid before the tap or
connection is made.
At the time an application is made to the President and Board of Trustees for approval of a final plat
of a new subdivision, one-half (1/2) of said fee for all proposed units within said subdivision shall be
paid to the Village Clerk. The other one-half (1/2) shall be paid before the taps or connections are
made.
The property owner or applicant shall pay for all labor and materials necessary to make such sewer
connection. If a public street or alley is excavated or otherwise disturbed, the property owner or
applicant shall pay for all labor and materials to repair or replace such street or alley to its original
condition.
C. Subdivisions: In all new subdivisions approved by the President and Board of Trustees after the
effective date hereof, the subdivider shall be responsible for bringing the water and sewer lines to the
boundary line of each lot and the subdivider shall pay the fee for water and sewer connections1.
D. Application And Fee For Temporary Sewer Connections: Every person desiring to connect drainage or
sewerage of any kind to the Village sewer system, for a period of three (3) years or less, shall make
application in writing for a permit to the Village Clerk. Such application shall state the location of the
premises, the legal description and the approximate location where such connection will enter the
premises. All connections shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent. The fees for
such taps or connections shall be twenty seven percent (27%) of the fee computed for permanent
connections for commercial purposes as computed in subsection B3 of this section. In making
application as described above, the applicant shall state the estimated average daily population
equivalent during the first year of operations, and the tap-on fee shall be based on that estimate. All
discharge into the village system shall be metered. Upon the first anniversary of the making of the tap
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 631/649
or connection, the village may revise the fee based on actual discharge during the first year of
operations. Upon the termination of the three (3) year period, the then owner of the property served by
the sewer connection shall cause disconnection from the village sewer system without the necessity of
prior notice. All disconnections shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent. Upon
application by the owner, the village board by resolution may authorize the extension of the connection
to the village sewage system for up to two (2) additional one year periods. The fee for each such
extension shall be one-third (1/3) of the original fee set forth above. (Ord. 2013-09, 4-23-2013)
10-3-4: SERVICE RATES, CHARGES:
A. Bimonthly Charges Or Rates For Users Of Water Services Only: For each residential user of water
services only, there shall be a bimonthly charge or rate based upon the amount of water consumed
bimonthly as follows:
Effective
Date
First 4,000
Gallons
From 4,001 To
100,000 Gallons
For All Over
100,000 Gallons
Minimum
Bimonthly Charge
9-1-2014 $12.48 $3.12 per 1,000
gallons
$2.86 per 1,000
gallons
$12.48
Effective May 1, 2015, and every year thereafter on May 1, there will be a three percent (3%) increase
from the prior year in the bimonthly charge or rate for the first four thousand (4,000) gallons and for usage
of four thousand one (4,001) to one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons and a 4.9 percent increase for all
gallons used over one hundred thousand (100,000) based upon the amount of water consumed.
In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the village to be in excess of twenty
thousand (20,000) gallons bimonthly, the village may require such flat rate user to install metering devices
on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied.
For users residing outside the corporate limits of the village, the above rate schedule shall be increased
by fifty percent (50%).
B. Bimonthly Charges Or Rates For Users Of The Sewer Services Only:
Effective Date First 4,000 Gallons
For All Over
4,000 Gallons Minimum Bimonthly Charge
9-1-2014 $19.04 $4.76 per 1,000 gallons $19.04
Effective May 1, 2015, and every year thereafter on May 1, there will be a three percent (3%) increase
from the prior year in the bimonthly charge or rate in each category based upon the amount of water
consumed.
All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater facilities, and/or users of the wastewater facilities who
are not users of the village's water system shall pay a minimum flat rate charge equal to the minimum
bimonthly charge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 632/649
C. Bimonthly Charges Or Rates For Users Of The Combined Waterworks And Sewer Services: For each
residential user of the combined water and sewer services there shall be a bimonthly charge or rate
based upon the amount of water consumed bimonthly as follows:
Effective
Date
First 4,000
Gallons
From 4,001 To 100,000
Gallons
For All Over 100,000
Gallons
Minimum Bimonthly
Charge
9-1-
2014
$31.52 $7.88 per 1,000 gallons
$7.62 per 1,000
gallons
$31.52
Effective May 1, 2015, and every year thereafter on May 1, there will be a three percent (3%) increase
from the prior year in the bimonthly charge or rate in each category based upon the amount of water
consumed.
D. Separate Meters:
1. In all buildings housing more than one apartment or commercial account, each apartment or
commercial account shall be metered separately.
2. As an alternative, one meter may be used for all tenants and the bill include at least the minimum
charged times the number of units in the building.
3. All new buildings with more than one apartment and having a single meter shall be classified as
commercial for water and sewer deposit rates. (Ord. 2014-25, 8-26-2014)
10-3-5: BILLING PERIOD; LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service on such premises and the services furnished to the premises by the village
only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the village. (Ord. 1997-18, 11-11-1997)
10-3-6: DELINQUENCIES, LIEN:
In the event that the charges for service are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for
such service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter
such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and the
village collector is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Grundy County, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed
notice for the payment of such charges for such service. (Ord. 1965-5, 10-22-1965)
10-3-7: SERVICE DISCONTINUED FOR NONPAYMENT:
If the rates or charges for such services are not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for
such services, such services shall thereafter be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until all past due bills including the penalties thereon are paid in full, together with payment
made of fifty dollars ($50.00) for reinstating such service. If the water service is to be reinstated at a time
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 633/649
other than the regular business hours of the village hall, then the reinstatement fee shall be in the amount
of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00). (Ord. 2016-07, 2-23-2016)
10-3-8: APPLICATION FOR SHUTOFF OF WATER:
Any user desiring for his convenience a shutting off of the water supply shall make application therefor to
the village water and sewer superintendent and a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be made for each
act of shutting off or turning on of the water at the request of any such user. (Ord. 2014-25, 8-26-2014)
10-3-9: WATER TURNED ON, PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person who shall turn on the supply of water to a service pipe from which the supply has been turned
off by the village on account of nonpayment of water rates or for any other reason, without first having
obtained a permit to do so from the proper village officers, shall be subject to the penalty provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1918-1, 9-4-1918; amd. 1977 Code)
10-3-10: TREASURER TO RENDER BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the treasurer to render bills for service and for all rates and charges in
connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon. (Ord. 2014-25, 8-26-2014)
10-3-11: FUNDS KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage system
shall be held by the village sewer and water superintendent separate and apart from his private funds and
separate and apart from all other funds of the village, and all of said sums, without any deductions
whatever, shall be delivered to the village treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same,
or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the president and board of
trustees. (Ord. 1965-5, 10-22-1965; amd. 1977 Code)
10-3-12: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND:
The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined waterworks and sewerage
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be
delivered to him and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage
fund of the village of Minooka", and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by the applicable provisions of the Illinois municipal code, approved May 29, 1961,
chapter 24, Illinois Revised Statutes, paragraph 11-139-12 et seq., and all laws amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto, and as provided in the ordinance heretofore adopted on September 15, 1965, and
authorizing the issuance of two hundred twenty thousand dollars ($220,000.00) waterworks and sewerage
revenue bonds of the village. (Ord. 1965-5, 10-22-1965)
10-3-13: FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED:
No free service of any of the services supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 634/649
be supplied by the village to the village or to any other person, firm, organization or corporation, public or
private. (Ord. 1965-5, 10-22-1965)
10-3-14: COPY FILED WITH COUNTY:
A copy of the provisions of this chapter, properly certified by the village clerk, shall be recorded in the
office of the recorder of deeds of Grundy and/or Will County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of
real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system of the village on their properties. (Ord. 1965-5, 10-22-1965)
10-3-15: WATER SALE OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
The village shall not furnish or sell water outside the village limits unless an agreement has been entered
into with each individual property owner who is furnished such water. Said agreement shall provide that
each property owner shall reimburse the village for said property owner's proportionate share of the
expense of furnishing such water, as specified by the village ordinances. (Ord. 1975-1, 1975)
10-3-16: CONNECTING DOWNSPOUTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect downspouts from building eave troughs to the sanitary
sewers of the village, or to maintain any such connection previously made. (Ord. 1958-1, 2-4-1958)
10-3-17: WATER METERS REQUIRED:
Any person who now uses, or may hereafter use, any village water for resident consumption or otherwise
shall install a water meter of a character to be approved by the president and village board of trustees. All
such meters shall be properly connected with the village water pipes so as to correctly measure all village
water used by such person, and all such meters so installed and the normal maintenance of the same
(except abuse, misuse, or negligent or deliberate damage by the user) shall be at the expense of the
village. The village shall furnish such meters to all applicants using water, at actual cost. (Ord., 1985)
All meters must be kept free from obstruction and be so located that they may be read or inspected at any
reasonable time. Any person who shall arrange to obtain water that has not passed through a meter, or
contrive any means of obtaining water that has not passed through a meter, shall be punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1918-1, 9-4-1918; amd. 1977 Code)
10-3-18: EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION:
The village board may impose mandatory water conservation by passage by majority vote of a resolution
that a water emergency exists in the village. Immediately upon passage of such a resolution, the following
restrictions shall apply:
A. Residential watering of lawns, trees, flowers, shrubs, gardens, or other vegetation shall be restricted to
the hours of five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Such watering shall be further
restricted to odd numbered calendar days for residences with odd numbered addresses and even
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 635/649
numbered calendar days for residences with even numbers, except that watering of flowers, gardens,
trees and shrubs by handheld hose may be done any day during the hours set forth in this subsection.
B. Office, business and industrial watering of lawn, trees, flowers, shrubs or other vegetation shall be
restricted to the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Such watering shall be
further restricted to odd numbered calendar days for odd numbered addresses and even numbered
calendar days for even numbered addresses, except that watering of flowers, gardens, trees and
shrubs by handheld hose may be done any day during the hours set forth above. These restrictions
shall not apply to any person or entity engaged in the business of growing or selling plants to the
extent watering is necessary to maintain such business inventory.
C. No water shall be used from a hose to wash automobiles, except at places of business where autos
are washed on every business day either with attendants, with automatic equipment or by self-service.
Any person may wash an automobile with water from a bucket.
D. No swimming pools shall be filled, except that children's wading pools of fifty (50) gallons or less may
be filled.
Upon written application, the superintendent may issue permits, which allow watering otherwise in
violation of the above restrictions, if strict compliance therewith would impose an undue hardship on
the applicant. Said permits shall be limited to ten (10) days' duration and shall allow only so much
watering as is necessary to relieve such undue hardship.
Said restrictions shall cease to be in effect on the date the village board passes a resolution, by
majority vote, that the water emergency no longer exists.
Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code.
The superintendent shall use his best efforts to notify village residents and businesses of the
imposition of mandatory water conservation, due to a water emergency, including posting a notice in
the village hall and notifying local newspapers and radio stations. Failure to receive notification shall
not be a defense or excuse for violation of this section. (Ord. 1989-7, 5-23-1989)
ARTICLE A. SEWER USE ORDINANCE
10-3A-1: SEWER USE ORDINANCE ADOPTED1:
There is hereby adopted by reference the "Sewer Use Ordinance to Meet the Requirements of Public Law
95-217 and to Regulate the Use of Sewers and Wastewater Treatment". Said Sewer Use Ordinance shall
be incorporated herein by reference, verbatim, with the same force and effect as if the same were fully set
out herein; and said Ordinance shall be and remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 1986-1,
1-13-1986)
Chapter 4
CROSS CONNECTIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 636/649
10-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE:
All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with the state plumbing code,
Illinois environmental protection agency and local regulations. If in accordance with the state plumbing
code or in the judgment of the superintendent of public works, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the state plumbing code,
Illinois environmental protection agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections
and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the state plumbing code,
Illinois environmental protection agency and local regulations. (Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005)
10-4-2: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY APPROVAL:
No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any
connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the village may enter the supply or distribution system of the municipality, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have
been approved by the superintendent and the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-
11-1992)
10-4-3: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS, DUTY OF SUPERINTENDENT:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and
other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record
and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the superintendent shall deem
necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five (5) years. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable
time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the village
for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and the superintendent or his
authorized agent, upon showing proper identification, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time
any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the village for the
purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection
control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to
the superintendent any information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or
water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion
of the superintendent, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992; amd. 1997 Code)
10-4-5: DISCONTINUE WATER SERVICE FOR VIOLATION; RECONNECTION FEE:
The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 637/649
violation of the provisions of this Chapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary
measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been
eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and until a reconnection fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) is paid to the Village. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be
effected when the Superintendent is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public
water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of
disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion
of the Superintendent or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent
actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the Village, the
Superintendent, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms
of this Chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COST OF CLEANUP:
The consumer responsible for back-siphoned or back pressured material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection
or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must
bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-7: SUPERINTENDENT DEFINED:
As used in this Chapter, the "Superintendent" shall mean the Superintendent of Public Works of the
Village. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992; 1997 Code)
10-4-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the
Minooka Municipal Code. Each day that a violation of the provisions of this Chapter exists shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING CROSS-CONNECTIONS
CONTROL:
Rules and regulations concerning cross-connection control are hereby adopted, and made a part of this
Chapter by reference as set forth in the following sections. The Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish
the rules and regulations in pamphlet form in the Village Hall. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-1: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL, GENERAL POLICY:
A. Purposes: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
1. To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the
customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 638/649
connection into the public water supply system.
2. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the
public or consumer's potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources of systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
3. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will
prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water systems.
B. Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water
supply system of the Village.
C. Policy: The owner or official custodian of premises served by the public potable water supply system of
the Village shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination
due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service connection.
If, in the judgment of the Superintendent or his authorized representative, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service
connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or devices
at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or
devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair as required in subsection 10-4-9-5D4 of this Chapter for a period of at least five (5)
years. The Superintendent may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report
to the Village to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All crossconnection
inspections shall be conducted by a cross-connection control device inspector certified by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations:
AGENCY: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers,
American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the
public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may
include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or
objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a
potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent
backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the
standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 639/649
supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A building
plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree
which could create a health hazard.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate
piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or
questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.
DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection formed when a water system is physically joined to
a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check
valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of
each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the
water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting in a real
or potential danger to the health and well-being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify
"health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be
forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a potable water system, other than by direct crossconnection.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and
appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as determined by the
requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative Code 604.
OWNER OR OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN: Any person or entity who has or purports to have any ownership or
possessory right to any premises containing a water system connected to a public water system, and
shall include, but not be limited to, ownership in fee simple, beneficial owner of a land trust, partners,
officers, directors and shareholders of corporations who are owners or official custodians, tenants,
subtenants, licensees, guests, and the like.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by
any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for
all purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water supply
on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge
of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related
ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the
point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five
feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 640/649
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in
water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative Code 604 for
drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS- CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered
spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal
termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise
contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or
system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
C. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in
sanitary quality;
D. Cooling waters:
E. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation
systems;
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
G. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids in industrial or other processes, or for
fire fighting purposes;
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed
to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively and severally, actually used or intended for use
for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen
(15) service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days
per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a "noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure
differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE Standard
1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief
valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves
at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end
of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main
through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of
all connections to the public water supply system and must include the location, type and most recent
inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that
customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing
inspection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 641/649
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not
dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it
has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply official
custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-3: WATER SYSTEM:
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public water supply system and
the consumer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and
shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the Superintendent up
to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage,
and delivery of water to the public water supply distribution system.
D. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water
from the source to the consumer's water system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection
used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 1992-3,
2-11-1992)
10-4-9-4: CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
A. Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or
other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved
cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
B. 1. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other
water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection
and analysis by the Agency.
2. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a supply.
(Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-5: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the approved cross-connection
control device inspector for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 642/649
consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection devices within the
consumer's premises.
B. On request by the Superintendent, or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish
information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The
consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Superintendent for the verification of
information submitted by the water consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding crossconnection
inspection results.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices
on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water
system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance
with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1).
D. It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by
ensuring that:
1. All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection control devices are installed for
control of backflow and back-siphonage.
2. Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
3. Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually
by a person approved by the Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The
inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
4. Testing And Records:
a. Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer.
b. Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be available for inspection by
Agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4(e).
c. Such device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of CCCDI and
type and date of repairs.
d. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
(1) Date of each test;
(2) Name and approval number of person performing the test;
(3) Test results;
(4) Repairs or servicing required;
(5) Repairs and date completed; and
(6) Servicing performed and dated completed. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 643/649
10-4-9-6: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply
as described in the state plumbing code. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment
of the superintendent, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water
system serving premises where the following conditions exist:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless each auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional
source by the superintendent and the source is approved by the Illinois environmental protection
agency.
2. Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual health hazard, if
introduced into the public water supply system, or premises having sources or systems containing
process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under
the sanitary control of the superintendent.
3. Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the superintendent and/or the
cross connection control device inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements
which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
4. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is
impossible or impractical to make a complete cross connection survey.
5. Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply
as described in the state plumbing code. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the superintendent determines that no actual or potential hazard to
the public water system exists:
1. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics and nursing homes.
2. Laboratories.
3. Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
4. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water pumping stations.
5. Food or beverage processing plants.
6. Chemical plants.
7. Metal plating industries.
8. Petroleum processing or storage plants.
9. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
10. Car washes.
11. Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 644/649
12. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005)
10-4-9-7: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
A. The type of backflow prevention device required under section 10-4-9-6 of these regulations shall
depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
1. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system
may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard.
2. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated
with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.
3. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention assembly or double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public water
supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous
to health.
B. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced
pressure principal backflow preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public
water supply when:
1. The fire safety contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals;
2. Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
3. Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be pumped into the fire safety
system from any other source.
4. There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the fire safety system.
C. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double
check valve assembly on metered service lines and a double detector check value assembly on
unmetered service lines. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and regulations shall be approved
by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California,
American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with
applicable industry specification.
B. Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's
maintenance manual shall be available on-site. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 645/649
10-4-9-9: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by
these regulations are installed to have inspection, tests, maintenance, and repair made in accordance
with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
1. Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is
maintained between the discharge point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle
at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or bypassed air
gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
2. Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of installation and at least
annually thereafter, and required service performed within five (5) days.
3. Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and
required service performed within five (5) days.
B. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the Agency as competent to service
the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing.
C. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection, name of
tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
1. Date of each test or visual inspection;
2. Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection;
3. Test results;
4. Repairs or servicing required;
5. Repairs and date completed; and
6. Servicing performed and dated completed.
E. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are found to be defective, they
shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay as required by subsection
A of this Section.
F. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made
ineffective without specific authorization by the Superintendent. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-10: BOOSTER PUMPS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 646/649
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump
shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when the
pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working
order and to certify to the Superintendent, at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 1992-
3, 2-11-1992)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE PARKS
10-5-1: PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the following subsections in any village park: (Ord.
2006-40, 11-14-2006)
A. For any person to possess or consume alcoholic beverages at any village park without first obtaining a
permit in writing from the village. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
B. For any person to violate the rules and regulations pertaining to posted usage capacity of picnic
grounds or any other area where limited facilities make it necessary to control use by persons and/or
motor vehicles. Village officials and law enforcement officers of the village are authorized to close such
facilities to additional persons until such time as the number of users falls below the capacity posted
within the area. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003)
C. For any person to enter or remain on any portion of any village park where posted rules and
regulations prohibit such entry to protect the natural fauna and flora within such area. (Ord. 2003-25,
4-22-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
D. For any person to remain in any area when advised by an authorized law enforcement officer or village
official that he is in violation of this chapter and that the area in question is a prohibited area for
persons and/or motor vehicles. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003)
E. For any person to camp overnight in any village park unless written permission is obtained from the
village in advance. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
F. For any unauthorized person to wilfully or wantonly or intentionally cut, break, injure or remove any
shrub, tree or flower or attempt to remove any of the above or to disturb any agricultural crop.
G. For any person to remove, take, mutilate, deface or destroy any equipment, property, improvement,
sign or building.
H. For any person to operate a motor vehicle with a wilful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons
or property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 647/649
I. For any person to operate a motor vehicle in excess of ten (10) miles per hour unless otherwise posted
by sign on any roadway or in any parking area. Notwithstanding the above, no vehicle may be driven
upon any roadway or in any parking area at a speed which is greater than is reasonable and proper
with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the roadway or parking area or endanger the safety of
any persons or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum
speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or
when any special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or
roadway conditions.
J. For any person to park a motor vehicle in any prohibited area which is posted with signs or to park his
vehicle in any parking area for the purpose of repair, except those immediate repairs necessary to
remove the vehicle.
K. For any person to abandon any vehicle in any parking area in or on any property owned, leased,
managed or supervised by the village. Village officials and law enforcement officers are authorized to
remove at the owner's expense vehicles in question after a period of twenty four (24) hours has
elapsed.
L. For any person to ride any motor driven bicycle, minibike or motorcycle except on roadways designated
for vehicular use. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on any
roadway or land owned, supervised or managed by the village unless such person possesses a valid
Illinois driver's license and the vehicle is properly licensed and equipped in accordance with the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
M. For any person to build any fire except in camp stoves provided by the village or in charcoal or other
types of metal grills which are furnished by the visitor and approved by the village official and at
specific campfire sites designated by the village official. Ground fires are strictly prohibited.
N. For any person to discard scrap paper, garbage or rubbish of any kind in any area except by placing
such refuse in designated containers provided by the village.
O. For any person to take fish from the water of any area contrary to the rules and regulations of the
Illinois department of natural resources and any fish or parts of fish remaining from cleaning must be
placed in a proper refuse container that is provided by the village.
P. For any person to carry firearms of any kind, bow and arrow, or blowgun.
Q. For any person to pursue with firearms, bow and arrow, blowgun, or any other means with intent to
maim, injure or kill any bird or animal.
R. For any person to attempt to entrap or trap by any means with intent to capture, injure or kill any bird or
animal.
S. For any person to possess or display any knife, commonly known as a switchblade knife, with a blade
which is spring loaded in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 648/649
T. For any person to allow or otherwise permit on a leash longer than ten feet (10') any dog, cat, livestock
or other domesticated animal on any area. All leashed animals shall be at all times under the specific
physical control of a responsible person.
U. For any person to ride or lead any horse in any area except on designated bridle paths or equestrian
areas.
V. For any person to allow animal waste to remain in picnic areas or other areas or on land owned,
managed or supervised by the village.
W. For any person to place signs or distribute advertising of any type in any area or make an attempt to
make sales of any kind or solicit sales of any kind without first obtaining a permit in writing from the
village.
X. For persons to gather in groups of more than twenty five (25) persons unless written permission is
obtained from the village in advance to use such facilities.
Y. For groups of nine (9) or more minors under the age of seventeen (17) to gather unless written
permission is obtained from the village in advance to use such facilities.
Z. For any person to swim or wade except in designated areas.
AA. For any person to operate any off the road vehicle such as snowmobiles, dune buggies, trail bikes or
ATVs unless specific permission is granted by the village to operate such vehicles on posted trails.
(Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003)
BB. For any person to act in such disorderly or unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb and to
provoke a breach of peace or to enter or remain in any village park for any unlawful purpose. (Ord.
2003-25, 4-22-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
CC. For any person to knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to be a peace officer
acting within his official capacity. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003)
DD. For any person to enter or remain in any village park before sunrise and to enter or remain after
sunset without previously obtaining a special permit from the village. (Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
10-5-2: USE OF RESTROOM FACILITIES:
Any person requesting the use of the restroom facilities for private parties, picnics and gatherings shall
obtain permission from the village and that person shall be held responsible for the condition and
cleanliness of the restroom facilities upon leaving the area. (Ord. 1977-14, eff. 7-11-1977; amd. Ord.
2003-25, 4-22-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=489 649/649
10-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (Ord. 1977-14, eff. 7-11-1977)