
O'Fallon, Illinois Code of Ordinances


CITY OF O’FALLON, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 4090 passed 4-1-2019; and
State legislation current through 2017 Illinois Legislative Service Pamphlet
#8










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



      11.   WARDS



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section headings



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Official time



   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Amendments to code



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Reference to public office or officer



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Ordinances saved



   10.16   Technical codes



   10.17   Historical and statutory references



   10.18   Applicability



   10.19   Section includes penalty



   10.20   Corporate seal



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification by and for the City of O’Fallon shall be designated
as the “Code of O’Fallon” and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons, but also every
other owner of property.



   CITY, MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. The City of O’Fallon,
irrespective of its population or legal classification.



   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The Council of the City of O’Fallon.



   COUNTY. St. Clair County, Illinois.



   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of St. Clair County, Illinois.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)



   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.



   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)



   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer
may include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)



   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day
on which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means
at any time after that date.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)



   HIGHWAY,ROAD or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of
the United States, or of the state, or of any town or county of the state,
and all bridges thereupon.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)



   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter
amended.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves, or as a servant, agent or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.



   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of O’Fallon.



   MONTH. A calendar month.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.



   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)



   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.



   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate as well as
individuals.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property, except real.



   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the
City of O’Fallon. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons
in the employ of a city as members of the Department of Police, who are or
shall hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)



   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government;
the village, city, county, state or federal governments, officers and
agencies thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use
of pedestrians.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)



   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Art. VII of the Constitution
of the state of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)



   STATE. The State of Illinois.



   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding
a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of
the premises, alone or with others.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The city code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters or sections.



   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Art. VII
of the Constitution of the state of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)



   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic  and any other
mode of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any
person is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required
by law, it shall be:



      (1)   In the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he
or she is unable to write, his or her proper mark; or



      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Electronic
Commerce Security Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq., except as
otherwise provided by law.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)



   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR
alone is equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord”.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



§ 10.03  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference
purposes only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or
judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.



   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following rules will be followed.



      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)



      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)



      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)



      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the
context admits.



   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in the state, and then it shall also be
excluded. If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)



   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more
municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority of the officers or persons.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)



   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision
of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding that
construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code may be
repugnant thereto.



   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor
and City Council may be fully carried out.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)



   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the
same as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of
the prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)



§ 10.05  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the city shall be as set by federal law.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder;



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred
thereunder;



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment. The investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as
if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the
context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or
revised was not intended.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.09  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or,
in any way, affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of
repealed chapters, sections and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the
omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances
as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima
facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of
ordinances by the City Council.



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section
or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application and, to this end, the provisions are severable.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Such references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office,
unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code
of ordinances.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not
limited to, tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances
relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other
ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances) as well as any other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances, shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
City Council or a certain city officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.



§ 10.16  TECHNICAL CODES.



   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall
automatically become a part of this code and shall be made available for
public inspection by the city. Further, to the extent of any conflict between
the technical provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by
reference, the most restrictive provision shall prevail.



§ 10.17  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section. Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord.
25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same
as the statute. Example: (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1)



      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



         § 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



            The city shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom
of Information Act.



         Statutory reference:



            Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140,
§§ 1 et seq.



§ 10.18  APPLICABILITY.



   Unless otherwise provided in this code, this code shall apply to all
acts performed within the corporate limits of the city. Provisions of this
code shall also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up
to the limits provided by law, where the law confers power to the city to
regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.



(1999 Code, § 10.02)



§ 10.19  SECTION INCLUDES PENALTY.



   Reference to any section of this code includes the penalty section
relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. In case of the
amendment of any section of this code containing provisions for which a
penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided shall relate
to the amended section whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance or not,
unless such penalty is specifically repealed or amended therein.



(1999 Code, § 10.09)



§ 10.20  CORPORATE SEAL.



   (A)   The corporate seal of the city shall be the same as that
heretofore provided and used by the city. It shall be circular in form, with
the words “City of O’Fallon, Illinois” in the exterior circle, and the
word “Seal” in the center.



   (B)   The corporate seal shall be used as such seal in all cases
provided for by law or by the ordinances of the city, and in all other cases
in which, by law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the corporation to
use a seal.



(1999 Code, § 10.20)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
city for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1



   Limitations on penalties and collection upon default in payment, see
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1



CHAPTER 11:  WARDS



Section



   11.01   Adoption by reference



§ 11.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The city does hereby redistrict into seven wards to be known as the
First Ward, Second Ward, Third Ward, Fourth Ward, Fifth Ward, Sixth Ward and
Seventh Ward. The territory of each ward shall be designated as Exhibit
“A” of Ord. 2016, and is incorporated as part of this code of ordinances
as fully as if set out at length herein.



(1999 Code, § 11.01)  (Ord. 2016, passed 12-22-1998)



Statutory reference:



   Division of city into wards, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-20-10 et
seq.



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY COUNCIL



      31.   CITY OFFICERS



      32.   POLICE AND FIRE



      33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS



      34.   FISCAL MATTERS



      35.   TAXATION



      36.   PERSONNEL



      37.   EMERGENCY OPERATION PROCEDURE



      38.   ELECTIONS



      39.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Composition; term of office



   30.02   Compensation



   30.03   Vacancies



   30.04   Committees



   30.05   Meetings



   30.06   Quorum



   30.07   Rules of order and procedure



   30.08   Ordinances




Procedures for Recording Closed Sessions




   30.20   Recording closed sessions



   30.21   Responsibility for recording closed sessions and maintaining
recordings



   30.22   Closed session minutes



   30.23   Procedure of recording



   30.24   Back-up equipment/procedure for equipment malfunction



   30.25   Procedure for review of closed session minutes and recordings



   30.26   Maintenance and public release of recordings and access to
tapes



   30.27   Procedure for destruction of recordings




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  COMPOSITION; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and 14 Aldermen and their
terms of office shall be for four years and until their successors are
elected and have qualified.



(1999 Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor and aldermen, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-5 et seq. and
3.1-40-5



§ 30.02  COMPENSATION.



   Each Alderman shall receive the sum of $200 per meeting for any and all
City Council meetings actually attended by him or her. All members shall be
allowed two absences each year for which compensation shall be paid. Each
Alderman shall receive the sum of $125 for any and all special City Council
meetings actually attended by him or her. This compensation shall take effect
prior to the general election in which the Alderman is elected.



(1999 Code, § 30.02)  (Ord. 604, passed 4-21-1969; Ord. 1340, passed
11-7-1988; Ord. 1487, passed 5-20-1991; Ord. 1587, passed 1-9-1993; Ord.
3022, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 3023, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.03  VACANCIES.



   A vacancy in the office of an Alderman shall be filled for the
remainder of the term at the next election of Aldermen. During the period
from the time that the vacancy occurs until the next election of Aldermen,
the vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Council, appointing a person to fill the vacancy.



(1999 Code, § 30.03)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 30.04  COMMITTEES.



   Committees may be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and
consent of the City Council, as may be needed from time to time.



(1999 Code, § 30.04)  (Ord. 1192, passed 3-31-1986; Ord. 1255, passed
5-18-1987; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 30.05  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings; adjourned meetings. The regular stated
meetings of the City Council shall be held in the City Hall building on the
first and third Monday in each month, at 7:00 p.m. When the meeting date
falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the Tuesday
following at the same hour and place, unless otherwise designated. Adjourned
meetings may be held at such times as may be determined by the Aldermen.



   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the City Council may be
called by the Mayor or any three Aldermen by giving at least 48-hours’
actual notice to the Mayor and each Alderman.



   (C)   Committee meetings shall be scheduled on days and times as
determined by the City Council.  In all respects, committee meetings shall
comply with the Open Meetings Act ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.



(1999 Code, § 30.05)  (Ord. 821, passed 7-18-1977; Ord. 857, passed
3-6-1978; Ord. 1063, passed 7-18-1983; Ord. 3180, passed 6-16-2003; Ord.
3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 3939, passed 6-20-2016)



Cross-reference:



   Procedures for recording closed sessions, see §§ 30.20 through 30.27



Statutory reference:



   Meetings, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-25



§ 30.06  QUORUM.



   At all meetings of the City Council, a majority of its corporate
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; and if no
such quorum attends such meetings, the City Council may adjourn from day to
day until a quorum is present, and shall have power to compel the attendance
of absent members.



(1999 Code, § 30.06)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum, compelling attendance, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-20



§ 30.07  RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE.



   All rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations and
meetings of both the City Council and its Committees except as to Committee
meetings, division (AA)(1) of this section, shall apply only to a vote or
question considered at any time during the same Committee meeting.



   Except as otherwise provided, all references in this section to the
terms City Council, Council and Alderman shall include and apply to Committee
Members and Committee Chairman as applicable.



   (A)   Order of business.



      (1)   The order of business shall be as follows:



         (a)   Call to order by Presiding Officer;



         (b)   Roll call;



         (c)   Approval of minutes;



         (d)   Public hearings;



         (e)   Public comment;



         (f)   Reports and communications from the Mayor and
other city officers;



         (g)   Resolutions;



         (h)   Ordinances;



         (i)   Reports of standing committees;



         (j)   Executive session; and



         (k)   Action taken on executive session items.



      (2)   All questions relating to the priority of business shall
be decided by the Chair, without debate, subject to appeal.



   (B)   Duties of Presiding Officer.



      (1)   The Presiding Officer shall preserve order and decorum
and may speak to points of order in preference to other members, and shall
decide all questions of order, subject to appeal.



      (2)   In case of any disturbances or disorderly conduct, the
Presiding Officer shall have the power to require that the chamber be cleared.



   (C)   Duties of members.



      (1)   While the Presiding Officer is putting the question, no
member shall walk across or cut off the Council chamber.



      (2)   Every member, previous to speaking, making a motion or
seconding the same, shall not proceed with his or her remarks until
recognized and named by the Chair. The member shall confine himself or
herself to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and refraining
from impugning the motives of any other member’s argument or vote.



   (D)   Public comment.



      (1)   City Council meetings.



         (a)   City Council meetings are deliberative sessions by
members of the governing body. Civility and decorum are expected at all
times. Public comment is encouraged at all public meetings, but the primary
purpose of the meetings are for the aldermen to discuss and determine public
policy for the city.



         (b)   Speakers will be acknowledged by the Mayor and
shall address the City Council in a respectful manner from the podium and not
approach the City Council. Speakers will begin their statement by first
stating their name and whether or not they are a resident of the city. A
speaker who represents an organization or other person, must identify the
organization or person.



         (c)   Statements are to be directed to the City Council
as a whole and not to individual Council members or individual city staff.



         (d)   A speaker shall speak no longer than five minutes
on any subject matter and shall only speak once on the same subject matter. A
speaker may speak for longer than five minutes if given permission by the
Mayor.



         (e)   After a speaker has made his/her statements,
he/she shall be seated with no further comments.



         (f)   Public comment is not intended to require the City
Council members or city staff to provide any answer to the speaker.



         (g)   Discussions between speakers and members of the
audience will not be allowed.



         (h)   The Mayor reserves the right to stop or remove,
from the Council chambers meeting room, any speaker or member of the audience
who uses profanity, makes threats or is otherwise disruptive.



         (i)   The public has the right to distribute written
materials, including copies of comments which material shall be presented to
the City Clerk.



         (j)   The general public shall not be permitted to bring
signs, banners or other display materials into the Council chambers.



         (k)   Cellular telephones, electronic beepers and pagers
that emit a paging or telephone sound, shall be allowed in the Council
chambers, provided the device is turned off or on "silent" mode.



         (l)   The Mayor reserves the right to override the above
rules in the case of an emergency or other unforeseen circumstances.



      (2)   Committee meetings.



         (a)   Council Committee meetings are deliberative
sessions by members of the governing body. Civility and decorum are expected
at all times. Public comment is encouraged at all public meetings, but the
primary purpose of the meetings are for the Committee Members to discuss and
determine public policy for the city.



         (b)   Speakers will be acknowledged by the Committee
Chairman and shall address the Committee in a respectful manner from the
podium and not approach the Committee. Speakers will begin their statement by
first stating their name and whether or not they are a resident of the
city.  A speaker who represents an organization or other person, must
identify the organization or person.



         (c)   Statements are to be directed to the Committee as
a whole and not to individual Committee members or individual city staff.



         (d)   A speaker shall speak no longer than five minutes
on any subject matter and shall only speak once on the same subject matter. A
speaker may speak for longer than five minutes if given permission by the
Committee Chairman.



         (e)   If the Committee Chairman or a Committee Member
has a question of any person who has previously addressed the Committee, that
person may answer and address the specific question even though he or she has
previously addressed the Committee.



         (f)   The Committee Chairman reserves the right to stop
or remove, from the Committee meeting room, any speaker or member of the
audience who uses profanity, makes threats or is otherwise disruptive.



         (g)   The public has the right to distribute written
materials, including copies of comments which material shall be presented to
the Committee Chairman.



         (h)   The general public shall not be permitted to bring
signs, banners or other display materials into the Committee meeting room.



         (i)   Cellular telephones, electronic beepers and pagers
that emit a paging or telephone sound, shall be allowed in the Committee
meeting room, provided the device is turned off or on "silent" mode.



         (j)   The Committee Chairman reserves the right to
override the above rules in the case of an emergency or other unforeseen
circumstances.



   (E)   Presentation of new business. When a member wishes to present
a communication, petition, order, resolution, ordinance or other original
matter, he or she shall send it to the desk of the Clerk, who shall read such
matter when reached in its proper order.



   (F)   Debate.



      (1)   No member shall speak more than once on the same
question, except by unanimous consent, and then not until every other member
desiring to speak has had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that,
the proponent of the matter under consideration, as the case may be, shall
have the right to open and close debate. No member shall speak longer than
ten minutes at any one time, except by consent of the Council; and, in
closing debate on any question, as above provided, the speaker shall be
limited to five minutes, except by special consent of the Council.



      (2)   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any
private discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.



   (G)   Call of member to order. A member, when called to order by the
Chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his or her seat and the
order or ruling of the Chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to
the right of appeal.



   (H)   Appeals from decisions of Chair. Any member may appeal to the
Council from a ruling of the Chair and, if the appeal is seconded, the member
making the appeal may briefly state his or her reason for the same, and the
Chair may briefly explain the ruling, but there shall be no debate on the
appeal and no other member shall participate in the discussion. The Chair
shall then put the question, “Shall the decision of the Chair be
sustained?” If a majority of the members present vote “No”, the
decision of the Chair shall be overruled, otherwise it shall be sustained.



   (I)   Questions of personal privilege. The right of a member to
address the Council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to
cases in which the integrity, character or motives of the member are
assailed, questioned or impugned.



   (J)   Voting. Every member who shall be present when a question is
stated from the Chair shall vote thereon, unless excused by the Council, or
unless the member is personally interested in the question, in which case, he
or she shall not vote.



   (K)   Special order of business. Any matter before the City Council
may be set down as a special order of business at a time certain if
two-thirds of the Aldermen present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.



   (L)   Motions. No motion shall be put or debated in the meeting or
in committee unless it be seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be
stated by the Presiding Officer before debate, and every motion in the
Council, except motions of procedure, shall be reduced to writing, if
required by a member, and the proposer of the motion shall be entitled to the
floor.



   (M)   Withdrawal of motions. After a motion or resolution is stated
by the Presiding Officer, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the
Council, but it may be withdrawn at any time before decision by consent of
the Council.



   (N)   Division of questions. If any question under consideration
contains several distinct propositions, the Aldermen, by a majority vote of
the members present, may divide such question.



   (O)   Record of motions. In all cases where a resolution or motion
is entered in the journal, the name of the member moving the same shall be
also entered.



   (P)   Taking and entering votes; explanations of votes not permitted.



      (1)   If any member requires it, the “yeas” and “nays”
upon any question shall be taken and entered in the journal; but the
“yeas” and “nays” shall not be taken unless called for prior to any
vote on the question.



      (2)   When the Clerk has commenced to call the roll of the
Council for the taking of a vote by yeas and nays, all debate on the question
before the Council shall be deemed concluded, and during the taking of the
vote, no member shall be permitted to explain his or her vote, but shall
respond to the calling of his or her name by the Clerk by answering “yea”
or “nay”, as the case may be.



   (Q)   Announcement and changes of votes. The result of all votes by
yeas and nays shall not be announced by the Clerk, but shall be handed by the
Clerk to the Chair for announcement, and no vote shall be changed after the
tally list has passed from the hands of the Clerk.



   (R)   Precedence of motions. When a question is under debate, the
following motions shall be in order and shall have precedence over each other
in order, as listed, divisions (R)(2), (R)(4) and (R)(5) to be decided
without debate.



      (1)   To adjourn to a day certain;



      (2)   To adjourn;



      (3)   To take a recess;



      (4)   To lay on the table;



      (5)   The previous question;



      (6)   To refer;



      (7)   To amend;



      (8)   To defer or postpone to a time certain;



      (9)   To defer or postpone (without reference to time); and



      (10)   To defer or postpone indefinitely.



   (S)   Motions to adjourn.



      (1)   A motion to adjourn the City Council shall always be in
order, except:



         (a)   When a member is in possession of the floor;



         (b)   While the yeas and nays are being called;



         (c)   When the members are voting;



         (d)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; and



         (e)   When it has been decided that the previous
question shall be taken.



      (2)   A motion simply to adjourn shall not be subject to
amendment or debate, but a motion to adjourn to a time certain shall be.



      (3)   The City Council may, at any time, adjourn over one or
more regular meetings, on a vote of a majority of all the Aldermen authorized
by law to be elected.



   (T)   Previous question. When the previous question is moved on the
main question, and seconded, it shall be put on this form: “Shall the main
question now be put?” If such motion be carried, all further amendment and
all further motions and debate shall be excluded, and the question put
without delay upon the pending amendment in proper order and then upon the
main question.



   (U)   Motions to lay on the table and to take from the table.



      (1)   A motion simply to lay the question on the table shall
not be debatable, but a motion to lay on the table and publish, or with any
other condition shall be subject to amendment and debate.



      (2)   A motion to take any motion or other proposition from
the table may be proposed at the same meeting at which such motion or
proposition was laid upon the table; provided, two-thirds of the Aldermen
vote therefor.



      (3)   A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on
the table shall apply to that motion or proposition only. An amendment to the
main question or other pending question may be laid on the table and neither
the main question, nor such other pending question shall be affected thereby.



   (V)   Indefinite postponement; motion to defer or postpone without
any reference to time.



      (1)   When consideration of a motion or other proposition is
postponed indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up at the same meeting.



      (2)   A motion to postpone indefinitely shall not open the
main question to debate.



      (3)   A motion to defer or postpone without any reference to
time shall not be construed as a motion to postpone indefinitely, but shall
be considered to be of the same general nature, and to possess the same
general attributes so far as applicable under these rules, as a motion to
postpone indefinitely or to a time certain.



   (W)   Motion to refer. A motion to refer to a standing committee
shall take precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.



   (X)   Motion to amend.



      (1)   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but
one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.



      (2)   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall
be in order; but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in
order.



      (3)   On an amendment to “Strike out and insert”, the
paragraph to be amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words
proposed to be stricken out, then those to be inserted and, finally, the
paragraph as it will stand if so amended shall be read.



      (4)   An amendment to the main question or other pending
questions may be referred to a committee and neither the main question nor
such other pending question shall be affected thereby.



   (Y)   Filling of blanks. When a blank is to be filled, and different
sums or times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or
the longest time.



   (Z)   Motion to substitute. A substitute for any original
proposition under debate or for any pending amendment or such proposition may
be entertained notwithstanding that at such time further amendment is
admissible; and if accepted by the Aldermen by a vote, shall entirely
supersede such original proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut
off all amendments appertaining thereto.



   (AA)   Reconsideration.



      (1)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time
during the same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A
motion for reconsideration, having been once made and decided in the
negative, shall not be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be
reconsidered.



      (2)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by
members who voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered,
unless otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that, where a motion has
received a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on
the ground that a greater number of votes is required by statute for the
passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case a motion to reconsider
may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such
question to be reconsidered.



   (BB)   Adoption of Robert’s “Rules of Order Revised”. The
rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition of
Robert’s “Rules of Order Revised” shall govern the City Council in all
cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent
with the special rules of the City Council.



   (CC)   Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules. These
rules may be temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of all Aldermen
entitled by law to be elected and shall not be repealed, altered or amended,
unless by concurrence of two-thirds vote of all Aldermen entitled by law to
be elected.



   (DD)   Censure of members; expulsion of members. Any member acting
or appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious,
obscene and insulting language to or about any member of the Council, or who
does not obey the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a
majority vote of the members present or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all
members elected.



(1999 Code, § 30.07)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 3939, passed
6-20-2016)



Statutory reference:



   City Council rules, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-15



§ 30.08  ORDINANCES.



   (A)   After a bill for an ordinance shall be reviewed by committee,
it shall be read the first time, at the end of which reading it shall be
subject to amendment or, if necessary, referred to the proper committee.



   (B)   Whenever such bill be reported back to the City Council by any
committee to which it may have been referred, with the recommendation that it
pass, and the report shall be concurred in by the Council, it, together with
all amendments, shall then be placed on the second and final reading and at
the end of such second reading, it shall be subject to amendment by the
Council, but amendments proposed by the committee shall first be acted upon
by Council. It shall then immediately be placed upon its final passage; after
any such bill has been passed by the City Council, it shall, after its
approval by the Mayor, be entered at large in the ordinance record by the
City Clerk.



   (C)   On the passage of all bills for ordinances, the roll of the
members of the City Council shall be called, and the question shall be:
“Shall the bill pass?” The Mayor shall order the roll of the members of
the City Council to be called, and the vote shall be taken by yeas and nays,
which shall be ordered entered in the journal. And when a bill shall fail to
receive the necessary majority upon final passage, the Mayor shall declare
that the bill has failed to pass, and no further action shall be taken upon
such bill, except a motion to reconsider such vote of the bill; but such
motion shall be made at the next meeting of the Council occurring after such
bill has failed to pass, and not afterwards; and not more than one
reconsideration shall be allowed upon the passage of any bill.



   (D)   No bill for an ordinance shall be read for the second and
final time until after the expiration of two weeks from the first reading
thereof. If, however, any emergency should exist for the prompt enforcement
of the same, the Council may, by a two-thirds vote of all its members
present, suspend the rules and, after one reading, read the same by title for
the second reading and put it on its final passage.



   (E)   A bill for an ordinance shall be in order in preference to all
other business, except when a proposition shall be under actual consideration
by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 30.08)  (Ord. 3123, passed 9-3-2002; Ord. 3627, passed
6-15-2009; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)




PROCEDURES FOR RECORDING CLOSED SESSIONS




§ 30.20  RECORDING CLOSED SESSIONS.



   The city shall keep a verbatim record of all closed or executive
session meetings of the corporate authorities of the city or any subsidiary
“public body,” as defined by the State Open Meetings Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act
120, §§ 1 et seq. The verbatim record shall be in the form of an audio or
video recording as determined by the corporate authorities.



(1999 Code, § 30.20)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.21  RESPONSIBILITY FOR RECORDING CLOSED SESSIONS AND MAINTAINING
RECORDINGS.



   The City Clerk or his or her designee shall be responsible for
arranging for the recording of such closed or executive sessions. In the
absence of the City Clerk or his or her designee, the meeting Chair will
arrange for the audio or video recording of the closed or executive session
of the City Council. Each subsidiary body of the city shall designate an
individual who will be responsible for the recording of any and all closed or
executive sessions of the subsidiary body and for providing the City Clerk
with a copy of such recording. The City Clerk or his or her designee shall
securely maintain the verbatim recordings of all closed sessions of the
corporate authorities of the city and all subsidiary public bodies of the
city.



(1999 Code, § 30.21)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.22  CLOSED SESSION MINUTES.



   In addition to the recordings of the closed and executive session as
addressed in this subchapter, the city will keep minutes of all closed
meetings in accordance with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act, ILCS
Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.



(1999 Code, § 30.22)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.23  PROCEDURE OF RECORDING.



   At the beginning of each closed session, those present shall identify
themselves by voice for the audio recording. If the meeting is videotaped,
those present shall individually appear on camera and identify themselves by
voice at the beginning of the closed session. The meeting Chair shall also
announce the times the closed session commences and ends at the appropriate
points on the recording.



(1999 Code, § 30.23)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.24  BACK-UP EQUIPMENT/PROCEDURE FOR EQUIPMENT MALFUNCTION.



   The city will maintain sufficient tapes, batteries and equipment for
the city to comply with this subchapter. The City Clerk or his or her
designee will periodically check the equipment to confirm that it is
functioning. In the event that anyone present at a closed session determines
that the equipment is not functioning properly, the closed session will be
temporarily suspended to attempt to correct any malfunction. In the event
that an equipment malfunction cannot be corrected immediately, the closed
session will terminate until such time as the closed session may proceed with
a functioning recording device.



(1999 Code, § 30.24)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.25  PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF CLOSED SESSION MINUTES AND RECORDINGS.



   At one meeting at least every six months, the agenda shall include the
item: “Review of the minutes and recordings of all closed sessions that
have not yet been released for public review, and determination of which
minutes, if any, may be released.” Minutes shall be reviewed in closed
session and shall not be released unless the corporate authorities of the
city find that it is no longer necessary to protect the public interest or
the privacy of an individual by keeping them confidential. As to any minutes
not released, the corporate authorities shall find that the “need for
confidentiality still exists” as to those minutes. Minutes of closed
sessions shall be kept indefinitely. Recordings shall be reviewed in a manner
appropriate to the purpose for which they were intended.



(1999 Code, § 30.25)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.26  MAINTENANCE AND PUBLIC RELEASE OF RECORDINGS AND ACCESS TO TAPES.



   The audio or video tape recordings of closed sessions shall be
maintained for 18 months after the closed session and shall not be released
to the public unless such release is required by a court order or
specifically authorized for release by a vote of the City Council. Members of
the corporate authorities may listen to the closed session recordings in the
presence of the City Clerk or his or her designee. Copies of such tapes will
not be made or provided to anyone unless specifically authorized by vote of
the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 30.26)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 30.27  PROCEDURE FOR DESTRUCTION OF RECORDINGS.



   The City Clerk or his or her designee is hereby authorized to destroy
the audio and video recordings of those closed sessions for which:



   (A)   The corporate authorities of the city have approved the
minutes of the closed sessions as to accurate content, regardless of whether
the minutes have been released for public view;



   (B)   More than 18 months have elapsed since the date of the closed
session;



   (C)   There is no court order requiring the preservation of such
recording; and



   (D)   The corporate authorities of the city have not passed a motion
requiring the preservation of the verbatim recording of that meeting.



(1999 Code, § 30.27)  (Ord. 3368, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICERS



Section




General Provisions




   31.001   Regulations regarding city officers



   31.002   Bonds



   31.003   Compensation



   31.004   Municipal year; effect on appointments




Mayor




   31.015   Election; term of office



   31.016   Vacancy



   31.017   Compensation



   31.018   Mayor pro tem



   31.019   Powers and duties generally



   31.020   Appointment and removal of officers; designation of duties



   31.021   Formal occasions



   31.022   Release of prisoners



   31.023   Business License Commissioner duties



   31.024   Liquor Commissioner duties



   31.025   Authority to examine records



   31.026   Deciding vote




City Clerk




   31.040   Election; term of office



   31.041   Vacancy



   31.042   Bond



   31.043   Compensation



   31.044   Deputy Clerk



   31.045   Council minutes; ordinances; bonds



   31.046   Delivery of documents



   31.047   Document preparation; attestation



   31.048   Licenses



   31.049   City seal



   31.050   Record maintenance; transfer to successor



   31.051   Other duties




City Treasurer




   31.065   Election; term of office



   31.066   Compensation



   31.067   Protection of funds



   31.068   Reports to Council



   31.069   Investment policy




Legal Department




   31.080   Created



   31.081   Function



   31.082   City Attorney and special counsel



   31.083   Compensation; billing



   31.084   Duties



   31.085   Surety bond review



   31.086   Policies and procedures




Director of Public Works




   31.100   Creation of office



   31.101   Duties




City Administrator




   31.115   Office created, appointment, term and qualifications



   31.116   Compensation



   31.117   Powers and duties



   31.118   Removal and resignation from office



   31.119   Conflict of interest prohibited



   31.120   Acting Administrator



   31.121   Matters directed to City Administrator



   31.122   Authority




Director of Public Safety




   31.135   Creation of office



   31.136   Qualifications



   31.137   Duties and responsibilities




Community Development Director




   31.150   Creation of office; qualifications



   31.151   Powers and duties




Freedom of Information Officer




   31.165   Philosophy of disclosure



   31.166   Information disclosure requirements



   31.167   Establishment of Freedom of Information Officer



   31.168   Freedom of Information Act rules and regulations




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 31.001  REGULATIONS REGARDING CITY OFFICERS.



   (A)   Leaves of absence. Any officer desiring to be temporarily
absent from the city shall apply to the Mayor for a leave of absence, which
may in the discretion of the Mayor be granted, in writing, for any time not
exceeding 30 days and, when granted, shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Books delivered to successor. Every officer shall, upon going
out of office, deliver to his or her successor all books, papers, furniture
and other things appertaining to such office and which are the property of
the city.



   (C)   Other rules and regulations. Every officer of the city shall
perform such duties and be subject to such other rules and regulations as the
City Council may provide by law.



   (D)   Delivery of records. Within five days after notification and
request, any person who has been an officer of a municipality is required to
deliver to his or her successor in office all property, books and effects in
his or her possession belonging to the municipality, or pertaining to the
office the person has held. Upon refusal to do so, the person shall be liable
for all damages caused thereby, and shall, upon conviction, be penalized
according to the provisions of § 10.99 of this code.



   (E)   Oath. Before entering upon the duties of their offices, all
city officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe to the
following oath:



      “I,                 , do solemnly swear that I will
support the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the
State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the
office of           according to the best of my ability.”



   (F)   Consolidation of city offices.



      (1)   The City Council may, from time to time, by law, impose
upon any officer filling any office created by the laws of the city any such
other or further duties as shall be consistent with the laws of this state,
and may consolidate any two or more of the offices and impose the duties
thereof upon any other officer, and may make any such regulations respecting
such offices as shall be consistent with the laws of this state.



      (2)   In case the City Council consolidates any offices
created by it, the person performing the duties of the offices so
consolidated shall not be entitled on account thereof to receive any salary
or compensation which he or she would not have been entitled to receive if
such consolidation had not taken place.



(1999 Code, § 31.001)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Oath, bond, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-25 and 3.1-10-30



§ 31.002  BONDS.



   (A)   Amount. Bonds of city officers required under § 3.1-10-30 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-30) shall be
executed, as required by state statute.



   (B)   Receipt of bonds. The Finance Director is authorized and
directed to obtain a public employee’s faithful performance blanket
position bond indemnifying the city against any loss caused to the city
through the failure of any officer or employee to faithfully perform his or
her duties; provided, however, that, this section shall not apply to the City
Clerk, City Treasurer and Finance Director.



   (C)   Premium payment by city. The cost of obtaining bonds for
officers or employees payable to the city shall be paid by the city.



   (D)   Surety.



      (1)   The City Council shall not receive or approve any bond
or security whereon the name of the City Council, any one of the Aldermen or
any elected or appointed officers of the city appears as bondsman or security.



      (2)   If, by mistake, a bond containing the name of any such
officer is approved by the City Council, or if any bondsman, after becoming
such, is elected or appointed to any city office, this section shall not act
as a release of any such obligation incurred.



(1999 Code, § 31.002)  (Ord. 513, passed 6-7-1965; Ord. 1508, passed
9-16-1991; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Cost of official bond, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 270, § 1



§ 31.003  COMPENSATION.



   No fee, salary or compensation of any municipal officer who is elected
or appointed for a definite term of office shall be increased or diminished
during such term.



(1999 Code, § 31.003)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Compensation of officers, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-5



§ 31.004  MUNICIPAL YEAR; EFFECT ON APPOINTMENTS.



   The municipal year shall commence on May 1 and shall end on the
following April 30. No appointments shall be made during the last month of
the municipal year in the year of a mayoral election.



(1999 Code, § 31.004)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)




MAYOR




§ 31.015  ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until
his or her successor is elected and qualified.



(1999 Code, § 31.015)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Term of office of mayor, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-10



§ 31.016  VACANCY.



   Whenever a vacancy in the office of Mayor occurs during his or her
term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next
election of Aldermen and during the period from the time that the vacancy
occurs and until a Mayor is elected, as provided in this chapter, and has
qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the election of an Acting Mayor from
the membership of the Council by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 31.016)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Vacancy in office of mayor, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50



§ 31.017  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall receive an annual compensation as
determined by the City Council from time to time.



      (2)   This compensation shall be established pursuant to the
provisions of state law.



   (B)   The Mayor shall have the right to purchase, at his or her
cost, health/medical insurance coverage for the Mayor and his or her family
through the city’s health/medical plan at the same rates as the city pays
into the plan if the Mayor works at least 30 hours per week.



   (C)   Each Mayor shall receive an annual compensation of $24,000
effective 5-1-2001.



(1999 Code, § 31.017)  (Ord. 728, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 968, passed
1-5-1981; Ord. 1340, passed 1-7-1988; Ord. 1587, passed 1-19-1993; Ord. 3022,
passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 3023, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor’s compensation established by city council, see ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 3.1-50-5



§ 31.018  MAYOR PRO TEM.



   (A)   During a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor which
incapacitates him or her from the performance of his or her duties, but does
not create a vacancy in the office, the City Council shall elect one of its
members to act as Mayor pro tem.



   (B)   The Mayor pro tem, during this absence or disability, shall
perform his or her duties and possess all the rights and powers of the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 31.018)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor pro tern, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35



§ 31.019  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, shall
preside over the meetings of the Council and shall perform such duties as may
be required of the Mayor by statute or law. The Mayor shall take care that
the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed and shall have supervision
over all of the executive officers and employees of the city and shall have
the power and authority to inspect all books and records pertaining to city
affairs and kept by any officer or employee of the city at any reasonable
time.



(1999 Code, § 31.019)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of mayor, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-5 through 3.1-35-30



§ 31.020  APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS; DESIGNATION OF DUTIES.



   (A)   Appointment of officers.



      (1)   At the first annual meeting in May, the Mayor shall
appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, all officers
of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for.



      (2)   Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be
filled in the same manner. The Mayor shall issue a commission or certificate
of appointment to all persons appointed to office in the municipality.



   (B)   Removal of appointees. The Mayor may remove any officer
appointed by him or her under this code on any formal charge, whenever the
Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the city demand removal in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10 as amended.



   (C)   Designation of officers’ duties. Whenever there is a dispute
as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city,
this dispute shall be settled by the Mayor, after consultation with the City
Attorney; and the Mayor shall have the power to delegate any appointive
officer to any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has
been directed to perform that duty.



(1999 Code, § 31.020)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Appointment of officers, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5



§ 31.021  FORMAL OCCASIONS.



   The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on formal occasions
and receptions, but, in his or her absence or inability to attend any such
function, the Mayor shall select any other city officer to so act.



(1999 Code, § 31.021)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.022  RELEASE OF PRISONERS.



   The Mayor may release any person imprisoned for violation of any city
code, and shall report the release, with reasons therefor, to the Aldermen at
the first session of City Council thereafter.



(1999 Code, § 31.022)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Release of prisoners, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-15



§ 31.023  BUSINESS LICENSE COMMISSIONER DUTIES.



   The Mayor is hereby designated as License Commissioner to issue and
revoke any and all business licenses as prescribed by law.



(1999 Code, § 31.023)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.024  LIQUOR COMMISSIONER DUTIES.



   The Mayor is hereby designated as Liquor Commissioner with all the
powers to license and/or revoke any city liquor license, according to state
and city laws.



(1999 Code, § 31.024)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Local liquor control commission, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 4-2 et
seq.



§ 31.025  AUTHORITY TO EXAMINE RECORDS.



   The Mayor, at all times, may examine and inspect the books, records and
papers of any agency, employee or officer of the city.



(1999 Code, § 31.025)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Examination of records, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-20



§ 31.026  DECIDING VOTE.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council.
The Mayor shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion, except:



      (1)   Where the vote of the Aldermen has resulted in a tie;



      (2)   Where one-half of the Aldermen elected have voted in
favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie; or



      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate
authorities is required by the state statutes to adopt an ordinance,
resolution or motion.



   (B)   In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall deprive an Acting Mayor or Mayor
pro tem from voting in his or her capacity as Alderman, but he or she shall
not be entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting Mayor or
Mayor pro tem.



(1999 Code, § 31.026)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Deciding vote by mayor, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-30




CITY CLERK




§ 31.040  ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The City Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four-year term and
until his or her successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute.



(1999 Code, § 31.040)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.041  VACANCY.



   In case the office of City Clerk shall become vacant for any reason,
the Mayor and Council shall appoint a successor as provided by statute.



(1999 Code, § 31.041)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.042  BOND.



   Before entering upon his or her duties of office, the City Clerk shall
execute a bond in such amount as is provided by § 31.002 of this chapter,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties.



(1999 Code, § 31.042)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.043  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall receive an annual compensation as
determined by the City Council from time to time. This compensation shall be
established pursuant to the provisions of state law.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall receive an annual compensation of
$15,000, effective 5-1-2001.



(1999 Code, § 31.043)  (Ord. 969, passed 1-5-1981; Ord. 1340, passed
11-7-1988; Ord. 1587, passed 1-19-1993; Ord. 3022, passed 10-16-2000; Ord.
3023, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.044  DEPUTY CLERK.



   (A)   Creation of office. There is hereby created the office of
Deputy Clerk. The Deputy Clerk shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the Clerk and
affix the seal of the city thereto whenever required.



   (B)   Signature. When signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall
sign the name of the City Clerk, followed by the word “By” and the Deputy
Clerk’s own name and the words “Deputy Clerk”.



   (C)   Time of authority. The powers and duties herein described
shall be exercised by such Deputy Clerk only in the absence of the City Clerk
from his or her office in the City Hall, and only when either written
direction has been given by the City Clerk to exercise such power, or the
City Council has determined by resolution that the City Clerk is temporarily
or permanently incapacitated to perform such function.



   (D)   Additional authority. Such Deputy Clerk shall have the
authority and power herein described, and such further power and authority as
may be provided by statute.



(1999 Code, § 31.044)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Powers of deputy city clerk, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-95



§ 31.045  COUNCIL MINUTES; ORDINANCES; BONDS.



   The City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council and shall
keep in a suitable book to be styled “City Council Minutes” a full and
faithful record of its proceedings. The City Clerk shall record and properly
index in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances passed by the City
Council, and at the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, the
City Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage, and when
published and the date of publication of such ordinance. The City Clerk shall
also record in proper books for that purpose all official bonds, the note
upon each bond so recorded, when the same was entered of record and the book
and pages where recorded.



(1999 Code, § 31.045)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of city clerk, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90



§ 31.046  DELIVERY OF DOCUMENTS.



   The City Clerk shall deliver to the several committees of the City
Council and to the officers of the city all petitions, communications,
reports and resolutions, orders, claims and other papers referred to those
committees or officers by the Council, on demand therefor. The Clerk shall
without delay deliver to the Mayor all ordinances or resolutions, orders, and
claims in the Clerk’s charge which may be required to be approved or
otherwise acted upon by the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 31.046)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of city clerk, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90



§ 31.047  DOCUMENT PREPARATION; ATTESTATION.



   The City Clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and
other official documents required to be issued by the Clerk under this code,
and shall attest the same with the corporate seal, and the Clerk shall in
like manner attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed
by the city.



(1999 Code, § 31.047)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.048  LICENSES.



   The City Clerk shall report to the City Council at its regular meetings
each month, and more often if the Council so requires, the data contained in
the Clerk’s license register with respect to licenses issued during the
previous month. In all cases where the city requires a license to be obtained
for the purpose of engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation, the
licensee is required to obtain from the City Clerk such plates, tags or
stickers free to the person paying the license fee.



(1999 Code, § 31.048)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.049  CITY SEAL.



   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal and shall affix its
impression on documents whenever this is required.



(1999 Code, § 31.051)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Cross-reference:



   Corporate seal, see § 10.20



§ 31.050  RECORD MAINTENANCE; TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.



   The City Clerk shall carefully preserve in his or her office all books,
records, papers, maps and effects of every detail and description belonging
to the city or pertaining to the Clerk’s office, and not in actual use and
possession of other city officers, and upon the expiration of the Clerk’s
official term, the Clerk shall deliver all such books, records, papers and
effects to his or her successor in office.



(1999 Code, § 31.052)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.051  OTHER DUTIES.



   In addition to the foregoing duties, the Clerk shall perform all such
other duties pertaining to his or her office as are or may be imposed upon
the Clerk by law or resolution or ordinance of the City Council. The Clerk
shall supervise all employees of the Clerk’s office as may be designated by
the Council.



(1999 Code, § 31.053)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)




CITY TREASURER




§ 31.065  ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The City Treasurer shall be elected every four years at the same
election the Mayor is elected.



(1999 Code, § 31.065)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.066  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall receive an annual compensation as
determined by the City Council from time to time. This compensation shall be
established pursuant to the provisions of state law.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall receive an annual compensation of $11,000,
effective 5-1-2001.



(1999 Code, § 31.066)  (Ord. 1340, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 1587, passed
1-19-1993; Ord. 3022, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 3023, passed 10-16-2000; Ord.
3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.067  PROTECTION OF FUNDS.



   The City Treasurer shall keep all moneys in his or her hands belonging
to the city separate and distinct from the Treasurer’s own money, and the
Treasurer shall not use either directly or indirectly the city moneys or
warrants in his or her custody and keeping for his or her own use and
benefit, or that of any other person. Any violation of this section shall be
subject to removal of the Treasurer from office by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 31.070)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Personal use of funds, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-55



§ 31.068  REPORTS TO COUNCIL.



   The City Treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities quarterly
a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the city as
shown by the Treasurer’s books up to the time of the report.



(1999 Code, § 31.072)  (Ord. 1635, passed 8-16-1993; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Treasurer’s report account of receipts and disbursements, see ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5 § 3.1-35-60



§ 31.069  INVESTMENT POLICY.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this investment policy (this
“policy”) is to formalize the framework for the investment activities of
the City of O'Fallon, Illinois (the “city”). This policy applies to all
of the city's financial assets and is intended to be broad enough to allow
the city to function properly within the parameters of responsibility and
authority, while adequately safeguarding such assets. All transactions
involving the city's financial assets, and related activity, shall be
administered and conducted in accordance with this policy.



   (B)   Responsibility.



      (1)   Governing body. The City Council shall retain ultimate
fiduciary responsibility. The City Council shall receive quarterly reports at
the Finance and Administration Committee meeting and shall approve changes to
the investment policy as recommended by the Investment Committee.



      (2)   Investment Officer. Authority to manage the investment
program is granted to the Director of Finance in consultation with the
Investment Committee hereinafter referred to as “Investment Officer” as
designated by ILCS Ch. 30, Act 235, § 2.5(a)(7). Management responsibility
for the operation of the investment program is hereby delegated to the
Director of Finance.



   (C)   Rules and procedures.



      (1)   Scope.



         (a)   This policy applies to the investment activities
of the city with regard to the financial assets of all funds, with the
following exceptions:



            1.   The City of O'Fallon Police Pension Fund is
governed by the O'Fallon Police Pension Board and has a separate investment
policy.



            2.   The City of O'Fallon Fire Pension Fund is
governed by the O'Fallon Fire Pension Board and has a separate investment
policy.



            3.   The City of O'Fallon Library Fund is governed
by the Library Board who make their own investment decisions.



            4.   Funds set aside to decrease city debt in
conjunction with a refunding agreement shall be invested in accordance with
appropriate bond documents and not necessarily in compliance with this
policy. Should bond covenants be more restrictive than this policy, funds
shall be invested in full compliance with those restrictions.



         (b)   The following funds are accounted for in the
city's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (Audit) and are covered under
this policy:



            1.   General Fund.



            2.   Special Revenue Funds.



            3.   Debt Service Funds.



            4.   Capital Project Funds.



            5.    Enterprise/Proprietary Funds.



            6.   Any new fund created, unless specifically
exempted above.



         (c)   Except for cash and investments in certain
restricted and special funds, the city commingles its cash and investments to
maximize investment earnings and to increase efficiencies with regard to
pricing, safekeeping, and administration. Investment income will be allocated
to the various funds based on their respective participation and in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States
of America (United States).



      (2)   General objectives. The primary objectives
(“objectives”), in order of priority, of all investment activities
involving the financial assets of the city shall be:



         (a)   Safety. Safety shall be the foremost objective of
this policy and refers to the preservation of capital and protection of
investment principal. City investments shall be undertaken in a manner that
seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the city's overall portfolio
by mitigating credit and interest rate risk.



            1.   Credit risk. Credit risk is the risk that an
issuer of a debt security will not pay its par value upon maturity. The goal
shall be to minimize credit risk by:



               (I)    Limiting investments to the types of
securities identified in division (C)(6) below; and



               (II)    Diversifying the portfolio in
accordance with division (C)(8) below, so that potential losses on individual
securities will be minimized. Diversification reduces the risk that potential
losses on individual securities might exceed the income generated from the
remainder of the portfolio.



            2.   Interest rate risk. Interest rate risk is the
risk that changes in interest rates will adversely affect the fair value of
an investment. The goal shall be to minimize interest rate risk by:



               (I)    Structuring the portfolio so that
securities mature to meet cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby
avoiding the need to sell securities on the open market prior to maturity; and



               (II)    Investing operating funds primarily
in shorter-term securities, money markets, or similar investment pools.



         (b)   Liquidity. The portfolio shall maintain sufficient
liquidity to enable the city to meet all operating requirements and expected
liabilities which may be reasonably anticipated in any city fund. This is
accomplished by structuring the portfolio so that securities or other
allowable investments mature concurrent with cash needs to meet anticipated
demands. Furthermore, since all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated,
the portfolio should provide adequate liquidity to meet unexpected cash
needs. Liquidity can be achieved utilizing securities with active secondary
markets, money market accounts and/or savings deposit accounts offering daily
liquidity, or other liquid options acceptable under state statute.



         (c)   Return on investments. The portfolio shall be
designed to obtain a reasonable return, which for the purposes of this policy
means the portfolio should obtain a market-average rate of return in
accordance with division (C)(11) below, taking into account the city's
investment risk constraints and cash flow needs of the city's funds.



      (3)   Standards of care.



         (a)   Prudence. The standard of prudence to be used by
investment officials shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be
applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. Investments and
deposits of public funds shall be made with judgment and care under the
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion, and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the probable income to be derived. City officers and
employees acting in accordance with this policy, and any other written
procedures, and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal
liability for an individual security's credit risk or market changes,
provided that officers and employees report deviations from expectations in a
timely fashion and take appropriate action to control adverse developments.



         (b)   Maintaining the public trust. All participants in
the investment process shall seek to act responsibly as custodians of the
public trust and shall avoid any transaction that might impair public
confidence in the city.



         (c)   Ethics and conflicts of interest. Officers and
employees of the city who are involved in the investment process shall
refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with proper
execution and management of the investment program, or which could impair
their ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees and
investment officials shall disclose to the City Council any material
interests in financial institutions with which they conduct business. They
shall further disclose any material personal financial or investment
positions that could be related to the performance of the portfolio.
Employees and officers shall subordinate their personal investment
transactions to those of the city, particularly with regard to the timing of
purchases and sales.



      (4)   Authorized financial institutions.



         (a)   Financial institutions may include depositories,
investment advisors, broker/dealers, and local government investment pools as
authorized in this policy. Financial institutions who desire to become
qualified for transactions must provide certification of having read and
understood this policy, agree to comply with this policy, and ensure all
investments proposed for purchase shall conform to this policy and applicable
state statutes. Selection of financial institutions authorized to engage in
transactions with the city shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
Financial institutions shall be selected based on financial condition, proper
registration, level of service, experience with Illinois municipalities, and
competitive pricing. Whenever possible, the city shall maintain operating and
investment accounts in financial institutions within the city.



         (b)   All depositories shall be insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or the National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA) and may consist of banks, savings and loan
associations, and credit unions. All financial institutions who desire to
become designated depositories must supply the following (as appropriate):



            1.   Audited financial statements.



            2.   Proof of state registration.



            3.   Evidence of adequate insurance coverage.



         (c)   All investment advisors shall be registered under
the Investment Advisors Act of 1940. All financial institutions who desire to
become designated investment advisors must supply the following (as
appropriate):



            1.   Audited financial statements.



            2.   Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Form
ADV - Parts 1 and 2.



            3.   Proof of state or SEC registration as
appropriate.



            4.   Evidence of adequate insurance coverage.



         (d)   All broker/dealers shall be insured by the
Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC). All financial institutions
who desire to become designated broker/dealers must supply the following (as
appropriate):



            1.   Audited financial statements.



            2.   Proof of Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) certification.



            3.   Proof of state registration.



            4.   Evidence of adequate insurance coverage.



         (e)   A periodic review of the financial condition and
registration of all designated financial institutions shall be conducted by
the Director of Finance, or his or her designee.



         (f)   Any financial institution selected by the city may
be requested to provide cash management services, including but not limited
to: checking accounts, wire transfers, purchase and sale of investment
securities and safekeeping services. Fees for banking services shall be
mutually agreed to by an authorized representative of the financial
institution and the Director of Finance of the city.



      (5)   Safekeeping and custody. All security transactions,
including collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the city
shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis. Securities shall
be held by a third-party custodian designated by the Director of Finance and
evidenced by safekeeping receipts.



      (6)   Authorized investments. The city is empowered by statute
to invest in the following:



         (a)   Bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness,
treasury bills or other securities now or hereafter issued, which are
guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States as to principal
and interest;



         (b)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or other similar
obligations of the United States, its agencies, and its instrumentalities;



         (c)   Interest-bearing savings accounts,
interest-bearing certificates of deposit or interest-bearing time deposits or
any other investments constituting direct obligations of any bank as defined
by the Illinois Banking Act; provided, however, that such investments may be
made only in banks which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation;



         (d)   Short term obligations of corporations organized
in the United States with assets exceeding $500,000,000 if:



            1.   Such obligations are rated at the time of
purchase at one of the three highest classifications established by at least
two standard rating services and which mature up to three years from the date
of purchase,



            2.   Such purchases do not exceed 10% of the
corporation's outstanding obligations, and



            3.   No more than one-third of the city's funds
may be invested in short term obligations of corporations;



         (e)   Money market mutual funds registered under the
Investment Company Act of 1940, provided that the portfolio of any such money
market mutual fund is limited to:



            1.   Bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness,
treasury bills or other securities now or hereafter issued, which are
guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States as to principal
and interest,



            2.   Bonds, notes, debentures, or other similar
obligations of the United States, or its agencies, and its instrumentalities,
or



            3.   Agreements to repurchase such obligations;



         (f)   Interest-bearing bonds of any county, township,
city, village, incorporated town, municipal corporation, or school district,
of the State of Illinois, of any other state, or of any political subdivision
or agency of the State of Illinois or of any other state. The bonds shall be
registered in the name of the municipality or held under a custodial
agreement at a bank. The bonds shall be rated at the time of purchase within
the four highest general classifications established by a rating service of
nationally recognized expertise in rating bonds of states and their political
subdivisions;



         (g)   Short term discount obligations of the Federal
National Mortgage Association;



         (h)   Shares or other forms of securities legally
issuable by state or federal savings banks or savings and loan associations
which are insured by the FDIC;



         (i)   Dividend-bearing share accounts, share certificate
accounts or class of share accounts of a credit union chartered under the
laws of the State of Illinois or the laws of the United States; provided,
however, the principal office of any such credit union must be located within
the State of Illinois whose accounts of which are insured by applicable law;



         (j)   A Public Treasurers' Investment Pool created under
Section 17 of the State Treasurer Act (Illinois Funds);



         (k)   Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund (IMET); and



         (l)   Any other investment permitted by Illinois statute.



      (7)   Collateralization.



         (a)   The city shall require that deposits in excess of
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA), and Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC)
insurable limits in a single financial institution and investments not
guaranteed by the United States or one of its agencies be secured by some
form of collateral. To fulfill this requirement, every pledge of collateral
must be documented by an approved written security and pledge agreement,
executed by the financial institution contemporaneously with the acquisition
of the pledged collateral by the financial institution.



         (b)   To the extent that there are funds in excess of
FDIC, NCUA, and/or SIPC insurance protection, eligible collateral instruments
are as follows:



            1.   Bonds, notes, or other securities
constituting direct and general obligations of the United States;



            2.   Bonds, notes, or other securities
constituting the direct and general obligation of any agency or
instrumentality of the United States, the interest and principal of which is
unconditionally guaranteed by the United States;



            3.   Bonds, notes, or other securities or evidence
of indebtedness constituting the obligation of a U.S. agency or
instrumentality;



            4.   Direct and general obligation bonds of the
State of Illinois or of any other state of the United States; provided,
however, the bonds shall be rated at the time of purchase within the four
highest general classifications established by a rating service of nationally
recognized expertise in rating bonds of states and their political
subdivisions;



            5.   Revenue bonds of the State of Illinois or any
authority, board, commission, or similar agency thereof; provided, however,
the bonds shall be rated at the time of purchase within the four highest
general classifications established by a rating service of nationally
recognized expertise in rating bonds of states and their political
subdivisions;



            6.   Direct and general obligation bonds of any
city, town, county, school district, or other taxing body of any state, the
debt service of which is payable from general ad valorem taxes; provided,
however, the bonds shall be rated at the time of purchase within the four
highest general classifications established by a rating service of nationally
recognized expertise in rating bonds of states and their political
subdivisions; and



            7.   Revenue bonds of any city, town, county, or
school district of the State of Illinois; provided, however, the bonds shall
be rated at the time of purchase within the four highest general
classifications established by a rating service of nationally recognized
expertise in rating bonds of states and their political subdivisions.



         (c)   The amount of collateral provided shall not be
less than 110% of the market value of the net amount of public funds secured.
The ratio of fair market value of collateral to the amount of funds secured
shall be reviewed monthly, and additional collateral shall be requested when
the ratio declines below the level required and collateral shall be released
if the fair market value exceeds the required level.



         (d)   Third party safekeeping shall be required for all
collateral, which may be held at the following locations:



            1.   A Federal Reserve Bank or its branch office;
or



            2.   By an independent third party with whom the
city has a current custodial agreement, unless physical securities are
involved.



         (e)   Safekeeping shall be documented by written
agreement which may take the form of a safekeeping agreement, trust
agreement, escrow agreement, or custody agreement. A clearly marked evidence
of ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be supplied to the city. Substitution
or exchange of securities held in safekeeping shall not be done without prior
written notice of the city at least ten  days prior to any proposed
substitutions and provided that the market value of the replacement
securities are equal or greater than the market value of the securities being
replaced. The city must pre-approve all substitution and exchanges of
securities.



      (8)   Diversification.



         (a)   It is the policy of the city to diversify its
portfolio. Investments shall be diversified to eliminate the risk of loss and
balance the effect of interest rate changes on different types of securities.
Investment shall be diversified by:



            1.   Limiting investments to avoid
over-concentration in securities from a specific issuer;



            2.   Investing in securities with varying
maturities;



            3.   Investing a portion of the portfolio in
readily available funds such as bank cash management accounts, money market
funds, Illinois Funds, or IMET Convenience Fund to ensure liquidity is
maintained to meet ongoing obligations.



         (b)   With the exception of U.S. Treasury and U.S.
agency securities, as well as Illinois Investment Pools no more than 50% of
the city's total investment portfolio shall be invested in a single security
type and no more than 50% of the city's total investment portfolio shall be
invested with a single financial institution. It is understood this goal is
for investment planning purposes and may not be achieved or maintained when
adherence to the 50% goal would create a cost (penalty) by reallocating funds
within a portfolio solely to comply with the 50% goal.



      (9)   Maximum maturities. To the extent possible, the city
shall attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow
requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the city shall not
directly invest in securities maturing more than three years from the date of
purchase. However, reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding
three  years if the maturities of such investments are made to coincide as
nearly as practicable with the expected use of the funds.



      (10)   Internal controls. The Director of Finance shall
establish a system of internal controls, which shall be documented in
writing. The controls shall be designed to prevent the loss of public funds
arising from fraud, employee error, and misrepresentation by third parties,
unanticipated changes in financial markets, or imprudent action by officers
and employees of the city.



      (11)   Performance standards. The portfolio will be managed in
accordance with the parameters specified within this policy. The portfolio
should obtain a market average rate of return during budgetary and economic
cycles, taking into account the city's investment risk constraints and cash
flow needs. The city's investment strategy is passive, which means securities
are intended to be held to maturity. Given this strategy, the investment
portfolio of the city shall be designed with the general objective of
regularly exceeding the average return of the Illinois Funds, money market
daily rate. The investment program shall seek to augment returns above this
level, consistent with risk limitations identified herein and prudent
investment principles.



      (12)   Reporting.



         (a)   Quarterly. The Director of Finance shall submit a
cash and investment report to the Finance Committee which lists the
individual components of the portfolio by maturity date, valuation by fund,
and rate of return. In addition, the Director of Finance shall ensure that
the portfolio is reviewed to determine its general performance and
effectiveness in meeting the objectives.



         (b)   Annually. The Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report (Audit) of the city shall include all investment information and
disclosures required by accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States as promulgated by the Government Accounting Standards Board.



      (13)   Amendment of policy.



         (a)   The Investment Committee shall review this policy
from time to time and shall submit any modifications thereto to the Council
for approval.



         (b)   In the event that any state or federal legislation
or regulation should further restrict instruments, institutions or procedures
authorized by this policy, such restrictions shall be deemed to be
immediately incorporated in this policy. If new legislation or regulation
should liberalize the permitted instruments, institutions or procedures, such
changes shall be available and included in this policy only after written
notification to the Council and their subsequent approval of said changes.



   (D)   Legislation and documentation.



      (1)   The city's investment program shall comply at all times
with the Illinois Public Funds Investment Act (ILCS Ch. 30, Act 235, §§ 1
et seq.) and other state laws governing the investment of public funds, as
amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between this policy
and the Illinois Public Funds Investment Act and other state laws, the
provisions of the Illinois Public Funds Investment Act and other state laws
shall control.



      (2)   The Director of Finance shall maintain a list of all
authorized financial institutions and dealers/brokers and is hereby
authorized to deposit city monies, in accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
3.1-35-50. The Director of Finance shall review this list from time to time
and shall submit any modifications made to this list to the Investment
Committee. The Director of Finance shall be discharged from responsibility
for all funds or money the Director of Finance deposits in a designated
financial institution while the funds and money are so deposited.



   (E)   Investment Committee.



      (1)   An Investment Committee shall be formed consisting of
the City Treasurer, Director of Finance, City Administrator, Chairman of the
Finance and Administration Committee and the Mayor. This Committee shall meet
as needed but no less than semi-annually to determine general strategies and
monitor results. The Investment Committee shall include in its deliberations
such topics as: economic outlook, portfolio diversification, maturity
structure, potential risks to funds, authorized depositories, brokers and
dealers and target rate of return on the investment portfolio as well as
reviewing RFPs submitted. After its deliberations, the Investment Committee
shall make investment decisions.



      (2)   Investment Committee members shall refrain from personal
business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment
program or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions Committee members shall disclose to the Mayor any material
financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business within
this jurisdiction. They shall further disclose any personal financial
investment positions that could be related to the performance of the city's
portfolio. Committee members shall subordinate their personal investment
transactions to those of the City , particularly with regard to the time of
purchases and sales.



   (F)   Competitive bidding. The Investment Committee shall make
determination of the bidding process required for obtaining competitive bids.
The Investment Committee, in compliance with the purchasing policy, may
require a formal RFP process or an informal process, but in any event, no
less than three bids/quotes will be obtained from the Authorized Financial
Institution/Broker/Dealer list. The investment will be awarded to the highest
bidder as determined by the net return to the city. In the event of tied bids
or highest bids totaling more than the face value to be invested, awards of
investment will be made first to bidders with offices in the city and then
pro rata among other highest bidders. The Director of Finance shall maintain
a record of all bids/quotes received and shall make available to the
Investment Committee a list showing the bidders, the bids/quotes received,
and amount awarded.



(1999 Code, § 31.073)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 4058, passed
10-1-2018)




LEGAL DEPARTMENT




§ 31.080  CREATED.



   There is hereby created the Legal Department, which shall consist of
the office of City Attorney and such Special Counsel as may be appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by a majority of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 31.080)  (Ord. 1952, passed 9-29-1997; Ord. 3113, passed
7-1-2002; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.081  FUNCTION.



   It shall be the function of the Legal Department to prosecute or defend
any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a
party or in which it may be interested, to provide legal advice and
consultation to all elected and appointed city officials and to prosecute all
alleged violations of the traffic ordinances of the city and such other
violations of the codes and ordinances of the city as the City Council may
authorize. The Legal Department shall, in addition to the foregoing, assist
in the preparation and prepare such other or additional matters as are set
forth herein.



(1999 Code, § 31.081)  (Ord. 1952, passed 9-29-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.082  CITY ATTORNEY AND SPECIAL COUNSEL.



   (A)   Appointment; term of office.



      (1)   The offices of City Attorney and Special Counsel shall
be filled by appointment made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, by persons competent to carry out the duties of said offices. Such
appointments may be for a term of four years, but shall not exceed the term
of the Mayor.



      (2)   Any person holding said office(s) shall continue until a
successor is appointed and confirmed.



   (B)   Removal. The City Attorney and Special Counsel may be removed
from office by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.



   (C)   Additional counsel. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, may retain additional special counsel to advise or
represent the city from time to time on such matters as may be designated by
the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 31.082)  (Ord. 1952, passed 9-29-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.083  COMPENSATION; BILLING.



   Members of the Legal Department shall be compensated either on an
annual-retainer basis and/or on a per-hour-of-work basis, as is mutually
agreed to at the time of appointment or as later agreed to by the member and
the Mayor. Bills shall be identified by department and shall be charged
against the corresponding department’s budget unless otherwise designated
by the Mayor and City Council.



(1999 Code, § 31.083)  (Ord. 1952, passed 9-29-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.084  DUTIES.



   Allocation of work between the City Attorney and the Special Counsel
shall be at the direction of the Mayor and shall include, but not be limited
to, the following.



   (A)   Generally. The City Attorney or Special Counsel shall
prosecute or defend such suits or actions at law or in equity to which the
city may be a party or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought
against or by any officer of the city on behalf of the city or in the
capacity of such person as an officer of the city, prosecute all violations
of traffic ordinances of the city and such other violations of city
ordinances as the Mayor may deem necessary and proper. Nothing contained in
this section shall be deemed to preclude the defense of actions seeking to
assess a monetary liability against the city by counsel selected and retained
by the insurance carrier of the city or to request that the City Attorney or
Special Counsel prosecute or defend any particular suit or action at law or
in equity referred to in this section.



   (B)   Providing advice. The Legal Department shall provide legal
advice to the city, the Mayor and/or City Council whenever requested to do
so. Upon request by the Mayor, any opinions shall be reduced to writing.



   (C)   Pursuit of enforcement of judgments and the like. It shall be
the duty of the Legal Department to see to the full enforcement of all
judgments or decrees entered in favor of the city and all similar
interlocutory orders.



   (D)   Special assessment and condemnation proceedings. It shall be
the duty of the Legal Department to see to the completion of all special
assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.



   (E)   Legal advice and the like. It shall be the duty of the Legal
Department to render advice on legal questions affecting the city and to
prepare and/or review ordinances, resolutions and prepare legal instruments
whenever requested and to provide such other legal counsel and services as
the Mayor or Council may from time to time specify on request.



   (F)   Approval of legislation and contracts as to legal form. The
Legal Department shall review all contracts, ordinances and resolutions as to
legal form prior to their passage and approval upon request of the Mayor.



   (G)   Prosecution of violations. It shall be the duty of the Legal
Department to prosecute all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city
and such other violations of the codes and ordinances of the city as the
Mayor may authorize or direct.



(1999 Code, § 31.084)  (Ord. 1952, passed 9-29-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.085  SURETY BOND REVIEW.



   All bonds required by law or ordinance to be submitted to and approved
by the City Council shall first be submitted to the Legal Department who
shall examine said bonds. If it is determined that the bonds are properly
drawn and are legal and binding obligations, the City Attorney shall issue a
legal opinion stating that the bonds are properly drawn, legal and binding;
if they are not, the City Attorney shall state the reasons for any
deficiencies.



(1999 Code, § 31.085)  (Ord. 1952, passed 9-29-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.086  POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   The Mayor may from time to time establish such policies and procedures
for use of the Legal Department by officials and employees of the city.



(1999 Code, § 31.086)  (Ord. 1952, passed 9-29-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)




DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS




§ 31.100  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the office of Director of Public Works. The
Director of Public Works shall report to the City Administrator and shall be
responsible to the Mayor and City Council for high level administrative,
technical and professional work in directing and supervising the
administration of the Public Works Department.



(1999 Code, § 31.095)  (Ord. 1024, passed 8-2-1982; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.101  DUTIES.



   The Director of Public Works shall have the following duties and
responsibilities.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall advise the Council and city
officials on all public works matters referred to him or her, and shall
perform such duties as are provided by law or code, and in addition thereto,
such other duties as from time to time may be imposed upon the Director of
Public Works by the Council or by the City Administrator. The Director of
Public Works shall, from time to time as required by the Council, make
reports regarding public infrastructure improvements, repairs of streets,
bridges, sidewalks, the water distribution system, the wastewater collection
system, wastewater treatment plant, storm water collection system, public
buildings or land, or such other work as the Council may request, and shall
make such suggestions to the City Council regarding the same as shall in his
or her judgment seem best and proper.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall be the officer responsible
for the overall direction and operation of the Public Works Department. In
administering these departments the Director of Public Works shall be
responsible for planning and implementing projects, developing budgets and
providing supervision of all assigned personnel and contractors providing
public works services to the city.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for
inspection and installation of public infrastructure in all newly platted
subdivisions within the city, and he or she shall also be responsible for the
inspection of all contract public works jobs between the city and any
contractors.



   (D)   The Director of Public Works shall give prior approval of all
purchases for the groups within his or her span of supervision.



   (E)   The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for
inventory control and property records for the groups within his or her span
of supervision.



   (F)   The Director of Public Works shall prepare all estimates,
resolutions and appropriations for expenditures of motor fuel tax funds, and
shall file the same, as required, with the State Highway Department.



   (G)   The Director of Public Works shall attend all City Council
meetings and make such reports as may be required of him or her by the City
Council.



   (H)   The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for
maintenance of such records as may from time to time be required by the City
Council.



   (I)   The Director of Public Works shall assist in the
administration of all city-owned buildings and shall make recommendations
when requested on repairs and improvements.



   (J)   The Director of Public Works shall keep accurate maps, plats
and records of all public works, lands or property owned by the city.



   (K)   The Director of Public Works shall perform such other duties
as may be required by the Mayor, City Council and the City Administrator not
inconsistent with the provisions of this code, other ordinances of the city
or laws of the state.



   (L)   A City Engineer will be designated if the Director of Public
Works does not have or is not able to obtain a state professional engineering
license. In such an instance, the City Engineer shall be under the direction
and supervision of the Director of Public Works. The City Engineer shall have
(or obtain within 90 days of hire) and maintain a state professional
engineering license in good standing during his or her period of employment
with the city.



(1999 Code, § 31.097)  (Ord. 1024, passed 8-2-1982; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)




CITY ADMINISTRATOR




§ 31.115  OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT, TERM AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Office of City Administrator. The
City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The City Administrator shall be chosen on the
basis of executive, administrative and educational qualifications with
special emphasis on the actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted
practice with respect to the office hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall have the minimum of a four-year
college degree, with major course work or experience in political science,
public administration, financial and personnel management and related fields.
Work experience shall include a minimum of three years of progressively
responsible experience in local government.



   (C)   To create a feeling of greater personal responsibility and to
exhibit to the citizenry a sense of concern for the welfare of the city, the
City Administrator shall reside in the city during his or her tenure as the
City Administrator. Neither the Mayor nor any member of the City Council
shall receive such appointment during their term of office.



(1999 Code, § 31.110)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.116  COMPENSATION.



   The Mayor may with subsequent ratification by the City Council, enter
into an employment contract which specifies in writing the level of
compensation of the City Administrator, fringe benefits, including the level
of support for the City Administrator’s continuing professional education,
agreements for separation pay upon termination of employment, other
appropriate agreements describing the working relationship between the City
Administrator and the elected officials and the Mayor and Council’s
performance expectations for the City Administrator. This agreement may be
reviewed and revised by mutual agreement at periodic intervals.



(1999 Code, § 31.111)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.117  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall be chief administrative officer
of the city. All departments shall report to the City Administrator. The City
Administrator shall be responsible to the Mayor for the proper administration
of all affairs of the city.



   (B)   In discharging this responsibility, the City Administrator
shall, as directed by the Mayor:



      (1)   Supervise and coordinate the administrative functions of
all departments, offices and agencies of the city;



      (2)   Recommend hiring, discipline and removal of all city
employees;



      (3)   Attend all City Council meetings and participate, as
required, in all discussions;



      (4)   Provide for the enforcement of such laws and ordinances
within the city subject to the authority and direction of the Director of
Public Safety;



      (5)   Coordinate activities between the departments to ensure
efficient utilization of resources and maximize interdepartmental
coordination;



      (6)   Prepare the city’s annual budget with assistance from
the Finance Department;



      (7)   Make such reports to the Mayor and City Council as may
be required from time to time concerning the operations of the city
departments and offices;



      (8)   Propose and recommend to the Mayor such personnel rules
and regulations as may be useful for management of policies, handbooks,
manuals and collective bargaining agreements;



      (9)   Prepare such administrative reports and other reports of
the activities of the city as may be required at the conclusion of the fiscal
year and periodically throughout the year;



      (10)   Research and collect information and prepare
applications for all grants and loans from governmental or private entities
for city programs, operations and services;



      (11)   Participate to the extent requested in the collective
bargaining processes of the city and recommend to the Mayor collective
bargaining agreements for consideration and possible final approval by the
City Council;



      (12)   Investigate and respond to resident inquiries and
complaints related to the operations of the city; and



      (13)   To participate in the development and implementation of
economic development programs for the city, including business retention,
expansion and recruitment. Serve as a liaison to community organizations as
necessary.



(1999 Code, § 31.112)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.118  REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION FROM OFFICE.



   The City Administrator may be suspended or discharged by the Mayor in
consultation with the Council. The City Administrator may also resign from
the position upon giving 30-days’ prior notice to the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 31.113)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.119  CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITED.



   The City Administrator shall not derive any personal benefit, directly
or indirectly from any contractual work or business of the city or from the
sale of any article from the city or from the purchase of property therefrom.



(1999 Code, § 31.114)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.120  ACTING ADMINISTRATOR.



   If, because of a temporary absence, disability or illness, the City
Administrator is unable to carry out the functions of the office, the
Assistant City Administrator shall serve as Acting Administrator and carry
out his or her duties in such absence.



(1999 Code, § 31.115)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.121  MATTERS DIRECTED TO CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   Except for purposes of inquiry, Aldermen shall deal with the
administrative service through the City Administrator. Alderman shall not
give orders to any department heads or subordinates of the City
Administrator, either publicly or privately.



(1999 Code, § 31.116)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 31.122  AUTHORITY.



   In case of accident, disaster or other circumstance creating a public
emergency, the City Administrator with the approval of the Mayor, may award
contracts or make purchases for the purposes of meeting said emergency: but
the director shall file with the Council such certification of emergency and
the necessity for such action. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
diminish or detract from the statutory powers and authority of the city’s
elected officials.



(1999 Code, § 31.117)  (Ord. 2024, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 2048, passed
8-16-1999; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)




DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY




§ 31.135  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the position of Director of Public Safety who
shall report to the City Administrator and shall be responsible to the Mayor
and City Council for high level administrative, technical and professional
work in directing and supervising the administration of the Public Safety
Division.



(1999 Code, § 31.125)  (Ord. 1023, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 1191, passed
3-31-1986)



§ 31.136  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Director of Public Safety shall possess the following minimum
qualifications:



   (A)   A bachelor’s degree from a recognized college or university;



   (B)   Adequate mental and physical health;



   (C)   If he or she holds the position of Chief of Police, also a
minimum of eight years of direct police experience; and



   (D)   If also holding the position of Chief of Police, a minimum of
three years of police administrative experience.



(1999 Code, § 31.126)  (Ord. 1023, passed 7-19-1982)



§ 31.137  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Subject to the direction of the City Administrator, the
Director of Public Safety shall be in charge of the following operations of
the following city functions:



      (1)   Police Department (provided, he or she is also named as
Chief of Police);



      (2)   Emergency Medical Service (EMS);



      (3)   Emergency Preparedness Chief (EPC); and



      (4)   Fire Department.



   (B)   In managing these departments, the Director of Public Safety
shall:



      (1)   Supervise the staff and operations of the Police, Fire
and EMS Departments to ensure that equipment and personnel are being used
effectively and efficiently;



      (2)   If he or she is Chief of Police, report monthly on the
status of the Police Department regarding arrests, accidents and the like;



      (3)   Coordinate the police and EMS personnel to provide for
optimum cooperation;



      (4)   Develop and maintain emergency operations plans and
procedures necessary to deal effectively with disasters;



      (5)   Supervise and recommend all purchases of equipment for
his or her departments;



      (6)   Evaluate and instruct staff members under his or her
direction so that they may improve themselves in their positions; and



      (7)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the
Mayor, City Council and the City Administrator not inconsistent with the
provisions of this code, other ordinances of the city or laws of the state.



(1999 Code, § 31.127)  (Ord. 1023, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 1057, passed
5-16-1983; Ord. 3961, passed 10-3-2016)




COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR




§ 31.150  CREATION OF OFFICE; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Community Development
Director. The Director shall be chosen on the basis of executive,
administrative and educational qualifications with special emphasis on the
actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice with respect to the
office hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   (1)   The Director shall have a minimum of a four-year
college degree with major course work in planning and urban development,
public administration, zoning and related fields.



      (2)   Work experience shall include five years of
progressively responsible experience in local government.



(1999 Code, § 31.140)  (Ord. 1946, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.151  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Community Development Director shall report to the City
Administrator and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for high
level administrative, technical and professional work in directing and
supervising the administration of the Community Development Department.



   (B)   In discharging this responsibility, the Community Development
Director shall:



      (1)   Provide professional planning advice to the Mayor and
City Council and department heads;



      (2)   Make presentations to boards, commissions, civic groups
and the public;



      (3)   Provide staff support to the Planning Commission and
Zoning Hearing Officer and ensure all applications are processed;



      (4)   Communicate the official Comprehensive Plan policies and
procedures to the Mayor, Council, boards and commissions, staff and the
public;



      (5)   Be responsible for the enforcement and administration of
the building, development and zoning codes for the city;



      (6)   Prepare development studies, reports and related
information for decision-making purposes;



      (7)   Attend all meetings of the Council at which attendance
may be required; and



      (8)   Develop, distribute and publish guidelines for
applicants who file for zoning changes, variances, special or other type
permits.



(1999 Code, § 31.143)  (Ord. 1946, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)




FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICER




§ 31.165  PHILOSOPHY OF DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   Pursuant to the fundamental philosophy of the American
constitutional form of government, it is declared to be the public policy of
the city that all persons are entitled to full and complete information
regarding the affairs of the city and the official acts and policies of those
who represent the citizens of the city as public officials and employees,
consistent with the terms of this subchapter.



   (B)   Such access is necessary to enable the people to fulfill their
duties of discussing public issues fully and freely, making informed
political judgments, and monitoring city government to ensure that it is
being conducted in the public interest.



(1999 Code, § 31.150)  (Ord. 3656, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.166  INFORMATION DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.



   The city hereby adopts the State Freedom of Information Act contained
in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq., and hereby adopts said state statute
as if it were fully set out in this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 31.151)  (Ord. 3656, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.167  ESTABLISHMENT OF FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICER.



   There is hereby established the office of the Freedom of Information
Officer, consistent with the State Open Meetings Act contained in ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 140, § 3.5, being one or more city officials or employees, as designated
by the City Administrator, each to serve until replaced by the City
Administrator.



(1999 Code, § 31.152)  (Ord. 3656, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 31.168  FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Introduction.



      (1)   The State Freedom of Information Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act
140 et seq.), as supplemented and amended since its effective date of
7-1-1984, requires all public bodies in the state to make non-exempt public
records available for inspection and copying. The city not only strives to
comply with the law, but also fully endorses the fundamental concept that all
persons are entitled to full, accurate and complete information regarding the
affairs of the city and the official acts and policies adopted by city
officials and public employees. The city recognizes that its desire for the
active and informed participation of its citizens in the public policy
process necessitates as full and as free an access to this information as
possible. In determining the parameters of public access to information, the
city also understands its obligations to protect legitimate privacy interests
and maintain the efficiency of its administrative operations.



      (2)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 3, the City Council
shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to
the availability of records and procedures to be followed in conformity with
the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. The rules and regulations
contained herein have thus been established by the city to ensure that its
obligations under the law and its philosophical obligation to its citizens to
promote openness and transparency are satisfactorily met. These rules are
intended to serve as procedural guidelines for citizens and employees and
officers of the city in expediting the process of obtaining access to public
records. In any instance in which these procedures shall conflict with
language contained in the State Freedom of Information Act as now existing or
hereafter amended, the terms of the Act shall prevail.



   (B)   Procedures for the request of inspection of copying of records.



      (1)   Requests for the inspection and copying of non-exempt
public records pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) may be made
in person at the City Hall, 255 South Lincoln, O’Fallon, Illinois, Monday
through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on
holidays.



      (2)   The city shall also accept FOIA requests received via
facsimile and through the United States mail. The city is only responsible
for responding to requests that it actually receives and is not responsible
for transmission or delivered errors for FOIA requests that are submitted
through these alternative means. Any requests received by the city after
normal business hours shall be considered received on the following business
day.



      (3)   All requests for public records must be made in writing,
preferably upon a city Freedom of Information request form. If a requesting
party is unable to obtain one of these forms, the city will accept any
legible written request; provided that, such written request is clearly and
concisely stated and contains the name, address and telephone number of the
requestor.



      (4)   To ensure that each FOIA request is acted upon in a
complete and timely fashion, the requestor should ensure that the public
record being sought is clearly identified in his or her request. Requestors
should provide as much known information about the requested record as
possible (e.g., type of record, approximate date of record, department where
record may be located and the like.) The request should indicate whether the
records are to be inspected, copied and/or certified. The city is not
obligated to respond to requests that are overly broad or that would place an
undue burden upon its operations; nor is the city obligated to interpret or
advise requestors as to the meaning or significance of public records that
may be provided.



      (5)   If the request is being made for a commercial purpose,
the requestor must disclose that fact to the city at the time the request is
made. It is a violation of the Act to knowingly obtain a public record for a
commercial purpose without such disclosure.



   (C)   Fee schedule.



      (1)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 6, the city is given
the authority to charge reasonable fees for the duplication and/or
certification of public records produced in compliance with FOIA requests.
The Freedom of Information Officer is given the authority to grant a waiver
or reduction of fees for copying records if the requestor’s stated purpose
is to obtain information regarding the health, safety and welfare of the
general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial
benefit. In determining the amount of any such waiver or fee reduction, the
city will also consider the number of records requested and the actual costs
of copying.



      (2)   Unless otherwise waived, copying fees that must be paid
in advance of the records being made available to the requestor, are as
follows:



 

8.5" x 11" documents
 
$0.15/page


8.5" x 14" documents
 
$0.15/page


11" x 14" documents
 
$0.15/page


Audio tape
 
$5/unit


Certification
 
$1/document


Compact disc
 
$5/unit



 



      (3)   For each request form filed, citizens shall be furnished
with the first 50 pages of standard, black and white copies at no charge.
Fees will not be waived for the first 50 pages of colored copies or copies
exceeding 11 inches by 14 inches in area, unless a waiver or fee reduction is
granted by the Freedom of Information Officer as a means of furthering the
public interest.



      (4)   Fees to copy blueprints, oversized documents, pamphlets,
manuals and any other records which are to be copied by an outside service
shall be based on the actual costs incurred by the city.



      (5)   Information regarding these fees will be provided to the
requestor before copying. Additional fees for accident records may apply, as
allowable by law.



   (D)   City response to request for inspection or copying records. In
accordance with the law, the city will respond to all non-commercial requests
within five working days of receipt. Responses will be provided to any
commercial requests within 21 working days of receipt. In processing requests
for information made under the Act, the city shall give priority first to any
non-commercial requests pending before it. The city must respond in one of
the following methods.



      (1)   Approval of request.



         (a)   If the requested records are available and
determined to be non-exempt, the city will advise the requestor of the
documents which are available and the cost to copy the records. For
commercial requests, the city response will include an estimate of the time
required to locate and compile the records requested, as well as the
estimated fees to be assessed to the requestor.



         (b)   If the requestor has asked to inspect the
documents, the city will provide the requestor with notice of a time and
location in which the records will be conducted during normal business hours
at the City Hall, unless another location is otherwise agreed upon by the
city and the requesting party. The city may require that an officer or
employee of the city be present during any inspection of public records. A
requestor may also be prohibited from bringing bags, briefcases or other
containers into the room in which the inspection takes place. Documents made
available for inspection will be held for 14 working days from the date of
the city’s response and, thereafter, will be re-filed.



         (c)   Fees for copies of records, unless waived, must be
paid in advance. All copying of documents shall be done by an officer or
employee of the city. Upon written request, the city will mail copies of
public records to the requestor.



      (2)   Notice of extension. Under certain circumstances, the
FOIA allows the city to provide notice of an extension of time for response
to a request. This time period shall not exceed an additional five working
days, or a total of ten working days from the receipt of the original
request. Any notice of extension must cite the reason why the extension is
necessary.



      (3)   Denial of request.



         (a)   Any denial of any part of a request shall be made
in writing and shall state the reason(s) for the denial in accordance with
ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 3(g), or if the record is determined to be exempt,
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 7 of the FOIA.



         (b)   ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140,§ 3(g) allows the city to
deny a request for a category of records if compliance with the request would
place an undue burden upon the city and there is no way to narrow the scope
of the request, and/or the burden on the city outweighs the public interest
in the information. Before denying a request on the basis of the exemption,
the city will contact the requestor to offer him or her an opportunity to
confer with the city in an attempt to reduce the scope of the request to a
manageable proportion. Any denial pursuant to ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 3(g)
shall specify the reason(s) why it would be unduly burdensome to the city and
the extent to which compliance with the request would burden the operation of
the city. Repeated requests for the same public records by the same person
shall be deemed unduly burdensome and shall be denied accordingly.



         (c)   ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 7 enumerates a series of
records that are considered exempt from public disclosure and, therefore,
need not be produced by the city.



         (d)   All denials shall include the name and title of
the individual or individuals responsible for the denial of the request, and
shall include a detailed factual basis for the application of any exemption
claimed. Any denial must also include a notice of the requestor’s statutory
right to petition the office of the Public Access Counselor in the office of
the State Attorney General for review of the denial, as well as the right to
judicial review under ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 11. In accordance with the
provisions of the Act, copies of all denials shall be retained by the Freedom
of Information Officer and will be indexed according to the type of exemption
asserted and, to the extent feasible, according to the type of records
requested.



         (e)   If the city determines that a FOIA request should
be denied by claiming an exemption under ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 7(l)(c) or
(l)(f), the Freedom of Information Officer shall provide written notice to
both the requestor and the Public Access Counselor of the city’s intent to
deny the request in whole or in part. This notice shall include: a copy of
the original FOIA request; the proposed response from the city; and a
detailed summary of the city’s basis for asserting the exemption. Upon
receipt of the notice of intent to deny, the Public Access Counselor shall
determine whether or not further inquiry is warranted. Within five working
days after receipt of the notice of intent to deny, the Public Access
Counselor shall notify the city and the requestor whether further inquiry is
warranted.



   (E)   Administrative and judicial review procedures.



      (1)   Any requestor whose request for information has been
denied by the city may exercise his or her statutory right to petition the
Public Access Counselor in the office of the State Attorney General for
review of said denial. A request for review must be filed with the Public
Access Counselor not later than 60 days after the date of the final denial.
Any such request for review must be in writing, signed by the requestor, and
include copies of the original FOIA request and any responses received from
the city.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a request for review, the Public Access
Counselor shall determine whether further action is warranted. If the Public
Access Counselor determines that the alleged violation of the Act is
unfounded, he or she shall so advise the requestor and the city and no
further action will be taken with respect to the complaint. In all other
cases, the Public Access Counselor shall forward a copy of the request for
review to the city within seven working days after receipt and shall specify
the records or other documents that the city shall furnish to facilitate the
review. Within seven working days after receipt of the request for review,
the Freedom of Information Officer must provide copies of the records
requested and shall otherwise fully cooperate with the Public Access
Counselor. To the extent that records produced by the city for the purposes
of review contain information that is claimed to be exempt, the Public Access
Counselor shall not further disclose that information.



      (3)   Within seven working days after he or she receives the
request for review and request for production of records from the Public
Access Counselor, the city may provide an answer to the allegations of the
request for review in the form of a letter, brief or memorandum. The Public
Access Counselor shall forward a copy of any such written answer to the
person submitting the request for review and the requestor may respond in
writing to such answer within seven working days. If the requestor chooses to
file a written response to the city’s answering of the allegations, he or
she must also provide a copy of that response to the city.



      (4)   The Attorney General shall examine the issues and
records submitted in conjunction with any request for review and shall,
within 60 days, issue to the requestor and to the city an opinion in response
to the request for review. The opinion shall be binding upon both the
requestor and the city, subject to administrative review under ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 140, § 11.5. The Public Access Counselor may opt to extend the 60-day
time period by up to 21 additional working days, provided that he or she
sends written notice of such extension to both the requestor and the city.
The Attorney General may exercise his or her discretion and choose to resolve
a request for review by mediation or by a means other than the issuance of a
binding opinion.



      (5)   Upon receipt of a binding opinion concluding that a
violation of the Act has occurred, the Freedom of Information Officer shall
either take necessary action immediately to comply with the directive of the
opinion, or shall initiate administrative review under ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140,
§ 11.5. If the opinion concludes that no violation occurred, the requestor
may initiate administrative review under ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 11.5.



      (6)   Any person denied access to inspect or copy any public
record shall also have the right to file suit for injunctive or declaratory
relief in the Circuit Court of the county.



   (F)   City FOIA administrative procedures.



      (1)   In accordance with ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 3.5, the City
Council shall designate an employee or officer of the city to serve as
Freedom of Information Officer. The designated Freedom of Information Officer
may, from time to time, designate additional employees or officers to serve
as deputy Freedom of Information Officers for particular departments or
divisions of the city as necessary to expedite the FOIA process. Freedom of
Information Officers and Deputies shall be charged with the responsibility
for implementing these policies and procedures and processing all requests
for information in accordance with the terms of the Act. Deputy Freedom of
Information Officers shall, at the discretion of the Freedom of Information
Officer, be given the authority to act as the primary Freedom of Information
Officer for each department or division in which they have been assigned.
Each individual designated as a Freedom of Information Officer or Deputy
shall successfully complete an annual training curriculum through the state,
as provided in the Act.



      (2)   All FOIA requests shall be date stamped upon receipt,
the Freedom of Information Officer shall forward a copy of the request to the
appropriate contact employee for the department in which the records are
located. Upon forwarding the request to the appropriate department, the
Freedom of Information Officer shall also indicate the date by which the
request must be approved or denied (five working days from the date of
receipt).



      (3)   The employee responsible for providing the information
on behalf of his or her department shall promptly either comply with or deny
the request. The employee shall notify the Freedom of Information Officer of
his or her action on the request no later than five working days after its
receipt. The Freedom of Information Officer shall then respond in writing to
the requestor accordingly. If denying the request, the official responsible
for the denial must include, in writing, the following information:



         (a)   The statutory exemption used as the basis for the
denial and the specific reasons for the denial, including a detailed factual
basis and citation to supporting legal authority;



         (b)   The names/titles of each person responsible for
the denial;



         (c)   The notice of the requestor’s statutory right to
petition the Public Access Counselor for review of the denial; and



         (d)   The notice of the requestor’s statutory right to
judicial review under ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 11.



      (4)   If any public record exempt from disclosure contains
material which is not exempt, the city shall delete the exempt information
and make the remaining information available for inspection and copying.



      (5)   If the responsible employee determines that there is not
adequate time to gather the requested information, the time limit may be
extended by an additional five working days. Extensions should be reserved
only for extenuating circumstances. Appropriate reasons for extension include:



         (a)   The requested record is in a place other than the
office at which the record is being requested;



         (b)   The request requires the collection of a
substantial number of specified records;



         (c)   The request is understood in categorical terms and
requires an extensive search for the records responsive to it;



         (d)   The requested records have not been located in the
course of routine search and additional efforts are being made to locate them;



         (e)   The requested records require examination and
evaluation by personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to
determine if the records are exempt from disclosure under ILCS Ch. 5, Act
140, § 7, or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions;



         (f)   The request for records cannot be complied with by
the public body within the time limits prescribed by ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §
3 without unduly burdening or interfering with the operations of the public
body; and



         (g)   There is a need for consultation, which shall be
conducted with all practicable speed with another public body or among two or
more components of a public body having a substantial interest in the
determination or in the subject matter of the request.



      (6)   When additional time is required for any of the
aforementioned reasons, the responsible employee shall notify the Freedom of
Information Officer as soon as possible, but no later than four working days
after receipt of the request. The Freedom of Information Officer shall then
immediately send written notice of extension to the requestor, stating the
reasons for the extension and the date by which the records will be available
or that a denial will be forthcoming. Extensions will not be granted for a
period exceeding five working days, except in the most unusual circumstances;
provided that, any such extraordinary period for extension will first be
agreed upon in writing by both the requestor and the Freedom of Information
Officer.



      (7)   All requests for public records made under the FOIA
shall be maintained in a file in an office designated by the Freedom of
Information Officer and preserved in accordance with the provisions of the
Local Records Act. Documents maintained in this file shall include, but not
be limited to, the following: the original request, a copy of the written
response, a record of written communications with the requestor and a copy of
all other communications. Additionally, all denials of FOIA requests shall,
by law, be indexed according to the statutory basis for the individual
denial. To the extent practicable, these records should be further subdivided
by type or category of record requested.



      (8)   In accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act
140, § 4, the Freedom of Information Officer shall be responsible for
publishing and maintaining a local FOIA manual, pamphlet or other
substantially similar document containing the following information:



         (a)   A brief description of the city, including, but
not limited to:



            1.   A short summary of its purpose;



            2.   A block diagram of its functional
subdivisions;



            3.   The total amount of its operating budget;



            4.   The number and location of each of its
separate offices;



            5.   The approximate number of full- and part-time
employees; and



            6.   The identification and membership of any
Council, commission, committee or council which operates in an advisory
capacity relative to the operation of the public body, or which exercises
control over its policies or procedures.



         (b)   A brief description of the methods whereby the
public may request information and public records;



         (c)   A directory designating by titles and addresses
those employees to whom requests for public records should be directed;



         (d)   A schedule of local fees, as allowable under ILCS
Ch. 5, Act 140, § 6;



         (e)   A reasonably current list of all types or
categories of records maintained by the city;



         (f)   A listing of all documents or categories of
records that the city shall immediately disclose upon request; and



         (g)   A description of the manner in which public
records stored by means of electronic data processing may be obtained in a
format comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of computer language or
printout format.



      (9)   All of the foregoing general information shall also be
made available for public access on the city’s website.



(1999 Code, § 31.153)  (Ord. 3656, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE AND FIRE



Section




Board of Fire and Police Commissioners




   32.01   Appointment; term of office



   32.02   Qualifications; oath; removal



   32.03   Officers of the Board



   32.04   Powers and duties



   32.05   Regulatory authority




Police Department




   32.20   Organization



   32.21   Creation of office/qualifications




Police Pension Board




   32.35   Police Pension Fund established



   32.36   Board of Trustees



   32.37   Election of Board



   32.38   Term of office



   32.39   Meetings; election of officers



   32.40   Powers and duties




Fire Department




   32.55   Sole provider of fire protection services



   32.56   Official department



   32.57   Organization



   32.58   Creation of office/qualifications



   32.59   Members as city employees



   32.60   Service fees



   32.61   Firefighters' Pension Fund



Administrative Hearing Procedure to Determine Eligibility
Under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act



   32.70   Purpose



   32.71   Application form, medical information and affidavit



   32.72   Administrative composition



   32.73   Administrative hearing



   32.74   Health insurance benefits pending a final determination



Cross-reference:



   City Organizations, see Ch. 33



   Fire Prevention, see Ch. 97




BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS




§ 32.01  APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby recognized as
established in accordance with the statutes of the state. This Board shall
consist of five members, whose terms of office shall be three years or until
their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. Appointments
are for staggered terms. Appointments shall be made by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council. No such appointment, however, shall be made by the
Mayor within 30 days before the expiration of his or her term of office.



(1999 Code, § 32.01)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 4022, passed
12-4-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1



§ 32.02  QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; REMOVAL.



   Of the five members of the Board, not more than three members of the
Board shall be of the employee class or of the employer class, and each shall
possess the qualifications required of other officers of the city, shall take
oath of office and shall be subject to removal from office in the same manner
as other appointed officers of the municipality. No person holding a
lucrative office under the United States, the state or any municipality shall
be a member of the Board. Not more than three members of the Board shall
belong to the same political party.



(1999 Code, § 32.02)  (Ord. 1395, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012; Ord. 4022, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 32.03  OFFICERS OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   On organizing, the Board shall elect a President and a
Secretary to serve during the municipal fiscal year. The Secretary shall keep
the minutes of the Board’s proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers
pertaining to the business of the Board and shall keep a record of all
examinations held.



   (B)   Vacancies on the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.



   (C)   A majority of the three members of the Board constitutes a
quorum for the conduct of all business.



(1999 Code, § 32.03)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 4022, passed
12-4-2017)



§ 32.04  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Board shall make rules for the appointment and promotion
of all full-time police and fire officers, with the exception of the Police
Chief and Fire Chief. These rules of the Board shall apply only to the
conduct of examinations for original appointments of candidates from the
traditional list and the lateral entry list and for promotions. When the
lists are finalized, they will be sent to the Chief of Police, and he or she
will determine, based on operational needs of the Police Department, which
list is utilized to fill the vacancy.



   (B)   No such rule shall be made by the Board to govern the
operation of the Police Department or the conduct of its members.



   (C)   On May 1, the Board shall submit to the Council an annual
report of its activities and of the rules in force and the practical effect
thereof. In this report, the Board may make suggestions it believes would
result in greater efficiency in the Fire and Police Departments.



(1999 Code, § 32.04)  (Ord. 1017, passed 7-6-1982; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012; Ord. 4022, passed 12-4-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-5



§ 32.05  REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Such Board of Commissioners shall make rules and appointments
and removals except those herein reserved to the Mayor and the City Council,
and shall have such other and further powers as are contained in Art. 1, Div.
2.1, of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 2-1-1 et seq.),
as amended. Any request for changes in Board rules outside of state statutes
requires Council approval.



   (B)   The City of O'Fallon, as a home rule community, has enacted
the following rules to be included in the Board Rules.



      (1)   Public Safety members in good standing will be allowed
to claim up to two additional preference points as provided in the Board
Rules.



      (2)   A separate lateral entry list, as provided in the
current Board Rules, will be maintained by the Board.



      (3)   Before the testing cycle for original appointment is
held, the Board shall determine and announce the expiration of the Final
Eligibility Register. The expiration date shall be either one or not more
than two years. A dated copy of the Final Eligibility Register shall be
announced and shall state registrants’ expiration dates.



(1999 Code, § 32.05)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 4022, passed
12-4-2017; Ord. 4085, passed 3-4-2019)




POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 32.20  ORGANIZATION.



   The Department of Police shall consist of a Chief of Police, who shall
be the Director of the Department under the Public Safety Division, and shall
also consist of other officers of various ranks as may be allocated and
approved through the adoption of the annual budget, or as otherwise provided
by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 32.15)  (Ord. 1154, passed 7-1-1985; Ord. 1448, passed
8-20-1990; Ord. 1606, passed 4-19-1992; Ord. 1974, passed 2-17-1998; Ord.
2099, passed 5-15-2000; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 32.21  CREATION OF OFFICE/ QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Creation of office. There is hereby created the position of
Chief of Police who shall report to the Director of Public Safety and shall
be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for high level administrative,
technical and professional work in directing and supervising the
administration of the Police Department.



   (B)   Qualifications.



      (1)   A bachelor’s degree from a recognized college or
university;



      (2)   Adequate mental and physical health;



      (3)   A minimum of eight years of direct police experience; and



      (4)   A minimum of three years of police administrative
experience.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities. Subject to the direction of the
City Administrator, the Chief of Police shall be in charge of the operation
of the following city functions: Police Department, EMS and Civil Defense. In
managing these departments, the Chief of Police shall:



      (1)   Supervise the staff and operations of the Police
Department to ensure that the equipment and personnel are being used
effectively and efficiently;



      (2)   Report monthly on the status of the Police Department in
regard to arrests, accidents and the like;



      (3)   Coordinate the police and EMS personnel to provide for
optimum cooperation;



      (4)   Supervise and recommend all purchases of equipment for
his or her department;



      (5)   Evaluate and instruct staff members under the Chiefs
direction so that they may improve themselves in their positions; and



      (6)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the
Mayor, City Council and the City Administrator not inconsistent with the
provisions of this code, other ordinances of the city or laws of the state.



   (D)   Other offices. The Chief of Police may also hold the office of
Director of Public Safety as otherwise provided for in this code.



(1999 Code, § 32.16)  (Ord. 1022, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 1190, passed
3-31-1986; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)




POLICE PENSION BOARD




§ 32.35  POLICE PENSION FUND ESTABLISHED.



   There shall be a Police Pension Fund established in the city.



(1999 Code, § 32.30)



§ 32.36  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of up to
five members. Two members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
city; two members of the Board shall be elected from the regular police force
from the active members thereof. At such time as there are beneficiaries of
the Fund, a fifth member shall be elected by and from among the beneficiaries
of the Fund.



(1999 Code, § 32.31)



§ 32.37  ELECTION OF BOARD.



   The election provided for in this subchapter for elected Board members
shall be held bi-annually on the third Monday in April at such place as shall
be prescribed by the appointed members of the Board and shall be under the
Australian ballot system. However, on the organization of the Board, the date
of election until the subsequent third Monday in April shall be fixed by the
appointed members.



(1999 Code, § 32.32)



§ 32.38  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The members of the Board shall serve for two years or until their
successors are appointed and have qualified.



(1999 Code, § 32.33)



§ 32.39  MEETINGS; ELECTION OF OFFICERS.



   The Pension Board shall meet in regular quarterly meetings on the
second Tuesday of July, October, January and April, annually, and special
meetings may be called by the President. The regular July meeting shall be an
organization meeting, at which the Board shall select from its members a
President, Vice President, Secretary and Assistant Secretary, to serve for a
period of one year.



(1999 Code, § 32.34)



§ 32.40  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Management of Fund. The Trustees shall have the authority to
control and manage, exclusively, the Pension Fund, and all moneys donated,
paid or assessed for the relief or pension of disabled, superannuated and
retired members of the Police Department, their widows, minor children and
dependent parents. All moneys shall be placed by the Treasurer of the
municipality to the credit of the Fund, subject to the order of the Board.



   (B)   Payments. The Board shall have the authority to order and
direct the payment of pensions and other benefits provided by the Police
Pension Act and to issue certificates, signed by its President and Secretary
to the persons entitled thereto, of the amount ordered paid to such persons
from the Fund, which certificate shall state the purpose of the payment.



   (C)   Investment of funds; regulatory authority. The Board of
Trustees shall have the power to invest the funds as it sees fit, in
accordance with § 3-135 of the Illinois Pension Code (ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §
3-135), and shall have the authority to make necessary rules and regulations
for the operation of the Fund.



(1999 Code, § 32.35)




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 32.55  SOLE PROVIDER OF FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES.



   The City Council recognizes the City Fire Department as the sole
provider for fire protection services within the corporate limits of the city.



(1999 Code, § 32.50)  (Ord. 3539, passed 10-1-2007; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 32.56  OFFICIAL DEPARTMENT.



   The City Fire Department is recognized as an official department of the
city under its Public Safety Division.



(1999 Code, § 32.51)  (Ord. 3539, passed 10-1-2007; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 32.57  ORGANIZATION.



   The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, who shall be the
Director of the Department, and shall also consist of other officers of
various ranks as may be allocated and approved through the adoption of the
annual budget, or as otherwise provided by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 32.52)  (Ord. 3539, passed 10-1-2007; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 32.58  CREATION OF OFFICE/ QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Creation of office. There is hereby created the position of
Fire Chief who shall report to the Director of Public Safety and shall be
responsible to the Mayor and City Council for high level administrative,
technical and professional work in directing and supervising the
administration of the Fire Department.



   (B)   Qualifications.



      (1)   Five years of supervisory firefighting experience at a
level which has afforded the opportunity to become familiar with all phases
of departmental operations, supplemented by successful completion of
supervisory courses in fire department administration and fire prevention and
business or public administration;



      (2)   Bachelors degree preferred;



      (3)   Other equivalent combination of experience and education
that meet the minimum requirements may be considered; and



      (4)   Valid CDL driver’s license required.



(1999 Code, § 32.53)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 32.59  MEMBERS AS CITY EMPLOYEES.



   All members of the City Fire Department, including paid on call
firefighters shall be employees of the city.



(1999 Code, § 32.54)  (Ord. 3539, passed 10-1-2007; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 32.60  SERVICE FEES.



   (A)   There is established a fee for firefighting services and
emergency medical services rendered by the city to persons, businesses and
other entities who are not residents of the city as follows.



      (1)   Firefighting service. The reasonable costs of providing
firefighting equipment and firefighters, but not to exceed the actual costs
of the service rendered when responding to a call for assistance. The city
may, however, charge an additional amount to reimburse the city for
extraordinary expenses of material used in rendering the services.



      (2)   Emergency medical services. The fees as set forth in the
exhibit attached to Ord. 3655, are made a part hereof as if fully set forth
herein.



   (B)   The residents of the O’Fallon-Shiloh Valley-Caseyville Fire
Protection District shall be exempt from this section.



(1999 Code, § 32.50)  (Ord. 3655, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 32.61  FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Firefighters’
Pension Fund in and for the city in accordance with ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §§
4-101 et. al.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term FIREFIGHTERS is
defined as full-time firefighters or full-time firefighters entitled to
participate in the benefits of the Pension Fund as provided by Article 4 of
the Illinois Pension Code (ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 4-101 et. al).



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the term BOARD or BOARD OF
TRUSTEES is defined as the Illinois Board of Trustees of the Pension Fund.



   (D)   The rights, powers, duties and functions of the Board of
Trustees and the members thereof, as such, and the rights and benefits of the
various beneficiaries of the Pension Fund, shall be and are hereby declared
to be in accordance with the law, and  particularly with Article 4 of the
Illinois Pension Code and all amendments thereof.



   (E)   The Board of Trustees shall be appointed and elected as
therein provided, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties that
shall be required of them by law. All monies and securities belonging to the
Fund shall be held by City Treasurer, subject to the order of the Board of
Trustees of the Pension Fund, and an annual list of beneficiaries or reports
of funds shall be made as required by law. Members of the Board of Trustees
of the Pension Fund shall serve without compensation.



   (F)   All necessary amendments will be made to the fiscal year 2016
budget.



(Ord. 3891, passed 7-20-2015)



ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY
UNDER THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT



§ 32.70  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a fair and efficient
method of determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits
enumerated under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (PSEBA) (ILCS Ch.
820, Act 320, §§ 1 et seq.), through the process of an administrative
hearing. All benefits provided employees pursuant to the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act (Act) will be consistent with the Act.



(Ord. 3938, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 32.71  APPLICATION FORM, MEDICAL INFORMATION AND AFFIDAVIT.



   (A)   In conjunction with a request for PSEBA benefits, a public
safety employee, or his/her representative, shall file a completed, notarized
application for PSEBA benefits, relevant medical information and an affidavit
for PSEBA coverage with the City Administrator. The application for PSEBA
benefits shall include, but shall not be limited to, a fully detailed
statement of the nature of the employee's claim giving full particulars
thereof, i.e. date, time, place, nature of injury, and other factual
circumstances surrounding the incident giving rise to said claim. The
application shall also include a signed PSEBA medical authorization release
and a signed PSEBA general information release. If the City Administrator
decides that additional information is necessary in order to render a
decision, he may schedule an informal meeting with the employee or the
employee's representative.



   (B)   Within 20 days after receipt of the aforesaid PSEBA
application, the City Administrator shall determine whether sufficient
documentation has been presented to warrant approval of the requested PSEBA
benefit. Should the City Administrator approve the PSEBA benefit, the city
will grant the health insurance benefits consistent with PSEBA. The City
Administrator shall issue a written decision which shall be deemed a final
administrative decision. Should the City Administrator deny the request for
the PSEBA benefit, the City Administrator shall issue a written decision to
that effect, and the PSEBA applicant shall have the right to request an
administrative hearing which must be served on the City Administrator within
30 days after the date of City Administrator's written decision of denial. A
copy of the City Administrator's written decision shall be promptly served on
the PSEBA applicant by certified mail. If a request for administrative
hearing is made, the City Administrator will notify the applicant, by
certified mail, of the date, time and location of the PSEBA administrative
hearing. The employee must confirm the receipt of said notice and concur with
the date set for the administrative hearing in writing within 30 days after
being served notice of the administrative hearing. If the employee fails, or
chooses not to confirm the receipt of said hearing notice within 30 days or
otherwise refuses to participate in the administrative hearing, the hearing
officer will proceed to make a final ruling on the PSEBA application based on
his investigation and the evidence that the employee chose to submit for the
hearing officer's consideration.



(Ord. 3938, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 32.72  ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.



   The PSEBA administrative hearing shall be comprised of a hearing
officer whose power and authority and limitations are as follows:



   (A)   Power and duties of the hearing officer.  The hearing officer
shall have all of the powers granted to him/her under common law relative to
the conduct of an administrative hearing including the power to:



      (1)   Presiding over all city hearings involving PSEBA.



      (2)   Issuing subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the
parties or their representatives.



      (3)   Inquiring into all matters related to the applicant's
entitlement to PSEBA benefits.



      (4)   Regulating all facets of the administrative hearing,
including the conduct of any parties and/or their counsel, the length of the
hearing and the number of witnesses.



      (5)   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is
relevant to the issue of eligibility under PSEBA.



      (6)   Ruling on motions to intervene from interested parties.



      (7)   Administering oaths.



      (8)   Examining witnesses and directing witnesses to testify.



      (9)   Establishing reasonable limits on the frequency and
duration of the testimony of any witness.



      (10)   Receiving relevant evidence in the form of testimony,
exhibits or stipulations. Insofar as practical, the hearing officer will
apply the rules of evidence applicable in Illinois courts. However, the
hearing officer is not required to strictly follow the rules of evidence.
Testimonial evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.



      (11)   Ruling on objections, motions and questions of
procedure.



      (12)   Ruling upon objections in the admissibility of evidence.



      (13)   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing
and all exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing.



      (14)   Hearing closing arguments.



      (15)   Authorizing the submission of post-hearing briefs and
setting the time for their filing.



      (16)   Issuing a determination based on the evidence presented
at the hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall
include a written finding of fact, decision and order.



   (B)   Establishment of  office of  hearing officer. The Hearing
Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. Alternate hearing officers may serve when the hearing officer is not
available and may be appointed in the same manner as the hearing officer. In
making said selection, the Mayor shall consider all pertinent information.



      (1)   The candidate's ability to comply with the job
description as set forth herein;



      (2)   Background and performance data made available to the
Mayor on file with the otherwise obtained by the city;



      (3)   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the State of Illinois for at least three years and have knowledge of
and experience in employment and labor procedure, the rules of evidence, and
administrative practice.



(Ord. 3938, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 32.73  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   In the event that an administrative hearing is initiated pursuant to §
32.71, the hearing officer shall adjudicate and determine whether the subject
public safety employee is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the employee
is found eligible, the applicant shall be afforded benefits consistent with
PSEBA.



   (A)   Time and date.  Hearings shall be held on the date, time and
place as established by the city with appropriate notice served upon the
public safety employee as provided in § 32.71.



   (B)   Record.  All hearings shall be attended by a certified court
reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified
court reporter. The city shall be responsible for paying any attendance fees
charged by the court reporter; individuals wishing to obtain a transcript of
the administrative hearing shall be responsible for paying for their own copy.



   (C)   Procedures.  The city and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at said hearing and may present witnesses, may
present testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and
may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant
witnesses or the production of relevant documents.



   (D)   Evidence.  The hearing officer shall, where practicable and
appropriate, follow (but will not be bound by) rules of evidence which
prevail in Illinois court of law.



   (E)   Preponderance of the evidence.  At the administrative
hearing, the employee shall have the obligation to prove that the employee is
qualified to receive the benefits by a preponderance of the evidence.



   (F)   Final determination.  The determination by the hearing
officer of whether the petitioning public safety employee is eligible for the
benefits under PSEBA shall constitute a final determination for the purpose
of judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.



(Ord. 3938, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 32.74  HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS PENDING A FINAL DETERMINATION.



   Until a final unappealable administrative or judicial determination of
PSEBA eligibility has been made, a public safety employee shall be entitled
to maintain his/her prior health insurance as a city employee. However, until
a final, unappealable determination of PSEBA eligibility has been made, a
public safety employee, or his/her representative, shall be responsible for
the prompt payment of all health insurance premiums as though the public
safety employee was not eligible for PSEBA benefits. Should the public safety
employee be found to be eligible for PSEBA benefits by virtue of a final,
unappealable administrative or judicial determination, the public safety
employee, or his/her representative, shall be promptly reimbursed by the city
for any out-of-pocket health insurance premiums paid from the date of the
employee's catastrophic, PSEBA-related injury death or the date of the Police
Pension Board awarded line-of-duty disability pension.



(Ord. 3938, passed 6-6-2016)



CHAPTER 33:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Planning Commission




   33.01   Established



   33.02   Composition; residency requirements; appointment



   33.03   Term of office; vacancies; compensation



   33.04   Administrative matters



   33.05   Powers and duties generally



   33.06   Reports on public improvements



   33.07   Recommendations regarding land use districts



   33.08   Expenditures



   33.09   Authority for review and decision on special permits and uses




Arts Commission




   33.20   Established



   33.21   Membership



   33.22   Duties and powers



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHED.



   A Planning Commission is hereby created under authority of Article 11,
Division 12 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-4
et seq.).



(1999 Code, § 33.01)



Cross-reference:



   Planning, see Ch. 153



§ 33.02  COMPOSITION; RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS; APPOINTMENT.



   The Planning Commission shall consist of 11 members. Said members shall
be residents of the city or shall reside within territory contiguous to the
city and not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and
not included within any other municipality. They shall be appointed by the
Mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the Planning
Commission, subject to the approval of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 33.02)  (Ord. 789, passed 3-15-1976)



§ 33.03  TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION.



   The members shall serve for a period of three years. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. All members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation.



(1999 Code, § 33.03)



§ 33.04  ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS.



   The Planning Commission shall elect such officers as it may deem
necessary, and adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure
consistent with the city code and state law. The Commission shall keep
written records of its proceedings. Minutes shall be approved at the next
meeting. Upon approval the original minutes shall be filed with the City
Clerk to be retained in the permanent records of the city.



(1999 Code, § 33.04)



§ 33.05  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive
Plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the city and
contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half miles
beyond the corporate limits of the city, and not included in any other
municipality; (Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical
or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official
Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof, of the city. Such plan shall be
advisory, except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by
ordinances duly enacted by the City Council. All requirements for public
hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the County Recorder of Deeds and
filing of the plan and ordinances with the City Clerk shall be complied with
as provided for by law. To provide for the health, safety, comfort and
convenience of the inhabitants of the city and contiguous territory, such
plan or plans shall establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions
and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to
redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined, and shall
establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and
surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service
facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds,
school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water
drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage
collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become
regulatory only when adopted by law.)



   (B)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality
and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation;



   (C)   To recommend to the City Council of this city, from time to
time, such changes in the Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as may be
deemed necessary;



   (D)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, from time to
time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of
the official Comprehensive Plan;



   (E)   To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, or
parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally to
promote the realization of the official Comprehensive Plan;



   (F)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding;



   (G)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions
and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to
assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area, subject to approval
of the City Council; and



   (H)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted
under authority of an act of the General Assembly of the state, as may be
conferred by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 33.05)



Cross-reference:



   Planning, see Ch. 153



§ 33.06  REPORTS ON PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   The City Clerk shall furnish the Planning Commission, for its
consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The Planning Commission may report in relation
thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of
the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 33.06)



§ 33.07  RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING LAND USE DISTRICTS.



   The Commission shall recommend the boundaries of districts for land use
and shall recommend regulations to the corporate authorities for the
following:



   (A)   To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter to be erected;



   (B)   To establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines
on or along any street, traffic-way, drive, parkway or storm or flood water
runoff channel or basin;



   (C)   To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas,
and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces, within and surrounding
such buildings;



   (D)   To classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial,
business, residential and other uses;



   (E)   To divide the entire municipality into districts of such
number, shape, area and of such different classes (according to use of land
and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of a lot
area, area of open spaces or other classification) as may be deemed best
suited to carry out the purposes of this section;



   (F)   To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein
shall conform;



   (G)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with
the character of such districts; and



   (H)   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of
existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions
and limitations lawfully imposed under this section.



(1999 Code, § 33.07)



Cross-reference:



   Planning, see Ch. 153



§ 33.08  EXPENDITURES.



   Expenditures of the Commission shall be at the discretion of the City
Council and if the Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it shall be done upon authority of the City



Council and appropriations by the City Council therefor.



(1999 Code, § 33.08)  (Ord. 632, passed 3-2-1970)



§ 33.09  AUTHORITY FOR REVIEW AND DECISION ON SPECIAL PERMITS AND USES.



   Notwithstanding any provision contrary in the Zoning Code, the
authority for review and decision on special permits and uses shall hereby
and hereinafter reside in the Planning Commission, with all procedures and
appeals relating to such decisions to be otherwise applicable to the Planning
Commission as previously applied to the Zoning Hearing Officer for special
uses and permits in such articles.



(1999 Code, § 33.09)  (Ord. 3379, passed 10-3-2005; Ord. 3382, passed
11-7-2005)



ARTS COMMISSION



§ 33.20  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established an Arts Commission to promote and encourage
public programs; to further the development and public awareness of and
interest in the fine and performing arts; to facilitate the identification
and preservation of the cultural heritage of the city; and to act in an
advisory capacity to the city in connection with the artistic and cultural
development of the city.



(1999 Code, § 33.20)  (Ord. 2036, passed 4-19-1999)



§ 33.21  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Arts Commission shall consist of five members who shall
serve three year terms and who shall meet and possess the following
qualifications, at the time of their appointment and at all times during
their terms:



      (1)   Either be residents of the city or have such an interest
in the cultural activities of the city as to merit inclusion upon the panel
and be residents of O’Fallon Township, Illinois;



      (2)   Express and maintain an interest in the Arts Commission
and the provision of cultural opportunities and activities to the citizens of
the city and the surrounding area; and



      (3)   The Board shall also have the Director of Administration
who shall serve as staff support, in an ex-officio status, between the Mayor
and Council and the Board. This person shall not vote upon matters presented
to the Commission, and shall not serve as the president or secretary of the
Board.



   (B)   The five voting members of the Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice of the City Council. They are subject to removal from
the position by the Mayor in the event they no longer possess the
qualifications specified above, for such other grounds as may be the basis
for the removal of a member during his or her term, or are absent from more
than four consecutive meetings of the Board without having been excused by
the Board.



   (C)   Vacancies upon the Commission shall be filled for any
unexpired term or completed term in the same manner as original appointments.



(1999 Code, § 33.21)  (Ord. 2036, passed 4-19-1999)



§ 33.22  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   The Commission shall have the following duties and powers:



      (1)   To hold quarterly public meetings and keep a written
record of its proceedings which shall be a public record;



      (2)   To initiate, sponsor or conduct, alone or in cooperation
with other public or private agencies, public programs to further the
development and public awareness of, and interest in the fine and performing
arts, and preservation of the cultural heritage of the city; provided that,
no expenditure of municipal funds for any such activity shall be authorized
or made without the prior approval of the City Council;



      (3)   To seek and encourage donations and grants to the city
for civic cultural purposes, including, but not limited to, art and theater,
to advise the city regarding the receipt of such donations and grants and
transmit any funds so received to the City Treasurer, and to recommend to the
Mayor and City Council the purposes and amounts of expenditures of such funds;



      (4)   To advise the city concerning the receipt of or purchase
of works of art to be placed on municipal property;



      (5)   To advise and assist the city in connection with such
other artistic and heritage activities as may be referred to it by the city;
and



      (6)   To provide to the Mayor and Council an annual report
summarizing its activities for the preceding 12-month period and making such
budgetary requests and recommendations as it may deem necessary and
appropriate to carry forth its activities  and goals for the  next 
budget  year. This report shall be submitted prior to October 1 of each
calendar year to facilitate its consideration in the budgeting process of the
city.



   (B)   The city will support such activities of the Commission with
such funds as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council.



(1999 Code, § 33.22)  (Ord. 2036, passed 4-19-1999)



CHAPTER 34:  FISCAL MATTERS



Section




General Provisions




   34.01   Fiscal year



   34.02   Prevailing wage rate for certain workers



   34.03   Claims against city; exception



   34.04   Procedure for sale or conversion of personal property



   34.05   Procedure for purchase or lease of real estate or personal
property



   34.06   Procedure for sale or lease of municipal real estate




Contracts and Purchasing




   34.20   Purchasing policy and purchasing agent




Director of Finance




   34.35   Creation of office; qualifications



   34.36   Powers and duties




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.01  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on May 1 and end on the
following April 30.



(1999 Code, § 34.01)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 34.02  PREVAILING WAGE RATE FOR CERTAIN WORKERS.



   (A)   To the extent and as required by An Act Regulating Wages of
Laborers, Mechanics and Other Workers Employed in any Public Works by a
State, County, City or Public Body or any Political Subdivision or by Anyone
under Contract for Public Works, approved 6-26-1941, as amended, being ILCS
Ch. 820, Act 130, the general prevailing rate of wages in the locality for
laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in construction of public works
coming under the jurisdiction of the city is hereby ascertained to be the
same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in county areas as
determined by the Department of Labor of the state as of the date of this
section (9-16-1996), a copy of that determination incorporated herein by
reference and on file at the office of the City Clerk. As required by said
Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the
Department’s determination apply to any and all public works construction
undertaken by the city. The definition of any terms appearing in this section
which are also used in the aforesaid Act shall be the same as in said Act.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said
general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment, except public works construction, of the city to the extent
required by the aforesaid Act.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for
inspection by any interested party in the main office of the city this
determination or any revisions of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of
this determination or of the current revised determination of the prevailing
rate of wages then in effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer, and to any association of employers, and to any person or
association of employees who have filed their names and addresses requesting
copies of any determination stating the particular rates and particular class
or workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.



(1999 Code, § 34.02)  (Ord. 1434, passed 5-21-1990; Ord. 1868, passed
9-16-1996; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 34.03  CLAIMS AGAINST CITY; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   All claims against the city for goods purchased, damages or
originating in any other way, except claims for salaries and other allowances
that are fixed by ordinance, must be presented on or before the last Monday
of each month to the Director of Finance. All such claims must be in writing
and items shall be specified.



   (B)   Division (A) above does not prohibit the City Council from
passing on any claims not previously presented if, in the opinion of the City
Council, justice to the claimant requires it, but all such claims must be
presented to the City Council by the claimant in person or by the
claimant’s representative.



(1999 Code, § 34.03)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 34.04  PROCEDURE FOR SALE OR CONVERSION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   The corporate authorities may by resolution passed by a simple majority
of the corporate authorities then holding office:



   (A)   Determine the manner and method by which municipal personal
property shall be offered for sale and in so doing specify the item to be
sold and the reason it is no longer needed for public use;



   (B)   Negotiate through the City Administrator or his or her
designated representatives the price and terms of sale of personal property;



   (C)   Authorize any municipal officer to convert the personal
property into some other form that is useful to the city by using the
material in the personal property;



   (D)   Convey or turn in any specified article of personal property
as part payment on the purchase of other new property;



   (E)   Authorize the sale of personal property in the manner and by
the method as designated by the corporate authorities; and



   (F)   Authorize the execution of a sale agreement by the appropriate
municipal officer for the sale of municipal personal property.



(1999 Code, § 34.04)  (Ord. 3441, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 34.05  PROCEDURE FOR PURCHASE OR LEASE OF REAL ESTATE OR PERSONAL
PROPERTY.



   The corporate authorities may by resolution passed by an affirmative
vote of two-thirds of the corporate authorities:



   (A)   Determine the method by which the city shall purchase or lease
real estate and in so doing specify the location of the real estate, the
intended use thereof, and such conditions with respect to the intended
development and use of the real estate;



   (B)   Determine the method by which the city shall purchase or lease
personal property and in so doing specify the need therefor and intended use
thereof;



   (C)   Negotiate through the City Administrator or his or her
designated representatives the price and terms for the purchase or lease of
real estate or personal property;



   (D)   Authorize the purchase or lease of real estate or personal
property for public purposes pursuant to a purchase or lease agreement,
including those which the purchase or lease agreement provides the city may,
at its option, purchase the real estate or personal property or lease which
is subject to the agreement, upon terms wherein payments previously made, or
a portion of them, are deducted from the purchase price of the property;



   (E)   Authorize purchase or lease of real estate or personal
property through contracts which provide for either lump sum payments or
installment payments, at an interest rate as determined by the corporate
authorities; provided, the installment payments do not exceed 20 years;



   (F)   Authorize the city to issue debt certificates to any person in
lieu of or evidence of the amounts payable under any purchase or installment
agreement or lease agreement. Such certificates may contain such terms as are
provided for the issuance of bonds generally under § 10 of the Local
Government Debt Reform Act (ILCS Ch. 30, Act 350, § 10), except to the
extent such terms expressly conflict with limitations set forth in the
Municipal Code. Cash proceeds received upon issuance of such certificates
shall be duly applied to the acquisition, construction and payment for the
real or personal property which is the subject of such installment or lease
agreement; and



   (G)   Accept and authorize the execution by the appropriate
municipal officer of any proposed agreement for the purchase or lease of real
estate or personal property.



(1999 Code, § 34.05)  (Ord. 3442, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 34.06  PROCEDURE FOR SALE OR LEASE OF MUNICIPAL REAL ESTATE.



   The corporate authorities may by resolution passed by an affirmative
vote of two-thirds of the corporate authorities:



   (A)   Determine the method by which the municipal real estate shall
be offered for sale or lease and in so doing specify the location of the real
estate, the current use thereof, and the reason it is no longer needed or
appropriate for public use;



   (B)   Negotiate through the City Administrator or his or her
designated representatives the price and terms of sale or lease of the
municipal real estate in whole or in part; and



   (C)   Accept and authorize the execution by the appropriate
municipal officer of any proposed agreement for the sale or lease of
municipal real estate, in whole or in part, including installment purchase
agreements not exceeding 20 years or lease agreements not exceeding 99 years.



(1999 Code, § 34.06)  (Ord. 3443, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)




CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING




§ 34.20  PURCHASING POLICY AND PURCHASING AGENT.



   (A)   The Purchasing Manual, as attached to Ord. 3981, passed
4-17-2017, is hereby adopted as the city’s purchasing policy.



   (B)   The office of purchasing agent is hereby established. The City
Administrator or his or her designee shall serve as the purchasing agent.



(1999 Code, § 34.15)  (Ord. 2092, passed 4-3-2000; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012; Ord. 3981, passed 4-17-2017; Ord. 4049, passed 7-16-2018)




DIRECTOR OF FINANCE




§ 34.35  CREATION OF OFFICE; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Creation of office. There is hereby created the office of the
Director of Finance who shall report to the City Administrator and shall be
responsible to the Mayor and City Council for high level administrative,
technical and professional work in directing and supervising the
administration of the Finance Department.



   (B)   Minimum qualifications.



      (1)   A bachelor’s degree in accounting from a recognized
college or university; and



      (2)   A minimum of eight years in financial management.



(1999 Code, § 34.30)  (Ord. 1945, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 34.36  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Director of Finance shall be responsible to the City
Administrator for high level administrative, technical and professional work
in directing and supervising the administration of the Finance Department.



   (B)   In discharging this responsibility, the Director of Finance
shall:



      (1)   Serve as Budget Officer as provided in ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, §§ 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10; (With the adoption of this section, and a
two-thirds majority vote, the city shall establish such position of Budget
Officer. Such officer shall take an oath and post a bond as provided in §§
31.001 and 31.002 of this chapter.)



      (2)   Manage and prepare the city payroll for all persons who
come under the appropriation for salary;



      (3)   Administer the employee benefit programs including the
State Municipal Retirement Fund, hospitalization, medical and other
insurance, workers’ compensation and other benefit programs and deductions
as authorized by the City Council;



      (4)   Oversee the City Purchasing Ordinance and assure all
city purchases are necessary and approved by the City Council in the annual
appropriations ordinance and budget and assure all funds are available prior
to purchase;



      (5)   Attend all City Council meetings and other meetings as
deemed necessary;



      (6)   Advise the Mayor and Council on such financial matters
and perform other duties as assigned by the Mayor and the City Administrator;



      (7)   Receive all moneys belonging to the city and shall pay
all warrants signed by the Mayor and not otherwise and shall keep a separate
account of each fund or appropriation and the debits and credits belonging
thereto. The Director of Finance shall give to every person paying money into
the City Treasury a receipt therefore, specifying the date of payment and
upon what account paid, and the Director of Finance shall file copies of such
receipts with his or her monthly reports;



      (8)   Keep his or her books and accounts in such a manner as
to show with accuracy all moneys received and disbursed by Finance Director,
stating from whom and what account received, and whom and on what account
paid out, and in such a way that the books and accounts maybe readily
investigated and understood, as books, accounts, files and papers of the
Finance Office shall be at all times open to examination to by the Mayor or
Council;



      (9)   Establish all municipal accounting procedures in
accordance with GASB standards; and



      (10)   Provide the Treasurer with all information necessary
for the Treasurer to carry out his or her assigned duties.



(1999 Code, § 34.33)  (Ord. 1945, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 3158, passed
2-18-2003; Ord. 3784, passed 12-2-2012)



CHAPTER 35:  TAXATION



Section




General Provisions




   35.001   Municipal retailer’s occupation (M.R.O.) tax



   35.002   Municipal service occupation (M.S.O.) tax



   35.003   Use tax



   35.004   Library tax



   35.005   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund Tax



   35.006   Foreign fire insurance company tax



   35.007   Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Home
Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax




Automobile Taxation




   35.020   Automobile renting occupation tax



   35.021   Automobile renting use tax



   35.022   Replacement vehicle tax




Hotel Accommodations Tax




   35.035   Definitions



   35.036   Imposition; rate



   35.037   Report; remittance



   35.038   Books and records



   35.039   Collection



   35.040   Proceeds of tax and fines




Locally Imposed and Administrated Tax Rights and Responsibilities




   35.055   Title



   35.056   Scope



   35.057   Definitions



   35.058   Notices



   35.059   Late payment



   35.060   Payment



   35.061   Certain credits and refunds



   35.062   Audit procedure



   35.063   Appeal



   35.064   Hearing



   35.065   Interest and penalties



   35.066   Abatement



   35.067   Installment contracts



   35.068   Statute of limitations



   35.069   Voluntary disclosure



   35.070   Publication of tax ordinances



   35.071   Liens



   35.072   Application




Tax on Sale of Food and Beverages Prepared for Immediate Consumption




   35.085   Definitions



   35.086   Imposition of tax



   35.087   Sales tax returns to city



   35.088   Sales tax returns to state



   35.089   Books and records



   35.090   Suspension of licenses




Municipal Utility Tax




   35.100   Tax imposed



   35.101   Exceptions



   35.102   Additional taxes



   35.103   Definitions



   35.104   Reports to municipality



   35.105   Credit for overpayment



   35.106   Collection




Natural Gas Use Tax




   35.120   Short title



   35.121   Definitions



   35.122   Tax imposed



   35.123   Collection of tax



   35.124   Books and records



 



   35.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Playground and Recreation System or Park Tax, see § 95.02



   Simplified Telecommunications Tax, see § 115.20



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.001  MUNICIPAL RETAILER’S OCCUPATION (M.R.O.) TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the city at the
rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions
of § 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1).



   (B)   Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property at retail in the city shall file all reports as required by
ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3, to the State Department of Revenue.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month.



(1999 Code, § 35.01)  (Ord. 618, passed 9-2-1969)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.002  MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION (M.S.O.) TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
municipality in the business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of
the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said service
persons either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the
provisions of § 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§ 8-11-5).



   (B)   Every supplier or service person required to account for
municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the city shall file all
reports as required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9, to the State Department of
Revenue.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.



(1999 Code, § 35.02)  (Ord. 617, passed 9-2-1969)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.003  USE TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6),
upon the privilege of using in the municipality any item of tangible personal
property which is purchased outside the state at retail from a retailer, and
which is titled or registered with an agency of the state government. The tax
shall be at the rate of 1% of the selling price of such tangible property
with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act (ILCS
Ch. 35, Act 105, §§ 1 et seq.).



   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue
for all municipalities imposing



the tax and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for
the personal property is issued.



(1999 Code, § 35.03)  (Ord. 757, passed 11-4-1974)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.004  LIBRARY TAX.



   The maximum tax rate for library purposes for the municipality shall be
15% of the assessed value of all taxable property in the municipality as
ascertained and set by law.



(1999 Code, § 35.04)  (Ord. 834, passed 12-5-1977)



§ 35.005  ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND TAX.



   (A)   Levied. There shall be levied a tax on all of the property as
equalized and assessed by the Department of Local Transportation Affairs
within the corporate limits of the city at a rate sufficient to pay the
city’s portion of the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund payment.



   (B)   Extent. The tax levied in division (A) above shall be in
addition to the tax levied for general corporate purposes as provided by §
8-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-3-1).



(1999 Code, § 35.05)  (Ord. 964, passed 7-21-1980)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.006  FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY TAX.



   (A)   All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated
under the laws of the state which are engaged in the city in effecting fire
insurance shall pay to the City Treasurer on July 15 of each year a sum equal
to 2% of the gross receipts of the premiums received by such corporation,
association or company, or their agency, agent or agents, for business
effected  for fire insurance on property situated within the city for the
year preceding July 1. The sum above-named shall be as a tax or license fee
upon all such corporations, companies or associations transacting business
within the city.



   (B)   Every person acting as an agent or otherwise for or on behalf
of any such corporation, company or association shall, on or before July 15
of each year, render to the City Clerk a full, true and just account,
verified by oath, of all premiums which during the year ending on July 1
preceding were received by him or her or any other person for him or her, on
behalf of such corporation, company or association, and shall fully and
specifically set out in said report the amount or amounts received as
premiums for fire insurance.



   (C)   The agent shall also, at the time of making the
above-mentioned report, pay to the City Treasurer the tax or license fee
imposed by this section.



   (D)   If such an account is not rendered on or before July 15, or if
the above-mentioned tax or license fees are unpaid after that day, it shall
be unlawful for any such corporation, company or association to transact any
business of fire insurance in this city until the requirements hereof are
fully complied with. This provision shall not relieve any company or
corporation or association from the payment of any such risk that may be
taken in violation hereof.



   (E)   If any such corporation, company or association fails to
render the report herein designated by the day required, or if the
above-mentioned rates as a tax or license fee remain unpaid after the day
designated, every such corporation, company or association shall be penalized
as provided in § 35.999, and, in addition to such penalty, the city shall
recover in action, in its name, for its use, against such corporation,
company or association the full amount of the tax or license fee which would
be due under the provisions of this section.



   (F)   All moneys received under the provisions of this section shall
be paid by the City Treasurer upon receipt directly to the Fire Department of
the city with the provision that the City Auditor shall annually audit the 2%
Fire Tax Fund of the Fire Department as part of the regular city audit.



(1999 Code, § 35.06)  (Ord. 973, passed 2-2-1981)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.007  HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND HOME RULE
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax.



      (1)   Tax. The corporate authorities of the municipality shall
and do hereby impose a tax upon all persons engaged in the municipality in
the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of
tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of the state,
at retail in the municipality on the gross receipts from those sales made in
the course of such business. This tax shall only be imposed at the rate of
0.5%, as authorized by the Act, which is at the same rate that the
municipality imposes a Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax under the
Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Act. Under the Act, this
additional tax may not be imposed on the sales of food for human consumption
that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than
alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics.



      (2)   Collection and enforcement. The tax imposed by the
municipality under this division (A) and the Act and all civil penalties that
may be assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and enforced by
the State Department of Revenue.



   (B)   Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax.



      (1)   Tax.



         (a)   The corporate authorities of the municipality
shall and do hereby impose a tax upon all persons engaged in the municipality
in the business of making sales of service on the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form
of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to  a sale of service.



         (b)   This tax shall only be imposed at the rate of 0.5%
of the selling price, as authorized by the Act which is at the same rate that
the municipality imposes a Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
under the Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act.



         (c)   Under the Act this additional tax may not be
imposed on the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off
the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks
and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription
and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.



      (2)   Collection and enforcement. The tax imposed by the
municipality under this division (B) and the Act and all civil penalties that
may be assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and enforced by
the State Department of Revenue.



(1999 Code, § 35.07)  (Ord. 3045, passed 2-20-2001; Ord. 3455, passed
6-19-2006; Ord. 3456, passed 6-19-2006)



AUTOMOBILE TAXATION



§ 35.020  AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting automobiles in this



city at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the
course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with
the provisions of § 8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 8-11-7).



   (B)   Every person engaged in the business of renting automobiles in
the city shall file all reports as required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3, to
the State Department of Revenue.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



(1999 Code, § 35.20)  (Ord. 1002, passed 1-18-1982)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.021  AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the
city an automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and which
is titled or registered with an agency of the state’s government in this
city at the rate of 1% of the rental price of such automobile while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-8 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8).



   (B)   The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from
the persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being in this city.



   (C)   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue.



(1999 Code, § 35.21)  (Ord. 1003, passed 1-18-1982)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.022  REPLACEMENT VEHICLE TAX.



   (A)   (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon each vehicle, as defined
in § 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146),
purchased in this city by or on behalf of an insurance company to replace a
vehicle of an insured person in the settlement of a total loss claim.



      (2)   The tax shall be in the amount of $50 per vehicle
purchase.



   (B)   Every such insurance company that purchases a replacement
vehicle as defined herein shall complete and file with the State Department
of Revenue a replacement vehicle certificate (Form RVT-7).



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.



(1999 Code, § 35.22)  (Ord. 1101, passed 4-30-1984)  Penalty, see § 35.999



HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX



§ 35.035  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, whenever any of the following
words, terms or definitions are used herein they shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section:



   HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS.  A room or rooms in any building or structure
located in the city and kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out
to the public to be an inn, hotel, motel, lodging house, bed and breakfast
establishment or where sleeping, rooming, conference or exhibition
accommodations are furnished for lease or rent whether with or without meals.
The terms HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS shall not include (i) an accommodation which a
person occupies or has a right to occupy as his domicile and permanent
residence; (ii) any temporary accommodation provided in any building or
structure owned or operated directly or indirectly, by or on behalf of a
not-for-profit medical institution, hospital, or allied educational
institution.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has the right to rent or lease hotel
accommodations to the public for consideration or who, directly or indirectly
receives or collects the price, charge or rent paid for the rental or lease
of hotel accommodations. This term includes, but is not limited to, persons
engaged in the business of selling or reselling to the public the right to
occupy hotel accommodations, whether on-line, in person or otherwise. The
term also includes persons engaged in the business of facilitating the rental
or lease of hotel accommodations for consideration, whether on-line, in
person or otherwise.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation,
business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal
corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier,
vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees
or other representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in
any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any
circumstance.



(1999 Code, § 35.35)  (Ord. 1824, passed 4-3-1996; Ord. 3966, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 35.036  IMPOSITION; RATE.



   (A)   Commencing the effective date of this subchapter a tax for the
rental or leasing of any hotel accommodations in the amount of 9% is hereby
levied upon all operators engaged in the business of renting or leasing hotel
accommodations for which a room charge is made.  Persons subject to the tax
imposed in this section, may reimburse themselves for their tax liability or
such tax by separately stating such tax as an additional charge in the rental
of the hotel room, which charge may be stated in combination with or in a
single amount with state tax imposed under the "Hotel Operator's Occupation
Tax Act" (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.).



   (B)   In the event an operator purchases a hotel accommodation from
another operator for resale and in so doing having paid a tax to the original
operator as prescribed herein, the resale operator shall, upon the resale of
the hotel accommodation, be responsible to pay a tax only on the difference
between the price of its purchase of the hotel accommodation and the resale
price of the hotel accommodation.



   (C)   A hotel accommodation tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee levied or imposed by the city.



(1999 Code, § 35.36)  (Ord. 1824, passed 4-3-1996; Ord. 3966, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 35.037  REPORT; REMITTANCE.



   (A)   The operator shall file monthly, with the Director of Finance,
tax returns on forms prescribed by the city and the Illinois Department of
Revenue, showing tax receipts received with respect to hotel accommodations
space rented or leased during the calendar month reported. The tax return and
remittance of a sum of money equal to the tax imposed on the renting or
leasing of the hotel accommodations space for the calendar month, shall be
due on or before the last day of each succeeding calendar month and the
return shall indicate for what period the return is to be filed; i.e. return
and payment for January tax receipts is due on or before the last day of
February.



   (B)   Every operator who is the owner of the hotel accommodations
shall file monthly with the Director of Finance on or before the last day of
each succeeding calendar month, a list, including name, postal address and
email address, of the operators, other than the owner, who have rented or
leased any hotel accommodations in the owner's facility for the month
reported.



   (C)   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a late payment
penalty in a sum equal to 10% of the unpaid tax, shall be assessed to the
operator and added to the tax.  In addition if for any reason any tax is not
paid when due, interest at the rate of 1.5% per month on the amount of tax
which remains unpaid, shall be added to the tax.



(Ord. 3966, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 35.038  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Each operator required by § 35.037 to pay the tax imposed by § 35.036
to the Director of Finance, shall keep accurate books and records of its
business activity, including the original source document and books of entry
denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax
liability under § 35.036.  All such books and records shall, at all times
during business hours of the day, be subject to and available for inspection
and auditing by the Director of Finance or his authorized agent.



(1999 Code, § 35.38)  (Ord. 1824, passed 4-3-1996; Ord. 3966, passed
11-21-2016)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.039  COLLECTION.



   Whenever any operator shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
City Corporate Counsel shall, upon the request of the City Administrator
bring or cause to be brought an action against the operator to enforce the
payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Any legal fees and costs incurred by the city, in the
collection of any tax, shall be paid by the operator.



(1999 Code, § 35.40)  (Ord. 1824, passed 4-3-1996; Ord. 3966, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 35.040  PROCEEDS OF TAX AND FINES.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
subchapter, including penalties, shall be appropriated for general corporate
purposes.



(1999 Code, § 35.41)  (Ord. 1824, passed 4-3-1996; Ord. 3966, passed
11-21-2016)



LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTRATED  TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES



§ 35.055  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally
Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Subchapter”.



(1999 Code, § 35.55)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.056  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the city’s
procedures in connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



(1999 Code, § 35.56)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.057  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act.



   CITY. The City of O’Fallon, Illinois.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The city’s Mayor and City Council.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The city’s Director of Finance is charged
with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they
are authorized by the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR to act in the LOCAL TAX
ADMINISTRATOR’s stead. The LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the authority
to implement the terms of this subchapter to give full effect to this
subchapter. The exercise of such authority by the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR
shall not be inconsistent with this subchapter and the Act.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the
city that is collected or administered by the city not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.



   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city.



(1999 Code, § 35.57)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.058  NOTICES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the Local Tax Administrator.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax Administrator as
follows:



      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the person’s last known address; or



      (2)   Personal service or delivery.



(1999 Code, § 35.58)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.059  LATE PAYMENT.



   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:



   (A)   Physically received by the city on or before the due date; or



   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the city, with adequate postage prepaid.



(1999 Code, § 35.59)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.060  PAYMENT.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order:



   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;



   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and



   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.



(1999 Code, § 35.60)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.061  CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be four or less years after the end of the calendar year in which
payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who
has not paid the amounts directly to the city.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that, there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any moneys to the city.



      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the Local Tax
Administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax
Administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



      (3)   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in
whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for
refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 4% per annum, based on a
year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(1999 Code, § 35.61)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.062  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.



   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and
if the date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days, nor more
than 30 days, from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
Local Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing,
that is convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.



   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the city.



   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the Tax Administrator’s determination of the best estimate of the
taxpayer’s tax liability.



   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of
the city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.



(1999 Code, § 35.62)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.063  APPEAL.



   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the Local Tax Administrator’s issuance of a protestable
notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal,
refund and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax
Administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.



(1999 Code, § 35.63)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.064  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 35.063 of this chapter, the
Local Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted, except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.



(1999 Code, § 35.64)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.065  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.



   (A)   Interest. The city hereby provides for the amount of interest
to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment or non-payment of the tax, to
be 5% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.



   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties.



      (1)   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of 5% of the
amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a
late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed.



      (2)   If no return is filed within the time or manner provided
by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of
tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty
shall be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed.



      (3)   A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.



(1999 Code, § 35.65)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.066  ABATEMENT.



   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if
the Local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(1999 Code, § 35.66)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.067  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The Local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered, unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
Local Tax Administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the Local Administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.



(1999 Code, § 35.67)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.068  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The city, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review
all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.



   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (C)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year
period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by
the city, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (D)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(1999 Code, § 35.68)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.069  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from
the Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the
amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application, but not more than four years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary
disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest or
penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if
the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.



(1999 Code, § 35.69)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.070  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.



(1999 Code, § 35.70)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.071  LIENS.



   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid,
the lien shall remain in full force and effect.



   (B)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the Local Tax
Administrator shall:



      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;



      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and



      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed
lien.



(1999 Code, § 35.71)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



§ 35.072  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the city’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this
subchapter shall be controlling.



(1999 Code, § 35.72)  (Ord. 3039, passed 1-2-2001)



TAX ON SALE OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES PREPARED FOR IMMEDIATE CONSUMPTION



§ 35.085  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.



   FARM PRODUCE STAND. Those temporary and sometimes semi-permanent stands
utilized by farmers and other produce growers to sell primarily their own
products in season.



   FOOD AND BEVERAGES PREPARED FOR IMMEDIATE CONSUMPTION.



      (1)   Unless otherwise exempted herein, any food and/or
beverages prepared at any food service establishment which is required to
hold a St. Clair County food service sanitation permit.



      (2)   Such prepared food or beverage may be purchased at
retail for consumption within or upon the premises where it is sold or may be
purchased for consumption off the premises. However, with respect to food
and/or beverages purchased for consumption off the premises, FOOD AND/OR
BEVERAGE does not include any food and/or beverage which is sold, in a closed
or sealed bottle, can, carton, or container of the manufacturer or
wholesaler, or which has not been prepared for immediate consumption.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, PREPARED FOOD also does
not include any food sold through a coin operated automatic food item
dispensing machine, or by wholesalers, churches, public or private schools,
daycare centers, nursing homes, retirement centers or similar residential
care facilities or programs for the central preparation of meals to be
delivered to and consumed at private residences of the elderly or the
disabled.



   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any person which sells at retail, food
prepared for immediate consumption, whether consumed on premises or not, and
whether or not such food service establishment use is conducted along with
any other use(s) in a common premise or business establishment including, but
not limited to those establishments commonly described as a restaurant,
eating place, drive in restaurant, buffet, bakery, banquet facility,
cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee
shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, ice
cream parlor, delicatessen, quick shop, convenience store, mobile food or
beverage vehicles, hospitals, hotel, motel, club or any other establishment
which sells, at retail, food which has been prepared for immediate
consumption.



   The term FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT does not include farm produce
stands, coin operated automatic food item dispensing machines, wholesalers,
churches, public or private schools, daycare centers, nursing homes,
retirement centers or similar residential care facilities or programs for the
central preparation of meals to be delivered to and consumed at private
residences of the elderly or the disabled and those persons that are exempt
from the Illinois Retailers Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et
seq.) or the Illinois Service Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, §§ 1 et
seq.).



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, unincorporated association, partnership,
joint venture, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
representative or other entity.



   SOLD AT RETAIL. To sell for use or consumption in exchange for
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other
nature and not for resale, with said transaction being subject to either the
Illinois Retailers Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.) or
the Illinois Service Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.).



(Ord. 3898, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 35.086  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all retail sales of food and beverages
that have been prepared for immediate consumption within the city at the rate
of 1% of the selling price of such food and/or beverages. This tax is imposed
in addition to any other tax imposed by the city or any other governmental
entity with respect to such food and beverages. The purchaser of such food
and beverages shall be liable for the payment of the tax imposed, but the
person engaged in the business of selling such food and beverages at retail
assumes the responsibility of collecting and paying said tax to the city.



(Ord. 3898, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 35.087  SALES TAX RETURNS TO CITY.



   Every person engaged in the retail business of selling food and
beverages for immediate consumption within the city shall file with the City
Finance Department, on or before the last day of each month following the
period to which they apply a report in the form required by the Finance
Department and the report shall be accompanied by a check or other form of
payment in the amount of the tax due and payable upon such taxable sales made
during the preceding month.



(Ord. 3898, passed 9-21-2015)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.088  SALES TAX RETURNS TO STATE.



   Every report filed under § 35.087 of this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a photocopy or other copy of the sales tax return filed by the
person engaged in the business of selling such food and beverages at retail
with the State Department of Revenue pursuant to ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3,
as amended, (commonly known as the sales tax return) showing the total retail
sales made by such person for the preceding calendar month. If more than one
location is reflected on the sales tax return, the multijurisdictional form
must also be submitted. The person will authorize release of sales tax
information to the city.



(Ord. 3898, passed 9-21-2015)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.089  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Every person engaged in the business of selling food and beverages
prepared for immediate consumption at retail shall keep complete and accurate
books and records of all such retail sales according to standards adopted by
the State Department of Revenue for retail sales generally. The City Director
of Finance or authorized representative may enter the premises of every such
person at reasonable times and upon reasonable advance notice to inspect the
books and records of such person in order to effectuate the proper
administration of the tax imposed by this subchapter, and to ensure
compliance with this subchapter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
subchapter for any person to hinder, interfere with or prevent the City
Director of Finance or authorized representative from performing his or her
duties hereunder.



(Ord. 3898, passed 9-21-2015)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.090  SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.



   In addition to any other penalties provided for in this code of
ordinances, if the Mayor, after a hearing held by him or her or for him or
her by his or her designee, shall find that any person has willfully avoided
the payment of any tax imposed by this subchapter, he or she shall suspend or
revoke all municipal licenses held by such person. The person shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than five days
after being notified of the hearing by registered or certified mail, at the
person’s address on record with the city. The notice shall state the date,
time and place of the hearing. Any suspension or revocation of any license(s)
shall not release or discharge the person from civil liability for payment of
the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.



(Ord. 3898, passed 9-21-2015; Ord. 3907, passed 11-2-2015)  Penalty, see §
35.999



Cross reference:



   Food industry, see Ch. 112



MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX



§ 35.100  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:



   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits
of the city and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts
therefrom;



   (B)   (1)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate
limits of the city at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for
each purchaser using an alternative rate promulgated pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 8-11-2(3):



         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed a month: $0.4951 per kilowatt- hour;



         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed a month: $0.4078 per kilowatt- hour;



         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed a month: $0.3301 per kilowatt- hour;



         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed a month: $0.2335 per kilowatt-hour;



         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed a month: $0.1854 per kilowatt-hour;



         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed a month: $0.3816 per kilowatt-hour;



         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed a month: $0.3706 per kilowatt-hour;



         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed a month: $0.3696 per kilowatt-hour;



         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed a month: $0.3586 per kilowatt-hour; and



         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month: $0.3476 per kilowatt-hour.



      (2)   The tax rates set forth in division (B)(1) above will be
used at least through 12-31-2008, are proportional and do not exceed the
revenue that could have been collected during 1997 using the rates enumerated
in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2.



   (C)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2, the rates set forth
in division (A) above shall be effective:



      (1)   Upon approval by the State Commerce Commission for
residential customers;



      (2)   For non-residential customers on the date of the first
bill issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104, but in no case later
than the last bill issued to that customer before 12-31-2000; or



      (3)   The date of the first bill issued pursuant to ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 16-104, for non-residential customers.



   (D)   Until such time as division (B) above becomes applicable for
non-residential customers pursuant to division (C) above, persons engaged in
the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity
for use or consumption within corporate limits of the city, and not for
resale, at a rate not to exceed 5% of the gross receipts therefrom for
non-residential customers.



(1999 Code, § 35.85)  (Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002)



§ 35.101  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed
with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the
extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by thus state
or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any person engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity
be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, authorized by ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 8-11-1, nor shall any tax authorized by this section be imposed upon
any person engaged in a business or any privilege unless such tax is imposed
in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of
the same class in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or
operated.



   (B)   All city accounts are not subject to the taxes imposed in §
35.101(A) and (B).



(1999 Code, § 35.86)  (Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 4011, passed
10-16-2017)



§ 35.102  ADDITIONAL TAXES.



   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to the municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires
or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers’ business.



(1999 Code, § 35.87)  (Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002)



§ 35.103  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, except for that consideration received from the city; and for all
services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every
kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service,
product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service
costs, or any other expenses whatsoever.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the
state, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by
order of any court.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a pubic utility directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.



   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits
of the municipality, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.



(1999 Code, § 35.88)  (Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002)



§ 35.104  REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY.



   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall
make a return to the City Treasurer for the preceding month, stating:



      (1)   His or her name;



      (2)   His or her principal place of business;



      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the
basis of which the tax is imposed;



      (4)   Amount of tax; and



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at
the time of making such return, pay to the city the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that, in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if
he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such
billings and the taxable gross receipts.



(1999 Code, § 35.89)  (Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002)



§ 35.105  CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT.



   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which
was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of
a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that, no amounts
erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited.



   (B)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after
the due date of such amount.



(1999 Code, § 35.90)  (Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002)



§ 35.106  COLLECTION.



   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the
purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in the state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt
of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity of the purchaser
and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
subchapter and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity
shall constitute a debt owed to the city by such person delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity, and taxes so collected shall be remitted to the city monthly.
Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross
charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
city upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the
tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall pay the tax monthly,
directly to the city in the manner prescribed by the city. Persons delivering
electricity who file returns pursuant to this section, shall, at the time of
filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to § 35.102 of this chapter. The utility tax is scheduled to expire
in the year 2022.



(1999 Code, § 35.91)  (Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002)




NATURAL GAS USE TAX




§ 35.120  SHORT TITLE.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be known as the Natural Gas
Use Tax and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the city,
the state or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.



(Ord. 3777, passed 10-15-2012)



§ 35.121  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GAS. Natural gas.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5,
§§ 1-101 et seq., as amended.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility, as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
3-105.



   RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas as part of a sale at
retail for use within the city.



   RETAILER. Any person engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas.



   SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale.



(Ord. 3777, passed 10-15-2012)



§ 35.122  TAX IMPOSED.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter is imposed on all retail purchasers
of gas from retailers, as follows.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, the natural
gas use tax is imposed at the rate of $0.05 per therm on the privilege of
using or consuming gas in the city that is purchased in a sale at retail.



   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the
natural gas use tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this
subchapter shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas.



   (C)   The retail purchaser shall pay the natural gas use tax,
measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser’s premises, to
the public utility designated to collect the natural gas use tax pursuant to
§ 35.123 of this chapter on or before the payment due date of the public
utility’s bill first reflecting the natural gas use tax, or directly to the
City Clerk on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the
month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser. If no public
utility has been designated to collect the natural gas use tax pursuant to
this division (C) or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public
utility, the retail purchaser shall remit the natural gas use tax directly to
the City Clerk.



   (D)   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the city by
the retail purchaser shall be exempt from the natural gas use tax, if the
gross receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser
are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to
the municipal utility tax.



   (E)   A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and, therefore, does
not pay the natural gas use tax imposed by this subchapter with respect to
the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all
of the gas, shall pay the natural gas use tax directly to the City Clerk on
or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which
the gas is used or consumed.



   (F)   The natural gas use tax shall apply to gas delivered to the
retail purchaser on or after 12-1-2012.



(Ord. 3777, passed 10-15-2012)



§ 35.123  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   The city is authorized to enter into a contract for collection
of the natural gas use tax imposed by this subchapter with any public utility
providing gas service in the city. Such contract shall include and
substantially conform to the following provisions.



      (1)   The public utility, as an independent contractor, will
collect the natural gas use tax with respect to gas delivered by it to retail
purchasers residing or doing business within the city.



      (2)   The public utility will remit collected natural gas use
taxes to the City Clerk no less than once each month.



      (3)   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from
such collected natural gas use taxes a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts
collected; provided, however, the natural gas use tax is timely remitted to
the city by the public utility.



      (4)   The public utility shall not be liable to the city for
any tax billed by the public utility, but not actually collected from a
retail purchaser.



      (5)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.



   (B)   A public utility designated to collect from its customers the
natural gas use tax imposed by this subchapter shall bill each customer for
the natural gas use tax on all gas delivered to the customer unless the
customer’s use or consumption is exempt from the natural gas use tax
pursuant to a duly passed and authorized ordinance of the city.



(Ord. 3777, passed 10-15-2012)



§ 35.124  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Every public utility supplying gas within the city shall keep accurate
books and records, including original source documents and books of entry,
denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given
rise to any natural gas use tax liability or exemption under this subchapter.
All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be
subject to and available for inspection by the city.



(Ord. 3777, passed 10-15-2012)



§ 35.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall be penalized as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   If any corporation, company or association fails to render the
report designated in § 35.006 of this chapter by the  day required, or if
the rates in § 35.006 of this chapter as a tax or license fee remain unpaid
after the day designated, every such corporation, company or association
shall forfeit and pay to this city the sum of $750 upon conviction for each
offense.



   (C)   Any operator found guilty of failing to pay, collect, report
and transmit said hotel accommodation tax (§§ 35.035 through 35.040) to the
Director of Finance in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $750 for each
offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day upon which said operator shall continue any such violation, or permit any
such violation to exist after notification thereof.



   (D)   (1)   If for any reason the tax imposed by § 35.086 of
this chapter on the sale of food and beverages for immediate consumption is
not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of 10% of the amount of tax owed
shall be applied, plus interest at the rate of 1.25% per month from the date
of delinquency per month shall be added and collected.



      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of
§§ 35.085 through 35.089 of this chapter, including the late filing of a
return or the late payment of the tax, shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed $500 for each offense. A separate offense is committed upon each day
that a violation exists.



   (E)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
35.100 through 35.106 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $200;
and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(1999 Code, § 35.99)  (Ord. 973, passed 2-2-1981; Ord. 1824, passed
4-3-1996; Ord. 3093, passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 3453, passed 6-19- 2006; Ord.
3966, passed 11-21-2016)



CHAPTER 36:  PERSONNEL



Section



   36.01   Personnel code adopted by reference



   36.02   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund



   36.03   Drug Free Workplace Policy



   36.04   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act adopted by reference



§ 36.01  PERSONNEL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The personnel code of the city, being Ord. 3058, as passed, approved
and amended by the city, is hereby adopted by the city as fully as if set out
at length herein.



(1999 Code, § 36.01)  (Ord. 1036, passed 12-6-1982;  Ord. 1848, passed
5-20-1996; Ord. 1944, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 1949, passed 9-29-1997; Ord.
3058, passed 7-2-2001; Ord. 3834, passed 7-21-2014; Ord. 4024, passed
1-2-2018; Ord. 4036, passed 4-16-2018)



Editor’s note:



   The personnel code of the city, as enacted by Ord. 3058, adopted
7-2-2001, is not set out at length in this code, but is on file and available
for inspection in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 36.02  ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.



   The city does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund, effective 1-1-1981.



(1999 Code, § 36.02)  (Ord. 960, passed 6-16-1980)



Cross-reference:



   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund Tax, see § 35.05



§ 36.03  DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY.



   The Drug Free Workplace Policy on file with the City Clerk is hereby
made part of this section by  reference and is hereby adopted by the city.



(1999 Code, § 36.03)  (Res. 97-13, passed 6-16-1997; Res. 01-34, passed 
8-6-2001)



§ 36.04  STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The regulations of § 5-15 (ILCS Ch. 5, Act  430, § 5-15)
and Art. 10 (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40) of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.
(hereinafter referred to as the “Act”), are hereby adopted by reference
and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the extent
required by ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5.



   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act by any officer or any employee of the
city is hereby prohibited.



   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the city under the Act is hereby prohibited.



   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the
Act, by any officer or employee of the city is hereby prohibited.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms “officer” and
“employee” shall be defined as set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §
70-5(c).



   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5, for similar
violations of the Act.



   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any
existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers
and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies
are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this
section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act
430, § 70-5(a).



   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the city.



   (I)   If the State Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional
in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
State Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further
appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further
action by the corporate authorities of the city if the Act is found
unconstitutional by the State Supreme Court.



   (J)   If the State Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional, but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the
Act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this section relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the city.



(1999 Code, § 36.04)  (Ord. 3254, passed 5-17-2004)



CHAPTER 37:  EMERGENCY OPERATION PROCEDURE



Section




Civil Emergencies




   37.01   Definitions



   37.02   Proclamation of emergency



   37.03   Curfew proclamation



   37.04   Authority of Mayor




Emergency Operation Plan




   37.15   Establishment; purpose



   37.16   Cooperation with state agencies



   37.17   Cooperation with other municipalities; mutual aid agreements



   37.18   Emergency purchases



   37.19   Dispatch call center



 



   37.99   Penalty



CIVIL EMERGENCIES



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY.



      (1)   CIVIL EMERGENCY.  A riot or unlawful assembly
characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use
force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons
acting together without authority of law.



      (2)   NATURAL DISASTER.  Human-made calamity, including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the
corporate limits of the city, resulting in the death or injury of persons or
the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures
must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   CURFEW.  A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city,
excepting officially designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency.



   EMERGENCY PLANNING CHIEF.  An emergency planning chief shall be
appointed by the Mayor and have the duties as provided herein as well as the
duties of preparedness as provided by the National Incident Management System
(NIMS).



(1999 Code, § 37.01)  (Ord. 3962, passed 10-3- 2016)



§ 37.02  PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Written declaration.  Whenever an emergency, as defined in §
37.01, exists, the Mayor shall declare its existence by means of a written
declaration under oath, setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency.



   (B)   Effective period. The proclamation herein authorized shall be
effective for a period of not more than seven days or until the adjournment
of the first regular Council meeting, whichever occurs first, unless sooner
terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating that the emergency no
longer exists. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of
seven days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster shall be
given prompt and generally publicity and shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   (C)   Declaration.  The effect of the declaration of an emergency
is to activate the city's emergency operation plan and to authorize the
furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.



   (D)   Notification.  Upon issuing the proclamation herein
authorized, the Director of Public Safety/Emergency Planning Chief or his/her
designee shall notify the news media situated with the city and shall cause
three copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to
be posted at the following places within the city:



      (1)   The City Hall;



      (2)   The Post Office; and



      (3)   The Police Station.



(1999 Code, § 37.02)  (Ord. 3962, passed 10-3- 2016)



§ 37.03  CURFEW PROCLAMATION.



   After the proclamation of an emergency, the Mayor may order a general
curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city as a
whole, as the Mayor deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the
day or night as the Mayor deems necessary in the interest of the public
safety and welfare.



(1999 Code, § 37.03)  (Ord. 3962, passed 10-3- 2016)



§ 37.04  AUTHORITY OF MAYOR.



   After the proclamation of an emergency, the Mayor of the city may also,
in the interest of the public safety and welfare, do any of the following:



   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores including
taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted;



   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by
any wholesaler or retailer;



   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving
away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing
or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and



   (E)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.



(1999 Code, § 37.04)  (Ord. 3962, passed 10-3- 2016)



EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN



§ 37.15  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city shall, at all times, have in place an emergency
operations plan to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile
action, or from natural disaster, in accordance with the State Emergency
Management Agency Act of 1988 (ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.), as
amended.



   (B)   The emergency operations plan shall be reviewed annually and
updated as necessary by the Director of Public Safety/Emergency Planning
Chief or his/her designee.



(1999 Code, § 37.15)  (Ord. 3962, passed 10-3- 2016)



§ 37.16  COOPERATION WITH STATE AGENCIES.



   If the Governor of the State of Illinois, declares that a state of
emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States
or the occurrence within the state of a major disaster resulting from enemy
sabotage or other hostile action or from a natural disaster, it shall be the
duty of the appropriate representatives of the city to cooperate fully with
the State Office of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and with the
Governor in the exercise of emergency powers.



(Ord. 3962, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 37.17  COOPERATION WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES; MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The City Administration may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
municipal corporations or political subdivision of the state, but no such
agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Council.



(Ord. 3962, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 37.18  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   (A)   The Council may, on recommendation of the Mayor, authorize any
purchase or contracts necessary to place the city in a position to combat
effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other
bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property and provide emergency assistance to victims in case of such disaster
or from natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of enemy-caused or natural disaster, the Director
of Public Safety/Emergency Planning Chief or his/her designee is authorized,
on behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or
material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency,
without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed
by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations as authorized by the
State Emergency Management Agency Act of 1988; provided that, if the Council
meets at such time, the Director of Public Safety/Emergency Planning Chief or
his/her designee shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed
by that body.



(Ord. 3962, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 37.19  DISPATCH CALL CENTER.



   The Law Enforcement Department shall maintain at all times the city's
Dispatch Call Center, including the maintenance of its 9-1-1 or Public Safety
Answering Point (PSAP). Subject to applicable laws, the Dispatch Call Center
shall:



   (A)   Answer 9-1-1 emergency and non-emergency calls from the
public, the interdepartmental calls from police, fire and ambulance services,
and call from other public safety agencies;



   (B)   Monitor multiple computer and/or video screens, gather,
prioritize and document caller information;



   (C)   Provide callers with the appropriate advice or referral, or
initiate police, fire and/or emergency medical services (EMS) to the caller;
and



   (D)   Operate Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD), 800 MHz radio and
multiple sophisticated communication equipment systems.



(Ord. 3923, passed 3-7-2016; Ord. 3962, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 37.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter or an executive
order issued pursuant thereto shall be punished as provided in § 10.99 of
this code.



(1999 Code, § 37.05)



CHAPTER 38:  ELECTIONS



Section



   38.01   Election procedures



   38.02   General election for municipal officers



   38.03   Judges of elections



   38.04   Voting hours



   38.05   Inauguration Day



§ 38.01  ELECTION PROCEDURES.



   The provisions of the Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et
seq.) concerning municipal elections shall govern the conduct of the city
elections.



(1999 Code, § 38.01)  (Ord. 977, passed 3-16-1981)



§ 38.02  GENERAL ELECTION FOR MUNICIPAL OFFICERS.



   A general election for municipal officers authorized by law or
ordinance to be elected shall be held in the city on the third Tuesday of
April in the odd-numbered years, at such places in the city, as may be
designated by law.



(1999 Code, § 38.02)  (Ord. 977, passed 3-16-1981)



§ 38.03  JUDGES OF ELECTIONS.



   The judges of the election shall qualify by being sworn to discharge
their duties according to law, and in the absence of any officer authorized
to administer oaths, the judges may administer the oath to each other.



(1999 Code, § 38.03)  (Ord. 977, passed 3-16-1981)



§ 38.04  VOTING HOURS.



   The judges of the election shall keep the polls open during the hours
prescribed by law.



(1999 Code, § 38.04)  (Ord. 977, passed 3-16-1981)



§ 38.05  INAUGURATION DAY.



   The terms of elected municipal officials shall commence at the first
regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities during the month of
May following the proclamation of the results of the regular municipal
election at which the officers were elected.



(1999 Code, § 38.05)  (Ord. 977, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 3526, passed
6-18-2007)



CHAPTER 39:  CITY POLICIES



Section




Policy Regarding Social Security Numbers




   39.01   Approval and adoption of policy relating to Social Security
numbers




Policy Regarding Outstanding Fees Owed to City




   39.15   Delinquent fees and failure to obtain permits or licenses



 



   39.99   Penalty



POLICY REGARDING SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS



§ 39.01  APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF POLICY RELATING TO SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBERS.



   (A)   In order to establish a policy and rules for the collection,
use and communication of Social Security numbers in compliance with the State
Identity Protection Act, the Mayor and City Council hereby adopt a policy
with regard to the collection, use and communication of individual’s Social
Security numbers in substantially the same form as attached to Ord. 3675, but
subject to amendment from time to time as deemed necessary to maintain
compliance with this Act.



   (B)   Upon its passage and approval, this section shall be in full
force and effect ten days after its publication in pamphlet form as required
by law.



(1999 Code, § 39.01)  (Ord. 3675, passed 7-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 39.99



POLICY REGARDING OUTSTANDING FEES OWED TO CITY



§ 39.15  DELINQUENT FEES AND FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMITS OR LICENSES.



   When an applicant applies for any license or permit required by the
city, the city may, in its discretion, deny that license or permit for any of
the following reasons:



   (A)   The applicant owes any fees to the city;



   (B)   The applicant has failed to apply for and/or obtain approval
for any other license and/or permit required by the city;



   (C)   The applicant has an outstanding balance for any service
provided by the city;



   (D)   If there are any outstanding costs of abatement due to the
city by the applicant;



   (E)   If there are any moneys owed by the applicant to the city
pursuant to a city lien against applicant’s real estate; and



   (F)   The applicant has any overdue balance for any tax by the city,
other than real property taxes.



(1999 Code, § 39.10)  (Ord. 3747, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 39.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person who violates § 39.01 of this chapter (§ 10 of the
Act) is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. For purposes of the violation of the
city code, said person is subject to a fine of $100 for the first such
violation, and a $500 fine for each violation thereafter. For purposes of
criminal prosecution, such person may face any or all penalties that the
State Legislature may establish from time to time for the commission of Class
B misdemeanors, including incarceration.



(1999 Code, § 39.99)  (Ord. 3675, passed 7-6-2010)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



      51.   SEWERS



      52.   WATER



      53.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



Section




Garbage and Rubbish Collection




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Applicability of provisions



   50.03   License required



   50.04   Fee for license



   50.05   Application for license; issuance; renewal



   50.06   Yard waste collection



   50.07   Revocation of permit



   50.08   Qualifications; truck and collection container sanitary
requirements



   50.09   Trucks required for large items



   50.10   Washing of trucks and equipment



   50.11   Parking garbage trucks




Regulations




   50.25   Containers



   50.26   Windblown garbage



   50.27   Accumulation of garbage



   50.28   Dumping garbage on property of others



   50.29   Depositing or dropping garbage




Administration and Enforcement




   50.40   Notice requiring removal of garbage or debris



   50.41   Abatement by city; charges



   50.42   Lien for unpaid abatement charges



   50.43   Release of lien



   50.44   Foreclosure



   50.45   Prima facie evidence of violations



   50.46   Exclusive garbage and trash haulers



 



   50.99   Penalty



GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   RUBBISH. Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood
furniture, bedding; non-combustible trash, including, but not limited to,
metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces
of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including,
but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt,
contents of letter receptacles; provided, however, that, refuse shall not
include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid
wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such
as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.



(1999 Code, § 50.01)



§ 50.02  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent or regulate the
hauling of rubbish or refuse from industrial processes, from construction
projects or other matter not normally collected on a regular schedule and
haulers of rubbish not normally collected in regular collections shall be
excused from the requirements of obtaining a collector’s license, as
provided in this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 50.02)



§ 50.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business as a residential or commercial
collector of garbage and rubbish unless first having made application and
secured a license from the city.



(1999 Code, § 50.03)  Penalty, see § 50.99



Statutory reference:



   Contracts regarding collection and disposal of garbage and refuse, see
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-19-1 et seq.



§ 50.04  FEE FOR LICENSE.



   The fee for the license of a residential collector shall be $250 per
year and a the fee for a commercial license shall be $50 per year. The
license fee shall be for the fiscal year of the city commencing on May 1 and
expiring on April 30. The license for residential collection will permit the
residential collector to pick up commercial, but the commercial license will
not permit any residential pickup.



(1999 Code, § 50.04)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE; RENEWAL.



   Upon application for a license, the applicant shall furnish the City
Clerk, along with the application, proof of insurance in the amount of
$300,000/ $100,000 liability and property damage, and at that time, shall
file with the Clerk a proposed rate schedule for services to be performed for
a residential application. The proposed rate schedule shall set forth the
type of service to be offered and the price for same, including the size and
number of cans per pickup for the charge, the charge for any extra cans, the
charge for the bags, the size of the bags and the charge for bundles and size
of the bundles, whether this is once a week or twice a week pickup, and shall
include an unlimited service charge. The proposed rate schedule shall also
set forth the days or day of each week that the collector shall schedule his
or her pickup within the city. Applications for license renewal shall be due
on or before May 1 of each year. All documentation and information that is
required for a new application shall also be provided for a renewal 
request. A license shall be granted only upon approval by the City Council of
a proposed rate schedule. Once approved, the rate schedule shall be valid for
one year and the licensee shall not be permitted to increase prices on the
schedule for that same period.



(1999 Code, § 50.05)  (Ord. 1683, passed 3-21-1994)



§ 50.06  YARD WASTE COLLECTION.



   Effective 7-1-1990, all licensees shall furnish yard waste collection
service to the residents of the city. The rates for the services to be
provided by the licensee shall be approved by the City Council as provided in
§ 50.05 of this chapter. Requests for license renewal and rate increases
must be submitted to the city for review and approval at least 60 days prior
to May 1.



(1999 Code, § 50.06)  (Ord. 1429, passed 4-16-1990; Ord. 1928, passed
7-7-1997)



§ 50.07  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   If the licensee fails to perform any services according to the
licensee’s application and rate schedule, the Mayor may revoke the permit.



(1999 Code, § 50.07)  (Ord. 701, passed 8-7-1972)



§ 50.08  QUALIFICATIONS; TRUCK AND COLLECTION CONTAINER SANITARY
REQUIREMENTS.



   The firm for the handling of collection of trash shall be of good
character and give evidence that the equipment used is adequate for the
purposes intended. The successful firm shall have a truck or trucks which
shall be so designed that garbage and rubbish that is collected will be
covered at all times or placed in containers that will be covered at all
times, except in the loading of garbage or rubbish, so that offensive odors
are not permitted to permeate the air and cause a nuisance within the city.
The trucks and all containers in which garbage is collected and transported
shall be cleaned daily and the collector shall not collect garbage on any day
without having a clean truck and hand containers if containers are used.



(1999 Code, § 50.08)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.09  TRUCKS REQUIRED FOR LARGE ITEMS.



   The licensee shall have as additional equipment a truck for the
disposal of large or unusual items of rubbish which cannot be placed in the
designated containers and shall have available for such pickups such
equipment at least one day each week or on such additional days as may be
necessary to satisfy the needs of the public.



(1999 Code, § 50.09)



§ 50.10  WASHING OF TRUCKS AND EQUIPMENT.



   A garbage truck or other equipment shall not be washed on city streets
or public property and will not be washed where the wastewater will cause any
offensive odors to adjoining property owners.



(1999 Code, § 50.10)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.11  PARKING GARBAGE TRUCKS.



   (A)   Parking while in use. No truck carrying garbage or rubbish or
both shall be parked or be permitted to stand anywhere in the city, except as
provided for in division (B) below, any longer than is necessary to pick up
containers, providing that the standing of such vehicle made necessary by
mechanical trouble, traffic conditions, accident or obedience to the
direction of police officers or traffic signals shall not be considered a
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Parking while not in use. A licensee shall designate the
location the yards on which his or her equipment will be parked while not in
use and the equipment shall not be parked within the city limits, unless the
designated location shall not in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer
create any nuisance for adjoining property owners.



(1999 Code, § 50.11)  Penalty, see § 50.99



REGULATIONS



§ 50.25  CONTAINERS.



   Every private residence shall place all garbage or trash for collection
in one or more 30-gallon containers with lids. Apartments limited to three
units or less shall be considered private residences for purposes of this
section. All multiple-family units shall have a dumpster or similar container
for garbage and trash.



(1999 Code, § 50.25)  (Ord. 758, passed 1-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.26  WINDBLOWN GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to place garbage or rubbish in such a manner as to
allow same to be blown by the wind onto the property of other residents.



(1999 Code, § 50.26)  Penalty, see § 50.99



Cross-reference:



   Littering on private property, see § 136.02



§ 50.27  ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE.



   No person shall permit any garbage or trash to accumulate on his or her
premises or private property. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it
shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real estate to refuse or
neglect to remove the garbage or debris.



(1999 Code, § 50.27)  (Ord. 758, passed 1-20-1975)  Penalty, see § 50.99



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Ch. 94



§ 50.28  DUMPING GARBAGE ON PROPERTY OF OTHERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or place any garbage,
rubbish, trash or refuse upon real property owned by another without the
consent of the owner or person in possession of such real property.



(1999 Code, § 50.28)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.29  DEPOSITING OR DROPPING GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any
garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the city; provided
that, this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse
or ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this chapter
preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner
provided herein.



(1999 Code, § 50.29)  Penalty, see § 50.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 50.40  NOTICE REQUIRING REMOVAL OF GARBAGE OR DEBRIS.



   (A)   Notice. The Mayor, the Chief of Police or the Mayor’s
designated representative may issue a written notice for removal of garbage
or debris. Such garbage or debris shall be removed by the owner or occupant
within 48 hours after such notice has been duly served.



   (B)   Service of notice. Service of notice provided for herein may
be effected by handing the same to the owner, occupant or lessee of the
premises, or to any member of his or her household of the age of 15 years or
older found on the premises or by mailing such notice to the last known
residence address of the owner; provided that, if the premises are unoccupied
and the owner’s address cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served
by posting the same upon the premises.



(1999 Code, § 50.40)  (Ord. 758, passed 1-20-1975)



Statutory reference:



   Removal of garbage and debris; lien for cost of removal; notice, see
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-13



§ 50.41  ABATEMENT BY CITY; CHARGES.



   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within 48 hours,
the city may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the
expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such
owner or occupant.



(1999 Code, § 50.41)  (Ord. 758, passed 1-20-1975)



§ 50.42  LIEN FOR UNPAID ABATEMENT CHARGES.



   (A)   Charges for such removal shall be a lien upon the premises. A
bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service
shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within 30 days of
submission of the bill, a notice of lien for the cost and expenses thereof
incurred by the city shall be recorded to include the following:



      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof;



      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense
incurred or payable for the service; and



      (3)   The date or dates when said cost and expense was
incurred by the city.



   (B)   The notice of lien shall be filed within 60 days after the
cost and expense is incurred.



(1999 Code, § 50.42)  (Ord. 758, passed 1-20-1975)



Statutory reference:



   Removal of garbage and debris; lien for cost of removal; notice, see
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-13



§ 50.43  RELEASE OF LIEN.



   Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises
if the owner’s address is known. Upon payment of the cost and expense after
notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or
person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed
of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien.



(1999 Code, § 50.43)  (Ord. 758, passed 1-20-1975)



§ 50.44  FORECLOSURE.



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case of foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosures shall be in the name of the city, after a
lien is in effect 60 days. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced
within two years after the date of filing the notice of lien.



(1999 Code, § 50.44)  (Ord. 758, passed 1-20-1975)



§ 50.45  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATIONS.



   The fact that garbage or rubbish remains on an occupant’s premises in
the city in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the
occupant of such premises is responsible for the violations of the chapter
occurring.



(1999 Code, § 50.45)



§ 50.46  EXCLUSIVE GARBAGE AND TRASH HAULERS.



   While the city is under exclusive contract with a garbage and refuse
hauler to collect and dispose of residential waste for the citizens of the
city, the following sections of this chapter will not apply to the waste
hauler under contract with the city: §§ 50.03 through 50.11 and 50.25 of
this chapter. All other provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force
and effect and shall apply to the garbage and refuse hauler under contract
with the city.



(1999 Code, § 50.46)  (Ord. 3126, passed 9-3-2002)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of § 50.28 of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
guilty of a petty offense.



(1999 Code, § 50.28)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   51.001   Definitions



   51.002   Application of provisions



   51.003   Deposit of certain substances prohibited



   51.004   Discharges to natural outlets restricted



   51.005   Damaging or tampering with sewers




Private Sewage Disposal Systems




   51.020   General restrictions on privies, septic tanks and the like



   51.021   Requirements



   51.022   Construction



   51.023   Sanitary operation




Building Sewers; Connection to Public Sewer




   51.035   Permits for building sewers



   51.036   Responsibility for costs, construction and maintenance



   51.037   Separate building sewers required; exception



   51.038   Use of existing building sewers



   51.039   Specifications



   51.040   Connections to downspouts and the like prohibited



   51.041   Excavations



   51.042   Connection to public sewer



   51.043   Inspection of connection




Public Sewer Use




   51.055   Storm water, uncontaminated water and the like



   51.056   Prohibited discharges



   51.057   Restricted wastewater substances



   51.058   Restricted wastewater qualities



   51.059   Options of City Engineer regarding wastewater



   51.060   Pretreatment requirements



   51.061   Interceptors



   51.062   Preliminary treatment and flow- equalizing facilities
maintenance



   51.063   Control manholes



   51.064   Sampling and standards



   51.065   Special agreements




Sewer Rates and Fees




   51.080   Sewer service rates



   51.081   Estimated charges in case of meter failure



   51.082   Multiple units on one meter



   51.083   Billing



   51.084   Late payment charge



   51.085   Discontinuance of water service for delinquent accounts



   51.086   Liability for charges



   51.087   Tap-in charges



   51.088   Sewer expansion and extension fee




Sewer Service Outside City Limits




   51.100   Eligibility



   51.101   Application procedures



   51.102   Rates



   51.103   Billing



   51.104   Late payment charges



   51.105   Discontinuance of service for delinquent accounts



   51.106   Liability for charges



   51.107   Payments; disposition of moneys collected




Administration and Enforcement




   51.120   Duties of City Engineer



   51.121   Right of entry; scope of inquiries



   51.122   Safety rules to be observed



   51.123   Easements



   51.124   Violations; notice; liability



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.



   B.O.D.(BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   CITY. The City of O’Fallon; and any reference to WITHIN THE CITY
shall mean all territory within the perimeter of the City of O’Fallon
boundaries.



   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of water pollution control of the
city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH
and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
NPDES permit.



   DIRECTOR. The chief administrative officer of a state water pollution
control agency or interstate agency. In the event responsibility for water
pollution control and enforcement is divided among two or more state or
interstate agencies, the term DIRECTOR means the administrative officer
authorized to perform the particular procedure to which reference is made.



   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.



   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant, as defined above.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. As it pertains to user charge system means a
manufacturing or processing facility which is engaged in a productive or
profit- making venture.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   MAY. A permissive term.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to
which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch and the like
or other body of surface or ground water.



   NPDES PERMIT (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
PERMIT).Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator, or, where appropriate by the Director, after enactment of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge
of pollutants pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is
100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of B.O.D. and 0.20
pounds of suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated as
the equivalent of the highest of the three parameters. Impact on a stream is
the higher of the B.O.D. and suspended solids parameters.



   ppm. Parts per million by weight.



   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.



   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance”
includes REPLACEMENT.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collection, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SHALL. A mandatory term.



   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of a quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost
of operation and maintenance including replacement of such works.



   USER RATE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance including replacement and the cost of any bond debt
of such works.



   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of
course, it may be a combination of the liquids and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be
present.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required
to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose
of the effluent.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(1999 Code, § 51.001)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.002  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer of
the city, or the state.



(1999 Code, § 51.002)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.003  DEPOSIT OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



(1999 Code, § 51.003)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Garbage regulations, see §§ 50.25 through 50.29



   Nuisances, see Ch. 94



   Offenses against public health and safety, see Ch. 136



§ 51.004  DISCHARGES TO NATURAL OUTLETS RESTRICTED.



   It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 51.004)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Ch. 94



   Offenses against public health and safety, see Ch. 136



§ 51.005  DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH SEWERS.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.



(1999 Code, § 51.005)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Damage to fire-fighting apparatus, hydrants, or equipment, see § 131.01



   Damaging city property, see § 131.03



PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



§ 51.020  GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND THE LIKE.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage.



(1999 Code, § 51.015)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.021  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Generally. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated
within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is not located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or
combined sewer of the city, is required, at his or her expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 90 days after the day of official notice to do so; provided
that, the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. However no
such notice shall be served unless and until the City Council determines,
based upon facts submitted to it by the City Engineer, that the presently
existing system located thereon is either inadequate to properly handle such
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes or is not functioning in a sanitary
manner, or that waters or wastes are being discharged into the public sewers
in violation of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Connection requirement. Where a public sanitary or combined
sewer is not available under the provisions of division (A) above, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Direct connection to public sewer.



      (1)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
51.022(C) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspool and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable material.



      (2)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building
sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean back-run
gravel or dirt.



(1999 Code, § 51.016)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.022  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Construction permit. Before commencement of construction of a
private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the City Engineer. The application for such permit shall be made on
a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the
City Engineer. A permit and inspection fee of $20 shall be paid to the City
Clerk at the time the application is filed.



   (B)   City Engineer inspections and oversight. A permit for a
private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The City
Engineer shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the City
Engineer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 60
hours of the receipt of notice by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Specifications; compliance required. The type, capacities,
location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the state. No permit
shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface
soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than a size
suitable for installation of an effective system. No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. (1999
Code, § 51.017)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.023  SANITARY OPERATION.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.



(1999 Code, § 51.018)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



BUILDING SEWERS; CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER



§ 51.035  PERMITS FOR BUILDING SEWERS.



   (A)   Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer.



   (B)   Classes of permits.



      (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:



         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and



         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial
wastes.



      (2)   In either case, the owner or the owner’s agent shall
make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City Engineer. A
permit and inspection fee of $0 for a residential or commercial building
sewer permit and $0 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to
the City Clerk at the time the application is filed.



(1999 Code, § 51.030)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.036  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation,
connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (B)   The property owner shall be responsible for the construction,
connection, maintenance, repair and proper operation of the sanitary sewer
service line from the point where it connects with the city sanitary sewer
main to the property owner’s building. All costs incident to the
construction, maintenance, repair and proper operation, including street
surface repairs, shall be the responsibility of the property owner. If, in
the opinion of the city, for the betterment of the whole system, a sanitary
sewer service line needs replacement, the city may demand replacement at the
owner’s cost.



(1999 Code, § 51.031)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977; Ord. 1287, passed
11-30-1987; Ord. 1781, passed 9-5-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.037  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWERS REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



(1999 Code, § 51.032)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.038  USE OF EXISTING BUILDING SEWERS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the City Engineer, to meet
all requirements of this chapter. Any alteration, replacement, extension or
repair of any existing building sewer shall not be made without written
permit from the City Engineer. Any plumber, contractor or any other person
making use of an old sewer for a new building or making any alteration,
replacement, extension or repair of any existing sewer shall first apply to
the City Clerk for a permit and pay a fee of $10, and in addition thereto,
shall post an annual bond with the city in the sum of $100.



(1999 Code, § 51.033)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977; Ord. 1001, passed
1-4-1982; Ord. 1050, passed 3-21-1983)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.039  SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Materials. The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe
ASTM Specification (A74-42) or equal (or most current ASTM designation); or
vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM specification (C-13-59T) or equal (or most
current ASTM designation), or other suitable material approved by the City
Engineer. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building
sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be
constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints or equal substitute.
Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the City Engineer where
the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in
filled, unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe;
except that, non-metallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable
concrete bed or cradle as approved by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Size and slope of building sewer. The size and slope of the
building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer, but in
no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such
six-inch pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. For larger
sizes of pipe, the minimum slopes shall be according to all state and local
regulations.



   (C)   Elevation.



      (1)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought
to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer
shall be laid parallel to any bearing wall if within three feet of any wall,
which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford
protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and
in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction or grade
shall be allowed only when a proper manhole is constructed at the location of
the change.



      (2)   On all buildings for which the sanitary sewer drainage
is to be conveyed by gravity to the sewer main, the lowest floor to be served
shall be a minimum of three feet above the top of the sanitary sewer main. In
all buildings in which the lower floor is too low to permit the gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. The pumped
sewage shall be connected to the gravity system of the building, at an
elevation not less than three feet above the top of the sanitary sewer main.



   (D)   Lifting of sanitary sewage. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial
means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (E)   Joints and connections.



      (1)   All joints and connections shall be made gas-tight and
water-tight. All cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or
hemp and filled with molten lead, Federal Specification (QQ-L156) or most
current federal specification not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run
in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall
be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested
and approved.



      (2)   All joints in vitrified clay pipe or between such pipe
and metals shall be made with approved hot-poured jointing material, approved
rubber gaskets, oakum and Sewertite, Am-Vit or an approved equal method and
material.



      (3)   Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften
sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a
temperature of 160°F, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the
drainage system. The joints shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp or
similar approved material. Other jointing materials and methods may be used
only by approval of the City Engineer.



(1999 Code, § 51.034)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977; Ord. 882, passed
9-5-1978)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.040  CONNECTIONS TO DOWNSPOUTS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to
a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(1999 Code, § 51.035)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.041  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Standards. All excavations required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
City Engineer. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with
ASTM specification (C12-58-T) or most current ASTM designation; except that,
no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected.



   (B)   Guarding of excavations. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city, and any other governmental agency affected.



(1999 Code, § 51.036)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks; excavations, see §§ 98.25 through 98.28



§ 51.042  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.



   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable
location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no
properly located “Y” branch is available, the owner shall, at his or her
expense, install a “Y” branch in the public sewer at the location
specified by the City Engineer. Where the public sewer is greater than 12
inches in diameter, and no properly located “Y” branch is available, a
neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer,
with entry in the downstream direction at an angle at about 45 degrees. A
45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so
as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of
the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a
higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer, but no higher than a
point one-half the vertical distance between the invert and the crown of the
sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and
water-tight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the
connection only when approved by the City Engineer. Manholes shall be
constructed at any junction of an eight-inch diameter line or larger into a
public sewer.



(1999 Code, § 51.037)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.043  INSPECTION OF CONNECTION.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City
Engineer when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
City Engineer or his or her representative.



(1999 Code, § 51.038)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



PUBLIC SEWER USE



§ 51.055  STORM WATER, UNCONTAMINATED WATER AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Prohibition. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Discharge of unpolluted drainage. Storm water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the City Engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the City Engineer to a storm sewer,
combined sewer or natural outlet.



(1999 Code, § 51.050)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.056  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;



   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including,
but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes
discharged to the public sewer;



   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works; and/or



   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(1999 Code, § 51.051)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.057  RESTRICTED WASTEWATER SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the City Engineer that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the City Engineer will give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree
of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors.



   (B)   The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; (The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three- fourths horsepower (three-fourths hp) (0.76 hp metric) or greater
shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.)



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing in excess of the
following concentrations and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage at the treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the City Engineer for such materials:



 

Waste or Chemical
 

Concentration(mg/l)





Boron
 

1.0



Cadmium
 

2.0



Chlorine demand
 

30.0



Chromium (Hexavalent)
 

5.0



Chromium (Trivalent)
 

10.0



Copper
 

3.0



Cyanide
 

2.0



Iron
 

15.0



Lead
 

0.1



Nickel
 

3.0



Oil and grease and the like (carbon tetrachloride extraction)
 

100.0



Phenols
 

0.5



Zinc
 

2.0





 



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-
or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the City Engineer as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the City Engineer in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 10.5;



      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues)
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works; and



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs”, as defined herein.



      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(1999 Code, § 51.052)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.058  RESTRICTED WASTEWATER QUALITIES.



   (A)   Subject to the approval of the City Engineer no person shall
allow the admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes:



      (1)   Having a five-day B.O.D. greater than 500 parts per
million by weight;



      (2)   Containing more than 550 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids;



      (3)   Containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in § 51.057 of this chapter; or



      (4)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the
average daily sewage flow of the city.



   (B)   Where necessary in the opinion of the City Engineer, the owner
shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:



      (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 500 parts per
million and the suspended solids to 550 parts per million by weight;



      (2)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
within the maximum limits provided for in § 51.057 of this chapter; or



      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes.



   (C)   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the City Engineer and of the Environmental Protection Agency
of the state, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
the approvals are obtained in writing.



(1999 Code, § 51.053)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.059  OPTIONS OF CITY ENGINEER REGARDING WASTEWATER.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 51.057 of this chapter, or which
in the judgement of the City Engineer, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City Engineer
may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of § 51.065 of this chapter.



   (B)   If the City Engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer, and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.



(1999 Code, § 51.054)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.060  PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as required by §§ 51.056(C), 51.057 and 51.059 of
this chapter, pretreatment for removal of compatible pollutants is not
required.



   (B)   In addition to the prohibitions set forth in §§ 51.056 and
51.057 of this chapter, the pretreatment standard for incompatible pollutants
introduced into a treatment works by a major contributing industry shall be
that established by a promulgated effluent limitations guideline defining
best practicable control technology currently available pursuant to §§
301(b) and 304(b) of the Act.



(1999 Code, § 51.055)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.061  INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City Engineer,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



   (B)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight and equipped with
easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gas-tight and
water-tight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at the owner’s expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.



(1999 Code, § 51.056)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.062  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT AND FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES MAINTENANCE.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.



(1999 Code, § 51.057)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.063  CONTROL MANHOLES.



   (A)   When required by the City Engineer, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes.



   (B)   Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
City Engineer.



   (C)   The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.



(1999 Code, § 51.058)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.064  SAMPLING AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard



Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Public Health Association, and Federal Regulation 40 C.F.R. part 136
entitled Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at
the control manhole.



   (B)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected,
provided the City Engineer shall be permitted to take samples within the
premises of the user, including lagoons, ponds and other places. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards
to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always,
B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of
all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples). All
discharges shall be in conformance with the NPDES permit.



(1999 Code, § 51.059)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.065  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.



(1999 Code, § 51.060)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



SEWER RATES AND FEES



§ 51.080  SEWER SERVICE RATES.



   Sewer service rates of the city shall be as follows.



   (A)   Monthly rates for sewage service. There shall be and there are
hereby established monthly rates and charges for the use of and the service
supplied by the sewerage system of the city, such rates and charges hereby
established being as follows.



      (1)   Sewer service rates.



         (a)   Effective 10-1-2017, the sewer service rate shall
be $15.40 for the first 1,000 gallons, plus an additional $9.52 for each
1,000 gallons of wastewater per month. The minimum monthly charge shall be
$7.33. Where wastewater flow is recorded in a control manhole required by §
51.063, the sewer service rate shall be $15.40 for the first 1,000 gallons,
plus an additional $9.52 for each 1,000 gallons of wastewater per month, as
recorded in the control manhole. If no control manhole is present to record
wastewater flow at a point of service, wastewater flow shall be determined by
the amount of water used; unless other sections of this chapter are
applicable for determining flow or cost of sanitary sewer service.



         (b)   The city shall audit operation, maintenance and
debt service costs for the wastewater facilities and review user rates
annually and revise such rates periodically to reflect actual treatment works
operation and maintenance costs, capital improvement and the cost of debt
services.



      (2)   Surcharge for industrial users.



         (a)   Effective 1-1-2015, the following is the procedure
for determining an industrial user surcharge:



            1.   Obtain representative B.O.D. and suspended
solids concentrations in the waste. This may require 24-hour composite
sampling for one or more days;



            2.   B.O.D. surcharge equals (B.O.D. — 200) ×
number of million gallons used × 8.33 × $0.22 per pound;



            3.   Suspended solids (SS) surcharge equals (SS
— 250) × number of million gallons used × 8.33 × $0.22.



            4.   Total Phosphorus (TP) surcharge equals (TP
— 10) × number of million gallons used × 8.33 × $6.36 per pound.



            5.   Total Nitrogen (TN) surcharge equals (TN —
40) × number of million gallons used × 8.33 × $1.41 per pound.



            6.   Zinc (Z) surcharge equals (Z — 0.05) ×
number of million gallons used × 8.33 × $229.03 per pound.



            7.   The above surcharges are added monthly to the
base user rate.



            8.   The surcharge rates shall be adjusted on each
annual anniversary, beginning January 2018, based upon the O’Fallon
Wastewater Treatment Facility organic surcharge determination calculation.



         (b)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes to determine the industrial user
surcharge factors shall be conducted in conformation with § 51.064.



   (B)   All commercial and industrial users of the sewerage system of
the city who do not use the water services of the city shall be required to
install a control manhole, as required by § 51.063, equipped with a metering
device approved by the City Engineer, which records the total sewage flow for
the purpose of determining the basis for user charges as provided by division
(A) above.



   (C)   The sewer service rate shall be subject to increase effective
on each annual anniversary, beginning October 2018, based upon the annual
increase in the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index, All Urban
Consumers, U.S. City Average, Water and Sewer Maintenance, or comparable
index if the same is no longer published, for the month of May.



   (D)   The rates for the summer billing periods for residential users
shall be the average of the previous three-quarters sewer charges.



(1999 Code, § 51.070)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977; Ord. 1405, passed
11-6-1989; Ord. 1427, passed 4-2-1990; Ord. 1801, passed 11-20-1995; Ord.
2050, passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 3204, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 3345, passed
6-20-2005; Ord. 3356, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 3416, passed 2-21-2006; Ord.
3629, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 3659, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 3823, passed
3-17-2014; Ord. 4005, passed 9-18-2017)



§ 51.081  ESTIMATED CHARGES IN CASE OF METER FAILURE.



   Whenever, for any cause, a water meter fails to operate, a reasonable
estimate shall be made by the city of the amount of water supplied during the
period such meter fails to operate and the user shall pay a rate based in
whole or in part on the estimated amount of water supplied.



(1999 Code, § 51.071)  (Ord. 566, passed 9-5-1967; Ord. 818, passed
9-1-1977)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provision, see § 52.084



§ 51.082  MULTIPLE UNITS ON ONE METER.



   Whenever two or more premises or residential units are served through
one water meter and with only one sewer lateral connected to the sanitary
main, the rates and charges for the use of the sewerage system of the city
shall be established with a minimum charge based on water usage as measured
by that single meter. If there are multiple sewer laterals serving the
premises, the base user rate shall be based on the water usage of the
premises for the first lateral and any additional laterals shall cause
additional charges at the minimum base user rate for each of those laterals
as well.



(1999 Code, § 51.072)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977; Ord. 1916, passed
5-19-1997; Ord. 3630, passed 6-15-2009)



Cross-reference:



   Multiple units on one meter; effect on water rates, see § 52.036



§ 51.083  BILLING.



   Bills for the rates and charges herein established shall be sent out by
the Clerk with the water bills. The bills shall be payable on the first day
of the month, following the reading of the water meters. All bills shall be
payable at the office of the City Clerk.



(1999 Code, § 51.073)  (Ord. 398, passed 8-22-1957; Ord. 818, passed
9-1-1977)



Cross-reference:



   Billing for water use, see § 52.086



§ 51.084  LATE PAYMENT CHARGE.



   If a charge for the services of the system shall not be paid by the
fifteenth day of the month in which it shall become due and payable, a
delayed payment charge of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added
thereto and collected therewith.



(1999 Code, § 51.074)  (Ord. 398, passed 8-22-1957; Ord. 818, passed
9-1-1977)



Cross-reference:



   Late payment charge regarding water use, see § 52.087



§ 51.085  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE FOR DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   If any bills for the services of the system remain unpaid after 30 days
following the rendition of the bill therefor, the water supply furnished by
the city for the lot, parcel of land or premises affected shall be cut off
and shall not be turned on except on payment in full of the delinquent charge
therefor in addition to the payment of a charge of $25.



(1999 Code, § 51.075)  (Ord. 738, passed 8-20-1973; Ord. 818, passed
9-1-1977)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provision regarding delinquent water service accounts, see §
52.088



§ 51.086  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   The owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises receiving any of the
services of the utility systems of the city, the occupant of such premises
and the user of the services shall be jointly and severally liable for the
payment of services to such lot, parcel of land or premises and all services
are rendered to the premises by the city only on the condition that such
owner, occupant and user shall be jointly and severally liable therefor to
the city.



(1999 Code, § 51.076)  (Ord. 560, passed 8-21-1967; Ord. 818, passed
9-1-1977)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions regarding water use, see § 52.085



§ 51.087  TAP-IN CHARGES.



   (A)   For a one-family residence, the tap-in charge shall be $3,000.



   (B)   For a multiple-dwelling unit, intended for occupancy of
multiple persons or a family per dwelling unit, the tap-in charge shall be
$3,000 for each dwelling unit.



   (C)   For hotels and motels, the tap-in charge shall be $1,200
applied to each dwelling unit.



   (D)   For facilities to be used for purposes such as dormitories,
institutional housing, hospitals, assisted living, nursing homes and the
like, the tap-in charge shall be $600 per bed.



   (E)   For any establishment used for a commercial purpose, not
industrial in nature, a church, a school or other institution, the tap-in
charge shall be the sum of $3,000 for the 3,000 square feet of its original
construction. Any original construction in excess of 3,000 square feet shall
result in an additional tap-in charge of $0.42 for each additional square
feet of original construction over 3,000 square feet. Should subsequent
additions be made to the original construction, regardless of the size of the
original construction, there shall be an additional tap-in charge of $0.42
for each subsequently added square foot of construction.



   (F)   If an industrial facility or establishment other than as
designated in divisions (A) through (E) above desires a sewer connection, the
sewer charge shall be based on the ration of use that the facility would bear
to the normal residential use, as may be determined by the City Engineer,
but, in any case, no less than $3,000. In addition, for each square foot
added after the original construction of the facility, there shall be an
additional charge of either $0.42 for each square foot of the added
construction or a charge as determined by the City Engineer in comparison of
the proposed facility addition to a normal residential use.



   (G)   For any tap as described in divisions (A) through (F) above
outside the corporate limits, the tap-in fee shall be, if permitted by the
City Council, determined by the City Council as permission is granted for
each such tap, but shall be no less than as established in § 51.102(A) of
this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 51.077)  (Ord. 560, passed 8-21-1967; Ord. 818, passed
9-1-1977; Ord. 1216, passed 9-29-1986; Ord. 1800, passed 11-20-1995; Ord.
3006, passed 7-17-2000; Ord. 3417, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 3673, passed
6-21-2010)



Cross-reference:



   Charges for tap and water service connections, see § 52.022



§ 51.088  SEWER EXPANSION AND EXTENSION FEE.



   (A)   The sewer expansion and extension fee is hereby established to
reimburse the city for its costs in extending sewer lines to serve new and
additional users and to increase its capacity to transport and treat sewage.
The city may provide, at its own initial expense, for the increase in size of
its sewage treatment plant and the extension and expansion of its sewer mains
to certain areas within the city. In so doing, the city seeks to provide a
material benefit to the property owners abutting such improvements and to
encourage the development of such property. To reimburse the city for the
funds so expended, the city hereby has created a sewer expansion and
extension fee. Such fee shall be based upon the pro rata share of the cost of
said construction and extension which cost was required to provide the sewer
services being made available to the new or additional user. The sewer
expansion and extension fee shall be based upon all costs including, but not
limited to, engineering fees, supervision, legal fees, land costs and
construction. For currently existing residences, a benefitted property owner
may, by so indicating in writing to the City Engineer, cause the sewer
expansion and extension fee to be billed to him or her over a three- year
period at an interest rate based on the city’s ability to borrow money at
that time, plus 0.5%, as an addition to the regular sewer charge bill
amortized in such a way that he or she shall make 36 equal payments. In the
absence of such written notification, the sewer expansion and extension fee
is due and payable by the property owner of presently existing residences
prior to the time of the connection of the individual premises to the
city’s sewer main.



   (B)   The expansion and extension fee will normally be based on the
portion of land occupied by the new or additional user (in developable acres
only) divided by the total land area that could be reasonably serviced by the
expansion and extension (in developable acres only) multiplied by the total
cost of the expansion and extension as described above as approved by the
Council. However, the City Engineer may propose an alternate expansion and
extension fee if appropriate and reasonable. Such alternate expansion and
extension fee as it pertains to each new or additional user shall be approved
by the Council.



(1999 Code, § 51.078)  (Ord. 816, passed 8-15-1977; Ord. 818, passed
9-1-1977; Ord. 3664, passed 4-19-2010; Ord. 3709, passed 4-18-2011)



SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS



§ 51.100  ELIGIBILITY.



   Sanitary sewers may be made available for use for premises located
outside the city limits on the following basis:



   (A)   On application of the owner of the premises, it is determined
that the premises served are not contiguous to the present city, so as to
permit annexation of the premises into the city; and



   (B)   The premises to be served by the sewer connection are
immediately adjacent to the trunk sewer main of the city and are a portion of
the lands or lots from which easements were obtained by the city for the
installation of its trunk sewer.



(1999 Code, § 51.090)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



§ 51.101  APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   The owner of any premises qualifying under § 51.100 of this chapter
desiring sanitary sewer service shall make application with the city and
shall submit to the city the plans and specifications for installation of
collector sewers the same as is required of subdividers within the city. The
owner shall also enter into an agreement with the city that the owner will
abide by and comply with all ordinances of the city and regulations of the
Sewer Department which pertain to sanitary sewer service for residents of the
city. The owner shall also agree to pay the rate for sanitary sewer service
as set forth by the City Council for sewer service outside the city limits.
The agreement shall also grant the city the right of entry onto the property
for inspection, service and meter reading. All subsequent owners of the
property shall enter into a similar agreement when application is made to
change the name of the responsible party on the records of the city.



(1999 Code, § 51.091)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



§ 51.102  RATES.



   Rates for sanitary sewer service outside the city limits shall be as
follows.



   (A)   Tap-in fees. Tap-in fees shall be 50% above the tap-in fee for
a similar property usage within the city limits as determined by the
ordinances in effect at the time of application.



   (B)   Sewer use charges.



      (1)   Property serviced by a public water supplier. Sewer
usage charges for property outside the city limits which is serviced by a
public water supplier shall be as set forth in the city ordinances for
property within the city limits, plus 35%, plus the user surcharge then in
effect.



      (2)   Residential property not serviced by a public water
supplier. Sewer usage charges for residential property outside the city
limits which is not serviced by the City Water Department shall be a flat
quarterly rate based upon the prevailing rate for sewer service within the
city and the average residential water usage for the preceding quarter in
thousands of gallons for property serviced by the City Water Department, plus
35%, plus the user surcharge then in effect. The average residential water
usage for the preceding quarter shall be determined by the City Clerk.



      (3)   Commercial and industrial property not serviced by a
public water supply. The owner of any premises qualifying under § 51.100 of
this chapter desiring sanitary sewer service shall install at the owner’s
expense a metering device upon the property’s water supply to measure the
amount of water used on the property from time to time. Sewer usage charges
shall be as set forth in the city ordinances for property within the city
limits, plus 35%, plus the user surcharge then in effect.



(1999 Code, § 51.092)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



§ 51.103  BILLING.



   (A)   Property serviced by the City Water Department. Bills for the
rates and charges herein established shall be sent out by the city with the
water bills for property serviced by the City Water Department. Bills will be
payable on the first day of the month following the reading of the water
meter and are to be made payable at the office of the city.



   (B)   Residential property not serviced by the City Water
Department. Bills for the rates and charges herein established for
residential property outside the city limits and not serviced by the city
shall be sent out at the beginning of each usage quarter. Bills will be
payable upon receipt and are to be made payable to the city.



   (C)   Commercial and industrial property not serviced by the City
Water Department. Bills for rates and charges herein established for
commercial and industrial property outside the city limits and not serviced
by the City Water Department shall be sent out at the beginning of each usage
month. Bills will be payable upon receipt and are to be made payable at the
office of the City Clerk.



(1999 Code, § 51.093)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



§ 51.104  LATE PAYMENT CHARGES.



   If any charge for the services of the system shall not be paid by the
fifteenth day of the month in which it shall become due and payable, a
delayed payment charge of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added
thereto and collected therewith.



(1999 Code, § 51.094)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



§ 51.105  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   Discontinuance of service for property serviced by the city.
Any bills for services of the system that remain unpaid after 30 days
following the rendition of the bill therefore shall be declared delinquent,
and the water supply furnished by the city for the lot, parcel of land or
premises affected shall be cut off and shall not be turned on except on
payment in full of the delinquent charges therefor, plus the payment of a $10
service charge.



   (B)   Discontinuance of service for property not serviced by the
city. Any bills for services of the system that remain unpaid after 30 days
following the rendition of the bill on property not serviced by the city
shall be declared delinquent, and the sanitary sewer service furnished by the
city for the lot, parcel of land or premises affected shall be cut off and
shall not be reconnected except on payment in full of the delinquent charges
therefore, plus the payment of $50 service charge.



   (C)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility
service to customers by reason of non-payment of bills only after notice and
a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. It is hereby provided:



         (a)   All bills are due and payable on or before the
date set forth on the bill;



         (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for non-payment; and



         (c)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or
her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official
shall be authorized to order that the customer’s service not be
discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of
the customer’s complaint.



      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will be
entertained; proper documentation in the form of a signed deferred payment
arrangement must be in the office prior to the disconnect date in order to
avoid termination of service; questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least ten days after the penalty date.



      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
utility service to a customer for non- payment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along
with a turn-on charge in the sum of $25. The service can then only be
connected during the city’s normal hours of operation; otherwise, the
service will be connected the following business day.



(1999 Code, § 51.095)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



§ 51.106  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   The owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises receiving any sanitary
sewer service, the occupant of such premises and the user of the services
shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of services to such
lot, parcel of land or premises, and all services rendered to the premises by
the city are so rendered only on the condition that such owner, occupant and
user shall be jointly and severally liable therefore to the city.



(1999 Code, § 51.096)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



§ 51.107  PAYMENTS; DISPOSITION OF MONEYS COLLECTED.



   All fees paid hereunder shall be paid to the City Clerk who shall issue
a receipt therefore, and the moneys so collected shall be paid into the
Sewerage Revenue Fund.



(1999 Code, § 51.097)  (Ord. 896, passed 2-5-1979)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.120  DUTIES OF CITY ENGINEER.



   The City Engineer shall have general supervision of the public sewers
and sewage treatment plant of the city. The City Engineer shall ascertain the
conditions and needs thereof and shall, from time to time, report the same to
the City Council. The City Engineer shall keep proper records of the location
of all sewers, “Y” branches and building sewer connections, and the
condition of private sewage disposal systems and building sewers. The City
Engineer shall also have other duties specifically set forth in this chapter
and shall have authority to supervise the construction of private sewage
disposal systems and the construction and installation of building sewers and
to issue permits therefor. The City Engineer shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and unless otherwise stated, he
or she is authorized to make such inspections, observations, measurements,
samplings and tests as may be necessary in that regard and is authorized to
enter upon any property for that purpose.



(1999 Code, § 51.140)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.121  RIGHT OF ENTRY; SCOPE OF INQUIRIES.



   The employees of the Public Works Department, the City Engineer and
other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall have access to all portions of the premises of the
consumer at reasonable times for the inspection of the use and flow of sewage
as well as the consumer’s pipes, fixtures and plumbing, and any other
apparatus in any manner connected to the sewer system of the city. In
addition, the aforementioned persons shall have access to all portions of the
premises of the consumer at reasonable times for the inspection, observation,
measurements, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The aforementioned representatives of the city shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways
or facilities for waste treatment. The city shall have the right and option
to demand, change, stop the use of or to require any repair, change, removal
or improvement of any pipe, fixture, plumbing or any other apparatus that
would in any manner affect the sewer system of the city.



(1999 Code, § 51.141)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977; Ord. 3393, passed
11-21-2005)



§ 51.122  SAFETY RULES TO BE OBSERVED.



   While performing the necessary work on private property referred to in
§ 51.121 of this chapter, the City Engineer or a duly authorized employees
of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required in § 51.062 of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 51.142)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.123  EASEMENTS.



   The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(1999 Code, § 51.143)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



§ 51.124  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE; LIABILITY.



   (A)   Violations; notice. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this chapter, except § 51.005 of this chapter, shall be served
by the city with written notice statingthe nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.



   (B)   Liability. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation.



(1999 Code, § 51.144)  (Ord. 818, passed 9-1-1977)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   52.001   Water service; non-liability of city



   52.002   Fire hydrants; non-liability of city; use



   52.003   Private fire connections; non-liability of city



   52.004   Dangerous apparatus



   52.005   Electric ground wires



   52.006   Tampering with system



   52.007   Resale of water prohibited



   52.008   Use of private wells



   52.009   Extraterritorial service




Service Connections




   52.020   Application for service



   52.021   Deposit



   52.022   Taps and water service connections; costs and installation



   52.023   Applicant’s remedies




Water Meters




   52.035   Meter requirements



   52.036   Multiple units on one meter; effect on rates



   52.037   Multiple meters



   52.038   Meter testing; charge



   52.039   Meter accessibility



   52.040   Meter damage



   52.041   Meter accuracy




Cross-Connection and Backflow Devices




   52.055   Cross-connection control standards



   52.056   Authority of City Engineer



   52.057   Discontinuance of service; notice; reconnection fee



   52.058   Consumer responsibility for contamination



   52.059   Cross-connection control policy



   52.060   Definitions



   52.061   Water system



   52.062   Cross-connections prohibited unless approved



   52.063   Inspection and maintenance requirements for
cross-connections



   52.064   Conditions of backflow prevention protection



   52.065   Type of backflow prevention protection



   52.066   Backflow prevention devices



   52.067   Inspection and maintenance of backflow prevention devices



   52.068   Booster pumps



   52.069   Violations




Rates and Charges; Billing Procedures




   52.080   Water inside city



   52.081   Rates for Fairview Heights



   52.082   Outside corporate limits



   52.083   Surcharges



   52.084   Estimated charge in case of meter failure



   52.085   Liability for charges



   52.086   Monthly billing



   52.087   Late payment charge



   52.088   Discontinuance of water service for delinquent accounts



   52.089   Temporary disconnection service charge



   52.090   Temporary hydrant meter charge




Water Main Extensions




   52.105   Application



   52.106   Requirements



   52.107   Plan preparation



   52.108   Sealed bids; deposit by applicant



   52.109   Contract procedures



   52.110   Water meter accessibility



   52.111   Applicant’s remedies regarding water main extensions



   52.112   Fire main extensions; charges




Administration and Enforcement




   52.125   Rules and regulations incorporated into consumer contracts



   52.126   Authority of city



   52.127   Non-compliance



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  WATER SERVICE; NON-LIABILITY OF CITY.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall have the right to shut off the supply
of water whenever it is necessary to make repairs, improvements, enforce
rules or for any operating reason. In all cases, if possible, as reasonable
notice as circumstances allow will be given to customers, but in emergencies,
the water may be shut off without notice. All hot water faucets shall be left
open during any shutoff, to prevent damage to plumbing. Such necessary work
will be done as rapidly as may be practical and, whenever feasible, at such
times as will cause the least inconvenience. The city shall not be held
responsible for or liable because of any shut-off of supply for any direct or
resultant damages to any person, company or consumer, or to any pipe,
fixtures or plumbing.



      (2)   Water for steam boilers, gas engines, ice plants or
other industrial use will not be furnished by direct pressure from the mains,
but only to tanks holding ample reserve supply. Should any equipment be
supplied direct from mains, then in case of any shut-off of water, the city
will not be held responsible or liable for any direct or resulting damage
because of interrupted supply, insufficient pressure or otherwise.



      (3)   Whenever water mains, pipes and service connections are
taken up, shut off or interfered with by reason of any city street
improvements, the city will endeavor to maintain service so far as reasonably
possible, but will not be directly or indirectly liable for any interruption,
poor pressure or damage of any kind either to consumers adjacent or to other
consumers affected thereby.



      (4)   The city expressly stipulates with all its consumers and
other persons that it will not insure or be responsible or liable in any
manner for any losses or damages, direct or resultant, by reason of any fire,
and all water service furnished shall always be conditional upon acts of God,
inevitable accidents, fire, strikes, riots, war or any other cause not within
the reasonable control of the city.



   (B)   The city shall not be held responsible for, or in any manner
liable to any person, company, consumer or public body, for any claim or
damage either direct or resultant because any shortage of water supply, any
shut-off of water supply for any reason, any bursting or leakage of either
the consumer’s or the city’s mains, pipes and fixtures, any pollution or
impurity in the water supply or any fire or water damage.



(1999 Code, § 52.001)



§ 52.002  FIRE HYDRANTS; NON-LIABILITY OF CITY; USE.



   (A)   All hydrants shall be owned, maintained and used only by the
city. Use of water from fire hydrants by contractors and other shall be only
upon permission by the city after approved application to the city.



   (B)   The city shall not be held liable and will not assume any
responsibility for the condition of any fire hydrant inside or outside the
city limits, or the pressure or amount of water obtainable therefrom, or any
damages either direct or resultant because of the condition, pressure or
amount of water available at any fire hydrant.



   (C)   All public fire hydrants outside of any city limits owned by
the city will be maintained in as good order as reasonably possible, but the
city will not undertake or assume any responsibility or liability for their
condition, use or abuse. Such public fire hydrants shall be used only for the
purpose of extinguishing fire, except when the city may issue a special
permit for their use to contractors who shall then be responsible for the
hydrants and the use of water from them.



(1999 Code, § 52.002)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.003  PRIVATE FIRE CONNECTIONS; NON-LIABILITY OF CITY.



   (A)   All private fire connection mains, pipes, fire hydrants,
standpipes, automatic sprinklers and any and all other privately owned fire
extinguishing apparatus connected shall be installed, maintained and used
only by the owner or consumer. No connection shall be made to any private
fire main, pipe or apparatus from which water may be taken for any other
purpose than actual fire use. A sufficient number of gate valves shall be
placed in the main fire line in order that at the time of fire, portions of
such line may be cut off if broken. All fire mains, and the construction and
kind of hydrants and apparatus, shall be subject to the approval of the city.
The owner shall furnish the city a complete map showing kind, size and
location of all private mains, gates, hydrants and apparatus. No extensions,
connections or additions shall be made for any purpose without the consent
and approval of the city.



   (B)   The city shall have the right to make a small meter bypass
test and inspections of private fire mains and apparatus at any time, and in
case any leakage is found, the owner or consumer shall immediately repair or
replace any defective pipe or apparatus. In case any pipe or apparatus is
found in dangerous condition, the city may, at its option, immediately shut
off such private fire main connection and not turn it on until satisfactorily
repaired or replaced. The city, at its option, in case of defective pipe or
apparatus, or in case the city has any reason to believe that water is being
taken for any other purpose than extinguishing fire, may install after five
days’ notice, a fire main meter at the sole cost and expense of the owner
or consumer, and charge thereafter for all water used or wasted at meter
rates in addition to the regular fire main connection rate. The city may
place seals on private fire hydrants and other outlets, and in case the same
are found broken, may install meters as provided above unless the city has
been notified in advance of any test to be made by the consumer.



   (C)   The city shall not be held responsible or liable for any
direct or resultant damages due to the condition, pressure, amount of water
available or leakage of any private fire mains, hydrants or other apparatus,
or because of any shut-off for non- payment, to make tests or to enforce
rules or because of any fire loss, or damage of any nature.



(1999 Code, § 52.003)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.004  DANGEROUS APPARATUS.



   The city shall have the right to refuse water service, or to
discontinue water service, without notice at any time to any consumer if the
city finds any apparatus or appliances the operation of which will be
detrimental to the water system of the city or to any or all of its
consumers. Standpipes, hydrants, gate valves and any other apparatus that
cause water hammer or any danger to the water system or other consumers’
plumbing shall be immediately repaired or removed upon notice from the city,
or at its option, the city may immediately discontinue the service, without
notice and without any liability for direct or resulting damages therefrom.



(1999 Code, § 52.004)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.005  ELECTRIC GROUND WIRES.



   All persons are strictly forbidden to attach any electric ground wire
to any plumbing or water piping which is or may be connected to any water
service pipe, water meter or water main belonging to the city. The city will
hold the owner of the premises responsible and liable for any damage to the
property or injury to the employees of the city caused by such ground wire.
All owners and consumers shall remove any existing ground wires immediately
upon written notice from the city. If not so disconnected after five days’
written notice, the city, through its officials, may enter the property and
remove such ground wires and the consumer shall pay all costs.



(1999 Code, § 52.005)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.006  TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city
to tamper with, alter or damage any part of the city waterworks or supply
system including any meter inside or outside city limits.



   (B)   Any person damaging any part of the city waterworks, supply
system or meter(s) whether through negligence or intentional acts shall be
responsible to the city for the city’s costs of repair of said damages.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city
to turn on a water meter when the city has turned it off.



(1999 Code, § 52.006)  (Ord. 1507, passed 9-16-1991; Ord. 2072, passed
11-29-1999)  Penalty, see § 52.999



Cross-reference:



   Damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment, see § 131.01



   Damaging city property, see § 131.03



§ 52.007  RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED.



   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient or consumer
thereof from the city supply to any premises other than that for which
application has been made and the meter installed, except in case of
emergency.



(1999 Code, § 52.007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.008  USE OF PRIVATE WELLS.



   (A)   The use of private wells within the limits of the city shall
be permitted only when the city’s water distribution system is not
available to the premises on which water is required. The city water
distribution system shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be considered
available when a water distribution main is located within 300 feet of any
part of said premises on which water is required.



   (B)   All existing water wells within the city will be allowed to
remain in operation. Existing water wells located on property outside the
city will be allowed to remain in operation if the property is annexed.



   (C)   A backflow prevention device (as approved by the City Building
Inspector) will be required to be installed on the service line of all
properties using city water where an active well is located.



   (D)   The cross-connection of a water well with the city water
system under any circumstances is prohibited.



(1999 Code, § 52.008)  (Ord. 1741, passed 1-30-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.009  EXTRATERRITORIAL SERVICE.



   The city may, but shall in no event be obligated to, extend or maintain
water service outside its municipal boundaries, and such service may be
terminated by the city at any time. In order to ensure the orderly
development of the city and use of city infrastructure and services, after
the effective date of this section, water service provision and extension may
be granted at the discretion of the city subject to the following minimum
requirements.



   (A)   New extensions or service. New service shall not be extended
or commenced outside the boundaries of the city to any property unless such
property is annexed into the city by means of an annexation petition and
agreement; or if not then capable of annexation, subject to an annexation
agreement, all requiring compliance with the city’s ordinances and
requirements; provided that, if the property is located in another
incorporated city or village, such service may be extended only pursuant to a
service agreement conforming with city requirements.



   (B)   Continued extraterritorial service. Service outside the city
boundaries shall hereinafter be maintained only as follows.



      (1)   Residential dwellings. Within 60 days of mailing of
notice to the owners of residential dwellings receiving city water service
outside the city boundaries, the owners shall, if they wish to continue such
service, execute and submit to the City Clerk either an acceptable annexation
agreement and annexation petition if contiguous to the city, or an acceptable
annexation agreement if not contiguous to the city, in all cases conforming
with the requirements of the city. It shall be deemed a condition of
continued service under any service agreement that if requested by the city
the property owner shall submit an acceptable annexation agreement and
annexation petition if contiguous to the city, or an acceptable annexation
agreement if not contiguous to the city. Within 30 days of receipt of notice
by the city of these requirements, each such owner shall notify the city if
such continued service is requested as provided herein and to obtain from the
city the required documents to be executed.



      (2)   Other properties. Within 30 days of mailing of notice to
the owners of properties other than residential dwellings governed by
division (B)(1) above shall, if they wish to continue such service, execute
and submit to the City Clerk either an acceptable annexation agreement and
annexation petition if contiguous to the city, or an acceptable annexation
agreement if not contiguous to the city, in all cases conforming with the
requirements of the city. It shall be deemed a condition of continued service
under any service agreement that if requested by the city the property owner
shall submit an acceptable annexation agreement and annexation petition if
contiguous to the city, or an acceptable annexation agreement if not
contiguous to the city. Within ten days of receipt of notice by the city of
these requirements, each such owner shall notify the city if such continued
service is requested as provided herein and to obtain from the city the
required documents to be executed.



      (3)   Council approval. Nothing herein shall require the city
to accept any annexation agreement, annexation petition or service agreement
not deemed by the Council in the public interest, or otherwise provide
service outside the boundary of the city; provided, however, that, service
shall not be denied, terminated or maintained on any unlawful discriminatory
basis.



      (4)   Notice; termination of service. Each owner of properties
receiving service outside the boundaries of the city shall be given written
notice of the requirements of this section. Such notice shall contain a
statement providing that service shall be terminated without further notice
if the requirements for future service are not satisfied as set forth herein.
In the event that a property owner does not submit all required documents
within the required time frame, or violates the provisions thereof, the
service shall be terminated immediately thereafter.



      (5)   Variances; extensions. The requirements set forth herein
may be varied and deadlines extended for good cause or undue hardship by
application to the Council in writing.



(1999 Code, § 52.009)  (Ord. 3063, passed 7-16-2001)



SERVICE CONNECTIONS



§ 52.020  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   An applicant desiring a water tap or service connection with the
waterworks system of the city shall file a written application at the City
Hall, signed by the owner of the property for which the tap or service
connection is desired, or by the duly authorized agent of such owner. The
application shall be accompanied by payment of the fee hereinafter prescribed
to cover the cost of such service connection and meter; in the event such
application is made by an agent for the owner, then the application shall
also be accompanied by the written authorization of the owner to the agent
for making the application.



(1999 Code, § 52.020)  (Ord. 3007, passed 7-17-2000)



§ 52.021  DEPOSIT.



   All customers at time of application for service with the Water
Department shall pay an initial turn-on fee of $50 to the city.



(1999 Code, § 52.021)  (Ord. 1450, passed 10-29-1990; Ord. 3007, passed
7-17-2000; Ord. 3376, passed 9-19-2005)



§ 52.022  TAPS AND WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS; COSTS AND INSTALLATION.



   (A)   For all taps and service connections, the city will furnish
the tap and service pipe connections, curb  cock, curb box and meter at the
following rates, except as noted.



      (1)   Specific rates.



 

Tap
 

Rate





3/4 in. or 5/8 in. tap
 

$2,750



1 in. tap
 

$3,000



1-1/2 in. tap
 

$4,500



2 in. tap
 

$5,000



3 in. tap
 

$5,000



4 in. tap
 

$8,500



6 in. tap
 

$13,000



Fire sprinkler tap* (all sizes)
 

$5,000



NOTE TO TABLE:

* Waived for single and double dwelling residential construction.




 



      (2)   Rates for larger taps. Fees for taps larger than six
inches will be determined by the City Engineer. All taps shall meet the
minimum size requirements per the State Plumbing Code or its successor
document.



      (3)   Additional fees. In addition to the fees as set forth in
divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, a water expansion and extension fee is
hereby established to reimburse the city for its costs in extending the water
system to serve new and additional users and to increase the city’s
capacity to distribute water through its water system. The city may provide,
at its own initial expense, for the extension and expansion of its water
system within and outside the city boundaries. In so doing, the city seeks to
provide a material benefit to the property owners abutting such improvements
and to encourage the development of such property. To reimburse the city for
the funds so expended, the city hereby has created a water expansion and
extension fee. Such fee shall be based upon the pro rata share of the cost of
said construction and extension which cost was required to provide the water
services being made available to the new or additional user. The water
expansion and extension fee shall be based upon all costs including, but not
limited to, engineering fees, supervision, legal fees, land costs and
construction. For currently existing residences/businesses, a benefitted
property owner may, by so indicating in writing to the City Engineer, cause
the water expansion and extension fee to be billed to him or her over a
three-year period at an interest rate based on the city’s ability to borrow
money at that time plus 0.5% as an addition to the regular water charge bill
amortized in such a way that he or she shall make 36 equal payments. In the
absence of such written notification, the water expansion and extension fee
is due and payable by the property owner of presently existing
residence/businesses prior to the time of the connection of the individual
premises to the city’s water main.



      (4)   Fee base. The expansion and extension fee will normally
be based on the portion of land occupied by the new or additional user (in
developable acres only) divided by the total land area that could be
reasonably serviced by the expansion and extension (in developable acres
only) multiplied by the total cost of the expansion and extension as
described above as approved by the Council. However, the City Engineer may
propose an alternate expansion and extension fee if appropriate and
reasonable. Such alternate expansion and extension fee as it pertains to each
new or additional user shall be approved by the Council.



   (B)   The city will install all taps up to and including two inches
in size and provide all labor and materials from the water main to the meter
pit. The customer will be responsible for providing all materials (including
a meter compatible with the city water system) and labor for installing all
taps over two inches in size and fire sprinkler taps in accordance with all
three of the following stipulations.



      (1)   All taps over two inches in size shall be inspected by
city personnel during all stages of the installation process and all tap fees
shall be paid in full prior to the installation. A licensed plumber shall be
provided by the customer to install the tap and shall be on site at all times
during the tap.



      (2)   All taps two inches in size or larger shall be provided
with an approved backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of §
52.064 of this chapter and shall be installed in accordance with the details
set forth by the city’s Engineering Department;



      (3)   All taps over two inches in size shall be scheduled at
least three working days in advance in order to allow for sufficient advance
notice for inspection; and



      (4)   All taps shall be made during regular business hours.



   (C)   For multiple dwelling (apartment, dormitory, institutional
housing, assisted living, nursing home) units, mobile home courts or mobile
home parks, a single master meter shall be installed to serve the entire
development. The tap fee shall be $1,000 for each dwelling unit. The tap fee
for the entire development shall be due and payable prior to the installation
of the master meter. The City Engineer shall determine where the master meter
will be located. The city reserves the right to apply the single family tap
procedures to multi-dwelling units where each unit is separately owned.



   (D)   For hotels and motels a single master meter shall be installed
for each hotel/motel. The tap fee shall be $3,000, plus $500 per guest room.



(1999 Code, § 52.022)  (Ord. 888, passed 12-18-1978; Ord. 1275, passed
10-5-1987; Ord. 1640, passed 9-7-1994; Ord. 1668, passed 12-20-1994; Ord.
1980, passed 4-6-1998; Ord. 2087, passed 1-31-2000; Ord. 3007, passed
7-17-2000; Ord. 3281, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 3376, passed 9-19-2005; Ord.
3672, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 3709, passed 4-18-2011)



Cross-reference:



   Tap-in charges for sewers, see § 51.087



§ 52.023  APPLICANT’S REMEDIES.



   When an applicant has submitted the written application and paid the
fee provided for in §§ 52.020 and 52.022 of this chapter, and the city,
through its employees, has failed to provide water taps or service
connections within 21 calendar days after the date that the applicant has
submitted the written application and paid the fee provided for in §§
52.020 and 52.022 of this chapter due to the refusal of city employees to
provide such taps or service connections, the city shall have seven more
calendar days to use its best efforts to arrange for such water taps or
service connections to be made by a plumbing contractor licensed in the state
and acceptable to the city. If, during that seven- day period, the city is
unable to secure a plumbing contractor for the construction of the water taps
or service connections, then the applicant may arrange for such water taps or
service connections to be made by its employees licensed in the state
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, §§ 0.01 through 43, or by an independent
contractor licensed in the state, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, §§
0.01 through 43. If this section applies, then the city shall provide
promptly upon demand by the applicant the following items: water meter; water
meter yoke; water meter box including the appropriate lids; an appropriate
puncture tool; and any other material or tool necessary to provide and
complete the taps or connections. Further, if this section applies, the city
shall refund within five days after that seven-day period that portion of the
fee paid by the applicant pursuant to § 52.022 of this chapter which does
not constitute material or parts cost of the city for the above items.



(1999 Code, § 52.023)  (Ord. 1758, passed 5-30-1995)



WATER METERS



§ 52.035  METER REQUIREMENTS.



   All water service, whether for domestic, commercial or industrial use,
shall be metered. All meters shall be so placed and installed as to render
the same accessible at all times for the purpose of reading or repairing, and
so as to be free from danger of freezing. Meters outside of a building shall
be set in a suitable meter box approved by the Director of Public Works or
his or her designee. Water will not be turned on for new connections until
the meter has been installed and all other requirements of this chapter on
the part of the property owner have been fully complied with.



(1999 Code, § 52.035)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.036  MULTIPLE UNITS ON ONE METER; EFFECT ON RATES.



   (A)   Generally. Two or more residential living units or businesses
may be served with water through a single water service and meter, subject to
the following rules.



      (1)   The water service shall not be extended to more than one
building.



      (2)   The premises serviced shall be owned by the same person,
firm or corporation.



   (B)   Computation of water rate. If the premises contain multiple
residential units or commercial units having a separate facility for using
water service, then the volume charge for water service in the first rate
block set forth in § 52.080 hereof shall be in accordance with the number of
residential or commercial units on the premises or in the building. The rate
block shall be based upon the following quarterly usage insofar as § 52.080
is concerned:



 

One unit
 
15,000 gallons or less


Over one unit
 
5,000 additional gallons per unit



 



   (C)   Meter size and rates. Every premises containing more than one
residential or commercial unit or combination thereof as aforesaid may be
required to have a meter of larger than minimum size based upon the needs of
the premises serviced. The minimum meter rates shall apply based upon the
size.



(1999 Code, § 52.036)  (Ord. 1450, passed 10-29-1990; Ord. 1590, passed
1-19-1993)



§ 52.037  MULTIPLE METERS.



   (A)   Any single commercial or residential premises may have a
second meter installed; provided, the water flowing through that meter does
not exit the premises into the city sanitary sewer.



   (B)   The second meter at the premises shall be installed at the
cost of the customer, and the customer shall be charged for the water used at
the regular schedule of rate blocks as set forth in this chapter, and when
less than the minimum amount is used during any billing period a minimum bill
shall be charged.



   (C)   Any second water meter installed and connected as provided by
this section shall be required to have a backflow device which meets American
Water Works Association (AWWA) standards.



   (D)   All piping for water that flows through secondary meters on
the premises shall be open to inspection, color coded and there shall be a
schematic drawing on file with the City Engineer’s office showing the flow
of the water from the second meter to the time it leaves the premises.



   (E)   Any person moving into a premises where there is a multiple
meter system already installed may at their option keep the second meter on
line with no extra cost other than paying of the normal water billings.



   (F)   If a person moves into a premises where there is a meter box
and line installed for a second meter, but the meter has been removed by a
previous owner, the person may have the meter reinstalled at a cost of $200,
plus the cost of the meter.



   (G)   If any second meter is replaced at the request of the owner
the charge shall be $200, plus the cost of the meter, unless there is a
necessity to replace any or all of the meter box and ancillary attachments,
in which event the cost of the reinstallation shall be at the regular tap-in
fee set forth in this chapter.



   (H)   No premises that has a swimming pool connected to the
municipal sewerage system may be allowed to have a second water meter.



(1999 Code, § 52.037)  (Ord. 980, passed 5-4-1981; Ord. 1366, passed
4-3-1989; Ord. 3376, passed 9-19-2005)



§ 52.038  METER TESTING; CHARGE.



   (A)   (1)   All meters are accurately tested before installation.



      (2)   Meters are also periodically tested in accordance with
the State Commerce Commission’s regulations.



      (3)   The Water Department may, at any time, remove any meter
for routine tests, repair or replacement and may, at its option and expense,
test any meter when the Water Department has reason to believe that it is
registering inaccurately.



   (B)   A customer may request a meter to be tested for accuracy,
which test will be made in the meter shop of the city, in accordance with the
standard regulations for meter testing as prescribed by the State Commerce
Commission. Each request for the test of a meter for accuracy shall be
accompanied by a deposit of $60 for five-eighths inch through one-inch meters
and $110 for one and one-half inch and larger meters. If the meter so tested
shall be found to be accurate within the limits prescribed by the State
Commerce Commission, the deposit shall be retained by the Water Department as
compensation for such test; if the error in registration is found to be more
than that permitted by the Commission, then the cost of the test shall be
borne by the Water Department, and the amount of the deposit shall be
returned to the customer and the customer’s bill shall be adjusted in
accordance with the result of the tests, if error is established.



(1999 Code, § 52.038)  (Ord. 888, passed 12-18-1978; Ord. 3375, passed
9-19-2005)



§ 52.039  METER ACCESSIBILITY.



   (A)   (1)   The employees of the Public Works Department shall
have free access at reasonable times to the premises of the consumer for
purposes of reading the internal water meter or inspecting the piping and
appurtenances connected to the meter, which includes the wiring leading from
the internal meter to the internal outside reading device (OSR).



      (2)   The occupants of any building or premises where meters
or OSRs are located shall keep the same free from obstruction and they shall
be so arranged that they may be accessible at all times for the purpose of
reading, inspection or repairing; and if a meter or the OSR is obstructed,
the water will be shut off until such obstruction is removed and the charge
for shutting off is paid.



      (3)   OSRs will be installed for all water customers. If an
OSR is not installed, the owner or occupant of the premises will give
reasonable access to employees of the Public Works Department so that they
may install an OSR. Under certain conditions, the Public Works Director or
his or her designee may waive the requirement to install an OSR. This waiver
will only be based on a unique construction condition that would make the
installation of an OSR cost-prohibitive.



   (B)   All water meters and water fixtures, connections and
appurtenances on private property connected with the waterworks system of the
city shall be open to the inspection of the proper officers and employees of
the city at all reasonable hours.



(1999 Code, § 52.039)  (Ord. 1745, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 1755, passed
5-1-1995)



§ 52.040  METER DAMAGE.



   (A)   Whenever a meter is found to have been damaged by hot water
being forced back into it from the consumer’s hot water or heating
apparatus; or a meter, any part of the meter, meter pit, piping within the
meter pit or a meter pit cover is damaged as a result of any other cause, the
consumer or the owner of the premises on which the meter is located, if
different than the consumer, shall be liable for the damage and shall pay the
city the actual costs of removal, repairing and replacing of the damage.



   (B)   All previous water bills may be corrected on an estimated
basis to cover such period as it appears if the meter was out of order for
such damage.



(1999 Code, § 52.040)  (Ord. 3742, passed 12-19-2011)



§ 52.041  METER ACCURACY.



   (A)   The quantity of water recorded by the meter shall be accepted
as correct by both the customer and the Water Department, except when the
meter has been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register.



   (B)   In either case, the meter will be promptly repaired by the
Water Department, and the quantity of water used will be determined by the
registration of the meter in the same period for the preceding year.



(1999 Code, § 52.041)  (Ord. 556, passed 9-5-1967)



CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW DEVICES



§ 52.055  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL STANDARDS.



   (A)   All plumbing installed within the city Department Service Area
shall be installed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin.
Code 890. If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the
judgment of the City Engineer, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the City Engineer
will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device
immediately. The water customer shall, at his or her own expense, install
such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the
State Plumbing Code, State Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable
local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved
devices upon installation and as required by the State Plumbing Code, State
Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, other than the regular public
water supply of the city, may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by
the City Engineer and the State Environmental Protection Agency as per the
applicable provisions of § 52.008 of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 52.055)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.056  AUTHORITY OF CITY ENGINEER.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of commercial industrial and other properties
served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations
shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every
two years, or as often as the City Engineer shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five years.



   (B)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city for
the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and
the City Engineer or his or her authorized agent shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of
verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required
cross-connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the City Engineer any
information which he or she may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when
demanded, shall, within the discretion of the City Engineer, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.



(1999 Code, § 52.056)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)



§ 52.057  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE; RECONNECTION FEE.



   The City Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures
as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property
shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected
in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, and until a
reconnection fee of $100 is paid to the city. Immediate disconnection with
verbal notice can be effected when the City Engineer is assured that imminent
danger of harmful contamination of the public water system exists. Such
action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of
disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be
effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the
public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the City
Engineer or the State Environmental Protection Agency, such action is
required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the
public water supply. Neither the city, the City Engineer or the city’s
agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or
lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer’s water
supply in accordance with the terms of this section, whether or not said
termination was with or without notice.



(1999 Code, § 52.057)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)



§ 52.058  CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONTAMINATION.



   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned or backpressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.



(1999 Code, § 52.058)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)



§ 52.059  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL POLICY.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these rules and regulations is:



      (1)   To protect the public water supply system from
contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service
connection into the public water supply system;



      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing
cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s
potable water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety;
and



      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program
of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution
of the public and consumer’s potable water systems.



   (B)   Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all
premises served by the public potable water supply system of the city.



   (C)   Policy. The owner or official custodian shall be responsible
for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to
backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer’s water
service connection. If, in the judgment of the City Engineer or his or her
authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the City Engineer
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow
prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer
shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his or her own
expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install
such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing
water service to the premises until such device or devices have been
installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair as required in § 52.067 of this chapter for a period of
at least five years. The City Engineer may require the consumer to submit a
cross-connection inspection report to the city to assist in determining
whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross-
connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross- connection control
device inspector certified by the State Environmental Protection Agency.



(1999 Code, § 52.059)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the
Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), American
Water Works Association (AWWA), American National Standards Institute or
certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.



   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to
the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from a
source such as wells, lakes, or streams, or be contaminated or objectionable
or constitute a water source or system over which the water surveyor does not
have control (as per § 52.008 of this chapter).



   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used
for backflow prevention in the state must meet the standards of the State
Plumbing Code and the State Environmental Protection Agency.



   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in
control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.



   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a CUSTOMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.



   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of
any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.



   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and
the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby
there may be a flow from one system into the other.



   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross- connection formed when a water system
is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under Association of State
Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) Standard 1015. A DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY must
include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.



   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of
the receptacle.



   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and
well- being of consumers. The word “severe”, as used to qualify HEALTH
HAZARD, means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to
result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.



   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross- connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.



   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically
all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
State Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890.



   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water that does not meet public health standards for
drinking water and is not suitable for human consumption or culinary use.
(See 77 Ill. Admin. Code 900.) Any water of unknown quality is considered
NON-POTABLE. (See 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890.120.)



   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all
purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the
source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the
street, alley or at the curb toe within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all
piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in
water supply systems. PLUMBING includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances
and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related
ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons
live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to
the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the
foundation walls.



   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.



   POTABLE WATER. Water that is suitable for human consumption in
accordance with the Drinking Water Systems Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 900.



   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded
hose connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.



   PROCESS FLUID. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes, but is
not limited to:



      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;



      (2)   Process waters;



      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply
system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;



      (4)   Cooling waters;



      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from
wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems;



      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and/or



      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous
fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. All mains, pipes and structures through
which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and
well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for
drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service
connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days per
year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM is either a “community water supply
system” or “non-community water supply system”.



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with
an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between
the two check valves and approved under Association of State Sanitary
Engineers (ASSE) Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of
normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the
supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential
relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit
must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the
device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.



   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and
appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.



   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s
piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water
supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection
and testing date of all cross- connection control devices and methods located
within that customer’s piping system. The survey must be in written form,
and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.



   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water
system or a consumer’s potable water system.



   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection
and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.



   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.



(1999 Code, § 52.060)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)



§ 52.061  WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts:
the public water supply system and the consumer’s water system.



   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those
facilities of the potable water system under the control of the Director of
Public Works or his or her appointed designee up to the point where the
consumer’s water system begins.



      (1)   The source facilities shall include all components of
the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of
water to the public water supply distribution system.



      (2)   The public water supply distribution system shall
include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the
consumer’s water system.



   (C)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water supply distribution to points of use.



(1999 Code, § 52.061)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 52.062  CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED UNLESS APPROVED.



   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross- connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure
proper operation on a continuing basis.



   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.



   (C)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.



(1999 Code, § 52.062)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.063  INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR CROSS-CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable
times to the approved cross-connection control device inspector for the
inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the
consumer’s premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of
cross-connection control devices within the consumer’s premises.



   (B)   On request by the City Engineer, or his or her authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer’s premises. The
consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the City
Engineer for the verification of information submitted by the inspection
consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection
inspection results.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to
arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to
determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to the
consumer’s water system through which contaminants or pollutants could
backflow into the consumer’s or the public potable water system. All
cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3.



   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent
backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:



      (1)   All cross-connections are removed, or approved
cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and
back-siphonage;



      (2)   Cross-connection control devices are installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions;



      (3)   Cross-connection control devices are inspected at the
time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency
as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI); (The inspection of
mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.)



      (4)   Regarding testing and records:



         (a)   Each device is tested at the time of installation
and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer;



         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water
supply shall be available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance
with applicable state law;



         (c)   Each device has a tag attached listing the date of
most recent test, name of CCCDI and type and date of repairs; and



         (d)   A maintenance log is maintained and includes:



            1.   Date of each test;



            2.   Name and approval number of person performing
the test;



            3.   Test results;



            4.   Repairs or servicing required;



            5.   Repairs and date completed; and



            6.   Servicing performed and date completed.



(1999 Code, § 52.063)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.064  CONDITIONS OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION PROTECTION.



   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Admin. Code 890, and the Agency’s regulations, 35 Ill. Admin. Code
680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed
on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where,
in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, actual or potential hazards
to the public water supply system exist.



   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the
following conditions exist:



      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such
auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the Director of
Public Works and the source is approved by the State Environmental Protection
Agency;



      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system; (This
shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or
waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer
under the sanitary control of the Director of Public Works or his or her
appointed designee.)



      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the
judgment of the Director of Public Works or his or her appointed designee
and/or the cross-connection control device inspector, are not correctable or
intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine
whether or not cross-connections exist;



      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey; and



      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections
being established or reestablished.



   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Admin. Code 890, and the Agency’s regulations, 35 Ill. Admin. Code
653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed
on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Director
of Public Works determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists:



      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;



      (2)   Laboratories;



      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;



      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage plumbing stations or
storm water pumping stations;



      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;



      (6)   Chemical plants;



      (7)   Metal plating industries;



      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;



      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear
reactors;



      (10)   Car washes;



      (11)   Pesticide, herbicide or extermination plants and
trucks; and



      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.



(1999 Code, § 52.064)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.065  TYPE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION PROTECTION.



   (A)   The type of protection required under this chapter shall
depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows.



      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with
substances that could cause a severe health hazard.



      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a
substance that could cause a system or health hazard.



      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.



   (B)   The type of protection required under § 52.064(B)(4) and
(B)(5) of this chapter shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation
or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.



   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is
used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public
water supply when:



      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire
retardant or other chemicals;



      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;



      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non- potable source, or
water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or



      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be
introduced into the fire safety system.



   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water
supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service
lines and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.



(1999 Code, § 52.065)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.066  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.



   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these
rules and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water
Works Association (AWWA), American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) or
American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation
Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications.



   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the
manufacturer of the device shall be performed. A manufacturer’s maintenance
manual shall be available onsite.



(1999 Code, § 52.066)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.067  INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to
have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in manufacturer’s instructions.



      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to
document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge
point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the
time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to
improper or bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.



      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and
tested at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and
required service performed within five days.



      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually,
or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service
performed within five days.



   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved
by the Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be
in writing.



   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of repairs.



   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:



      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;



      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test
or visual inspection;



      (3)   Test results;



      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;



      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and



      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.



   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these
regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at
the expense of the consumer without delay as required by division (A) above.



   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the City Engineer.



(1999 Code, § 52.067)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.068  BOOSTER PUMPS.



   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to
or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure
cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the
service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the City
Engineer, at least once a year, that the device is operable.



(1999 Code, § 52.068)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.069  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The City Engineer shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein
any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the City
Engineer, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been
removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.



   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in
conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer, and the required reconnection fee is paid.



   (C)   Neither the city, the City Engineer or the city’s agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customers of the city for any injury, damages
or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer’s water
supply in accordance with the terms of this subchapter, whether or not said
termination of the water supply was with or without notice.



   (D)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or any improperly
installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.



   (E)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this
subchapter shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violation.



   (F)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter,
in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation,
whether the same was caused before or after notice.



(1999 Code, § 52.069)  (Ord. 1777, passed 7-31-1995)  Penalty, see §
52.999



RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING PROCEDURES



§ 52.080  WATER INSIDE CITY.



   (A)   The established rates for the sale of water within the
corporate limits of the city are as follows:



      (1)   First 2,000 gallons per month or less: $6.97 per 1,000
gallons;



      (2)   Next 6,000 gallons per month or less: $7.74 per 1,000
gallons;



      (3)   Next 240,000 gallons per month or less: $7.15 per 1,000
gallons; and



      (4)   All over 248,000 gallons per month: $5.65 per 1,000
gallons.



   (B)   The minimum charge to all customers supplied through a
five-eighths-inch, three-fourths- inch or one-inch meter shall be $13.94 per
month, with a proportionate charge for meters of larger size, based upon the
area of the outlet opening of the meter, and shall apply as a service charge,
whether or not water is used during the period, as follows:



 


Size of Meter (inches)

 

Minimum Charge (per month)

 

Minimum Monthly Consumption (gallons)




1½

 

$181.93

 

25,000




2

 

$360.68

 

50,000




3

 

$718.18

 

100,000




4

 

$1,676.28

 

234,000




6

 

$3,674.78

 

584,000




 



   (C)   The city reserves the right to establish the size of the meter
to be used for water service to any building or premises within its system;
however, all meters shall be minimally sized to meet the requirements of the
most current version of the Illinois Plumbing Code.



   (D)   The usage rate shall be subject to increase effective on each
annual anniversary, beginning October 2018, based upon the annual increase in
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers,
U.S. City Average, Water and Sewer Maintenance, or comparable index if the
same is no longer published, for the month of May.



(1999 Code, § 52.080)  (Ord. 888, passed 12-18-1978; Ord. 1614, passed
6-1-1993; Ord. 1670, passed 1-31-1994; Ord. 1975, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 3205,
passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 3281, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 3363, passed 8-15-2005;
Ord. 3415, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 3472, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 4004, passed
9-18-2017)



§ 52.081  RATES FOR FAIRVIEW HEIGHTS.



   (A)   The established rates for the sale of water within the
corporate limits of the City of Fairview Heights are as follows:



      (1)   First 2,000 gallons per month or less: $8.56 per 1,000
gallons;



      (2)   Next 6,000 gallons per month or less: $9.45 per 1,000
gallons;



      (3)   Next 240,000 gallons per month or less: $8.76 per 1,000
gallons; and



      (4)   All over 248,000 gallons per month: $6.86 per 1,000
gallons.



   (B)   The minimum charge to all customers supplied through a
five-eighths-inch, three-fourths-inch or one-inch meter shall be $17.12 per
month, with a proportionate charge for meters of larger size, based upon the
area of the outlet opening of the meter, and shall apply as a service charge,
whether or not water is used during the period, as follows:



 


Size of Meter (inches)

 

Minimum Charge (per month)

 

Minimum Monthly Consumption (gallons)




1½

 

$222.74

 

25,000




2

 

$441.74

 

50,000




3

 

$879.74

 

100,000




4

 

$2,053.58

 

234,000




6

 

$4,481.18

 

584,000




 



   (C)   The city reserves the right to establish the size of the meter
to be used for water service to any building or premises within its system;
however, all meters shall be minimally sized to meet the requirements of the
most current version of theIllinois Plumbing Code.



   (D)   The usage rate shall be subject to increase effective on each
annual anniversary, beginning October 2018, based upon the annual increase in
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers,
U.S. City Average, Water and Sewer Maintenance, or comparable index if the
same is no longer published, for the month of May.



   (E)   Hydrant rental for the use of fire hydrants within the
corporate limits of the City of Fairview Heights, Illinois, is to be charged
to the City of Fairview Heights at the rate of $62.50 per hydrant, payable
annually beginning May 1 of each year, and any hydrants that are placed in
service during the fiscal year shall be prorated for the remaining portion of
the fiscal year based upon the above hydrant rental fee.



(1999 Code, § 52.081)  (Ord. 888, passed 12-18-1978; Ord. 994, passed
10-5-1981; Ord. 1614, passed 6-1-1993; Ord. 1670, passed 1-31-1994; Ord.
1975, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 3205, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 3281, passed
9-7-2004; Ord. 3363, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 3415, passed 2-21-2006; Ord.
3472, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 4004, passed 9-18-2017)



§ 52.082  OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.



   (A)   Rates for the sale of water from the water system of the city
outside the corporate limits of the city and outside the corporate limits of
the City of Fairview Heights shall be the same as in § 52.081, with a
surcharge of 13% as follows:



      (1)   First 2,000 gallons per month or less: $9.67 per 1,000
gallons;



      (2)   Next 6,000 gallons per month or less: $10.68 per 1,000
gallons;



      (3)   Next 240,000 gallons per month or less: $9.90 per 1,000
gallons; and



      (4)   All over 248,000 gallons per month: $7.75 per 1,000
gallons.



   (B)   The minimum charge to all customers supplied through a
five-eighths-inch, three-fourths-inch or one-inch meter shall be $19.34 per
month, with a proportionate charge for meters of larger size, based upon the
area of the outlet opening of the meter, and shall apply as a service charge,
whether or not water is used during the period, as follows:



 


Size of Meter (inches)

 

Minimum Charge (per month)

 

Minimum Monthly Consumption (gallons)




1½

 

$251.72

 

25,000




2

 

$499.22

 

50,000




3

 

$994.22

 

100,000




4

 

$2,320.82

 

234,000




6

 

$5,063.42

 

584,000




 



   (C)   The city reserves the right to establish the size of the meter
to be used for water service to any building or premises within its system;
however, all meters shall be minimally sized to meet the requirements of the
most current version of the Illinois Plumbing Code.



   (D)   Water rates are retroactive for the original customers to
10-1-1997.



   (E)   The usage rate shall be subject to increase effective on each
annual anniversary, beginning October 2018, based upon the annual increase in
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers,
U.S. City Average, Water and Sewer Maintenance, or comparable index if the
same is no longer published, for the month of May.



(1999 Code, § 52.082) (Ord. 1975, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 2041, passed
5-17-1999; Ord. 3205, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 3281, passed 9-7-2004; Ord.
3363, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 3415, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 3472, passed
8-21-2006; Ord. 4004, passed 9-18-2017)



§ 52.083  SURCHARGES.



   (A)  The surcharges for capital improvements in and outside the
corporate limits of Fairview Heights west of Old Collinsville Road are as
follows:



      (1)   First 8,000 gallons per month or less: $0.19 per 1,000
gallons;



      (2)   Next 240,000 gallons per month or less: $0.16 per 1,000
gallons;



      (3)   Next 420,000 gallons per month or less: $0.11 gallons
per month or less; and



      (4)   All over 650,000 gallons per month: $0.09 per 1,000
gallons.



   (B)   There shall be a minimum surcharge to all customers supplied
through a five-eighths-inch, three-fourths-inch or one-inch meter in the
amount of $0.64 per month.



   (C)   The minimum surcharge to all customers with meters of larger
size than one-inch, as hereinafter referred to, are as follows:



 


Size of Meter (inches)

 

Minimum Charge (per month)

 

Minimum Monthly Consumption (gallons)




1½

 

$4.25

 

25,000




2

 

$8.25

 

50,000




3

 

$16.25

 

100,000




4

 

$37.58

 

234,000




6

 

$76.92

 

584,000




 



   (D)   All users outside the corporate limits of either the city or
Fairview Heights, Illinois, will be assessed an additional surcharge of $1
for every 1,000 gallons used.



(1999 Code, § 52.083)  (Ord. 994, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 1845, passed
5-20-1996; Ord. 3363, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 3415, passed 2-21-2006; Ord.
4004, passed 9-18-2017)



§ 52.084  ESTIMATED CHARGES IN CASE OF METER FAILURE.



   Whenever, for any cause, a water meter fails to operate, a reasonable
estimate shall be made by the City Clerk of the amount of water supplied
during the period such meter fails to operate and the user shall pay a rate
based in whole or in part on the estimated amount of water supplied.



(1999 Code, § 52.084)  (Ord. 556, passed 9-5-1967)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions regarding sewer charges, see § 51.081



§ 52.085  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   (A)   The property owner shall be held responsible for all water
charges left unpaid by any tenant of the premises and the city reserves the
right to shut off any water service where the delinquent rentals are not paid
by the owner.



   (B)   The owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises  receiving
any  of the  services of the utility systems of the city, the occupant of
such premises and the user of the services shall be jointly and severally
liable for the payment of services to such lot, parcel of land or premises
and all services are rendered to the premises by the city only on the
condition that such owner, occupant and user shall be jointly and severally
liable therefor to the city.



(1999 Code, § 52.085)  (Ord. 560, passed 8-21-1967)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions regarding sewer service, see §§ 51.086 and 51.106



§ 52.086  MONTHLY BILLING.



   (A)   Bills for the rates and charges herein established shall be
sent out by the Clerk with the water bills. The bills shall be payable on the
first day of the month following the reading of the water meters.



   (B)   All bills shall be payable at the office of the City Clerk.



(1999 Code, § 52.086)  (Ord. 398, passed 8-22-1957)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions regarding sewer service, see §§ 51.083 and 51.103



§ 52.087  LATE PAYMENT CHARGE.



   If any charge for the service of the system shall not be paid within 20
days of the date of the bill, a delayed payment charge of 1.5% per month
shall be added thereto and collected therewith.



(1999 Code, § 52.087)  (Ord. 398, passed 8-22-1957; Ord. 995, passed
11-16-1981; Ord. 1948, passed 9-29-1997)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions regarding sewer service, see § 51.084 and 51.104



§ 52.088  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE FOR DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   If any bills for the services of the system shall remain
unpaid after 30 days following the rendition of the bill therefor, the water
supply furnished by the city for the lot, parcel of land or premises affected
shall be cut off and shall not be again turned on, except on payment in full
of the delinquent charges therefore, in addition to the payment of a charge
of $50.



   (B)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility
service to customers by reason of non-payment of bills only after notice and
a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. It is hereby provided:



         (a)   All bills are due and payable on or before the
date set forth on the bill;



         (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for non-payment; and



         (c)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or
her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official
shall be authorized to order that the customer’s service not be
discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of
the customer’s complaint.



      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will be
entertained; proper documentation in the form of a signed deferred payment
arrangement must be in the office prior to the disconnect date in order to
avoid termination of service; questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least ten days after the penalty date.



      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
utility service to a customer for non-payment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along
with a turn-on charge in the sum of $50. The service can then only be
connected during the city’s normal hours of operation; otherwise the
service will be connected the following business day.



(1999 Code, § 52.088)  (Ord. 888, passed 12-18-1978; Ord. 1384, passed
7-31-1989; Ord. 1459, passed 12-17-1990; Ord. 3588, passed 9-15-2008)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions regarding sewer service, see §§ 51.085 and 51.105



§ 52.089  TEMPORARY DISCONNECTION SERVICE CHARGE.



   If the Water Department is requested to turn off the water at a
location at the customer’s request for a purpose other than emergency
repairs, then the customer shall pay a service charge to the City Clerk of
$50 for each temporary disconnection performed during the regular workday
hours Monday through Friday and $100 for each such temporary disconnection
performed at all other times.



(1999 Code, § 52.089)  (Ord. 888, passed 12-18-1978; Ord. 1384, passed
7-31-1989; Ord. 1450, passed 10-29-1990; Ord. 1459, passed 12-17-1990; Ord.
3589, passed 9-15-2008)



§ 52.090  TEMPORARY HYDRANT METER CHARGE.



   (A)   Temporary hydrant meter charge.



 

 
5/8 to 1 meters
 
Over 1 meters


Initial administration fee
 

$100

 

$150



Deposit
 

$300

 

$500



Minimum charge per month*
 

$138.14

 

$254.14



Minimum consumption per month (gallons)
 

20,000

 

40,000



NOTE TO TABLE:

* Includes $20 per month, or any part of a month, administration fee
(non-refundable)



 



   (B)   The initial administration fee charged for rental of a meter
will be collected at the time of rental and will not be refundable. The
deposit collected at time of rental will be refunded upon return of the meter
to the city in a clean and operating condition. The deposit will be forfeited
if the meter is in a condition that does not allow immediate re-issue to
others or has been damaged.



   (C)   Additional usage over the set minimums per month will be
billed at the out-of-corporate- limit rates established in § 52.082 of this
chapter and are subject to increase effective on each annual anniversary,
beginning October 2004, based upon the annual increase in the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers, U.S. City Average,
Water and Sewer Maintenance or comparable index if the same is no longer
published, for the month of May, similar to annual adjustments in other city
water consumption rates. Additionally, meters rented for a period longer than
three months shall be brought to City Hall by the renter for reading and
inspection at least quarterly by city personnel.



(1999 Code, § 52.090)  (Ord. 1384, passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 2080, passed
12-20-1999; Ord. 3347, passed 6-20-2006; Ord. 3517, passed 5-21-2007)



WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS



§ 52.105  APPLICATION.



   Any person, firm or corporation having an interest in real estate
within the service areas of the water system and desiring the extension of
water mains to the premises shall make application therefore to the City
Clerk and in making the application, shall present to the City Clerk, a plat
showing the area to be served by the water main extension.



(1999 Code, § 52.100)



§ 52.106  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The plat shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the Director
of Public Works for determination of the size and lengths of water main
installation, location of fire hydrants, water service valves and other
appurtenances to be installed based upon the following requirements.



      (1)   Mains shall be sized so that fire protection service may
be rendered to all lots or premises to be served by the main and any possible
extension thereof.



      (2)   Fire hydrants shall be so located that no premises will
be more than 400 feet from a fire hydrant.



      (3)   In determining the length of pipe lines to be installed
to serve a subdivision or main extension, the main shall be extended to fully
cover the front of the property and if the last lot to be served is a corner
lot or a lot immediately adjacent to a corner lot, the terminal point of the
extension made hereunder shall be located so that the main laid hereunder
ties with the existing main located in the intersecting street; and, further
provided that, if there is no main located on the intersecting street, or no
intersecting street, the terminal point of the extension made hereunder shall
be located at the nearest street line of the intersecting street, or extend
to the furthest end of the development.



      (4)   The city may require the proposed main to be connected
to its distribution system at a point which, in its judgment, is necessary to
adequately furnish water to premises to be served and nothing herein shall
require the city to allow connection to the closest point of existing
service, if such service is inadequate for the extension proposed. Main trunk
lines may be installed by the city at no cost to the developer, however, lots
or properties fronting directly thereon which may be served by a service
connection to the main will be charged the average amount per connection as
found in subdivisions currently being constructed.



      (5)   The city reserves the right to further extend its water
mains from and beyond the terminus of each water main extension made under
this chapter. The applicant or the applicant’s agent paying for an
extension shall not be entitled to any refund for the attaching of customers
to any further extension or branch mains so involved.



      (6)   Extensions made under this rule shall be and remain the
property of the city.



      (7)   Before the city mains will be laid hereunder in any new
subdivision, it is understood and agreed that the road surface will be
brought to the extended sub-grade and the applicant developer of such new
subdivision shall furnish the city with a right-of-way agreement in suitable
form to the city, unless the streets of the new subdivision have been
dedicated to public use.



      (8)   When a pipe line is to be installed in a paved or
unpaved street, a service line of three-fourths inch Type “K” copper is
to be provided to the centerline of each lot for a one-family dwelling. The
service line is to terminate at a point three to five feet inside the
property line in a meter box.



   (B)   When a business or an apartment house is to be serviced, one
should contact the Water Department to obtain the proper size for the service.



(1999 Code, § 52.101)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 52.107  PLAN PREPARATION.



   After the approval of the design, plans and specifications shall be
prepared in accordance with the foregoing and with specifications for water
main extensions from time to time adopted by the City Council. The plans and
specifications shall be prepared by the City Engineer, or a civil engineer
acceptable to the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 52.102)



§ 52.108  SEALED BIDS; DEPOSIT BY APPLICANT.



   Sealed bids shall be received by the City Council after advertisement
not less than ten days prior to the date of the receiving of the bids, and
after receipt thereof, the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk the
entire cost, based upon the lowest responsible bid, the cost to include the
entire cost of the proposed extension, including pipes, valves, fittings,
fire hydrants, all other material and all costs of engineering and
inspection. Excepting that if the city should require the installation of a
size of pipe larger than is found by the city engineering standard to be
necessary for the subdivision, the deposit shall be based upon the cost of
installing the size determined to be necessary for the subdivision, with the
city standing the additional cost for a larger line.



(1999 Code, § 52.103)



§ 52.109  CONTRACT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Waterline extension contract. Upon deposit of the moneys by
the applicant as hereinbefore required, a contract shall be entered into
between the applicant and the city as follows:



   WATERLINE EXTENSION CONTRACT



   AGREEMENT made and entered into this _______ day of ______, by and
between the Water Department of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois, hereinafter
called the Water Department, and ______, hereinafter called the Depositor.



   First. That the Water Department contracts and agrees to have installed
by contract in accordance with its rules water mains as shown on the plat
thereof and the specifications as attached hereto and made a part hereof.



   Second. Bids having been taken and the lowest responsible bid having
been in the amount of ______, the Depositor agrees to deposit and does
deposit herewith the cost thereof.



   (a)   The lowest responsible



     bid   ____________



   (b)   Engineering and



        inspection charge   ____________



   (c)   Total   ____________



   Third. Final costs are to be adjusted up or down according to completed
job cost.



   Fourth. The ownership of the water mains laid herein shall be at all
times in the Water Department, its successors and assigns.



   Fifth. This Agreement shall be valid and binding on the Water
Department only when signed by the Mayor and Clerk of the City of O’Fallon.



   Sixth. This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, executors,
administrators, successors or assigns of the respective parties.



   Executed in duplicate by the parties hereto on the date first above
written.



               WATER DEPARTMENT,



               CITY OF O’FALLON



               By _______________



                  Mayor



ATTEST:



_______________



  City Clerk



               __________________



                  Depositor



_______________



_______________



  Witnesses



   (B)   Contract for construction and installation. After the deposit
of money and the signing of the contract as aforesaid, the contract for
construction and installation of the proposed water mains shall be awarded by
action of the Mayor and City Clerk.



   (C)   Grant of authority to Mayor and Clerk. The Mayor and City
Clerk are hereby authorized to sign waterline extension contracts with a
depositor on behalf of the city when all other prerequisites have been
accomplished and are hereby authorized to sign contracts for construction and
extension of the main with the lowest responsible bidder after the waterline
extension contract has been signed with the depositor and moneys for
construction deposited.



(1999 Code, § 52.104)



§ 52.110  WATER METER ACCESSIBILITY.



   All water meters shall be accessible. Applicants for water service
shall sign a statement allowing the meter reader to enter premises for the
purpose of reading and maintaining the water meter.



(1999 Code, § 52.105)



§ 52.111  APPLICANT’S REMEDIES REGARDING WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   When an applicant has complied with the provisions of §§
52.105, 52.108 and 52.109(A) of this chapter, and the city has failed to
install operating water line extensions and/or water mains within the lesser
of either 150 calendar days after the date that the applicant has made a
complete application under the provisions of § 52.105 of this chapter, or 90
days after the applicant has made its deposit with the City Clerk pursuant to
§ 52.108 of this chapter, the applicant may arrange for such water line
extensions and/or water mains to be constructed by employees licensed in the
state, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, §§ 0.01 through 43, or an
independent contractor licensed in the state, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 225, Act
320, §§ 0.01 through 43.



   (B)   If this section applies, the city shall:



      (1)   Refund to the applicant any deposits made by the
applicant provided for in §§ 52.108 or 52.109(A) of this chapter;



      (2)   Pay any additional reasonable expenses directly incurred
by the applicant as a result of the city’s failure to install the water
line extensions and/ or in the installation or construction of the water line
extension and/or the water main as provided herein;



      (3)   To the extent of any insurance coverage covering the
city, defend, indemnify, reimburse and hold harmless the applicant against
liability for any contract awarded under the provisions of § 52.109(B) or
(C) of this chapter, and any and all costs, expenses and attorney’s fees
incurred in connection with same;



      (4)   If applicable, pay applicant the cost differential
suffered by applicant as a result of a requirement by the city of
installation of a size of pipe larger than is found by the city engineering
standard to be necessary for the subdivision; and



      (5)   Promptly, upon tender, inspect and, if in conformance
with all local, state and federal rules, regulations, orders and laws, such
determination of conformity to be reasonably made, accept conveyance of the
water line extensions and/or water mains.



   (C)   The city may, at its option, mitigate its obligations under
this section by timely delivering the plans prepared by the City Engineer or
a civil engineer acceptable to the City Council under the provisions of §
52.107 of this chapter to the applicant, to that extent reducing the
additional expenses incurred by the applicant by the amount the applicant
would have paid to a third party for same. The city, at its option, may take
any other actions to mitigate its obligations.



   (D)   Further, if this section applies, any contracts pursuant to §
52.109(A) and (B) of this chapter shall be deemed null and void.



(1999 Code, § 52.106)  (Ord. 1759, passed 5-30-1995)



§ 52.112  FIRE MAIN EXTENSIONS; CHARGES.



   (A)   Fire main extensions. Upon proper application made by the
applicant in triplicate to the City Water Department, the City Council shall,
upon vote of a majority, issue a special permit to the applicant for the
connection of a minimum six-inch service pipe to be attached to the street
main of the City Water Department and extend onto the applicant’s property;
the main shall be for the primary purpose of providing fire protection to the
property, and shall not be used for private purposes other than fire
protection, unless the lateral extensions are properly metered and approved
by the City Water Department.



   (B)   Expense of fire main. The expense of installation of all
service mains as heretofore mentioned, shall be at the expense of the
applicant, and further, the maintenance of all service mains shall be at the
expense of the applicant; provided that, all work done on the service mains
from the street main to the property line shall be done by and under the
direction of the City Water Department.



   (C)   Fire connection charges. The charges for the installation of
special connections for fire protection shall be as follows:



 

 

Per Annum



Type of installation
 

Outside City Limits

 

Inside City Limits





Automatic sprinkler connections (minimum charge)
 

$150

 

$75



Automatic sprinkler heads (each)
 

$0.15

 

$0.08



Fire hydrant with or without steamer nozzle (each)
 

$150

 

$75



Hose connections, other than fire hydrant openings (minimum charge)
 

$75

 

$40



Hose connections, other than fire hydrant openings, 2 in diameter or less
(each)
 

$15

 

$8



Hose connections, other than fire hydrant openings, 2-1/2 in diameter (each)
 

$40

 

$20





 



(1999 Code, § 52.107)  (Ord. 692, passed 5-15-1972; Ord. 1091, passed
2-6-1984)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.125  RULES AND REGULATIONS INCORPORATED INTO CONSUMER CONTRACTS.



   All of the rules and regulations concerning the use of the facilities
of the water plant and the consumption of water shall be adopted and the same
shall become a part of the contract with every water consumer and every water
consumer shall be considered to take water from the city subject thereto and
bound thereby.



(1999 Code, § 52.120)



§ 52.126  AUTHORITY OF CITY.



   The employees of the Public Works Department shall have access to all
portions of the premises of the consumer at any reasonable time for
inspection of the use, pressure and flow of water, and the consumer’s pipe,
fixtures and plumbing, and any other apparatus in any manner connected to the
water system of the city or that may affect that system. No person shall
interfere with, prevent or obstruct the employees of the Public Works
Department or his or her designated representative or other person in such
work. The city shall have the right and option to demand, change or stop the
use of, or to require any repair, change, removal or improvement of any pipe,
fixture, plumbing or other apparatus that would in any manner affect the
water supply or system of the city or the supply or fixtures of other
consumers.



(1999 Code, § 52.121)  (Ord. 3364, passed 8-15-2005)



§ 52.127  NON-COMPLIANCE.



   If any consumer fails to comply fully with any of the rules and
regulations in force, the city shall notify the consumer of such failure. If
the consumer does not remedy the same, as the rules provide, and within a
reasonable time, the city shall have the right to discontinue service. Except
in cases of non-payment, emergency, necessity or as otherwise provided, the
city will not discontinue service for violation of any rules until five days
after notice has been given and the violation has not been remedied.



(1999 Code, § 52.122)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall be penalized as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person tampering with a water meter, as prohibited in §
52.006 of this chapter, including turning the meter on when the city has
turned it off, shall be fined not less than $50 for the first offense and not
less than $100 for each subsequent offense.



   (C)   If anyone breaks a lock on a water meter when the city has
locked the water meter, that person shall be fined not less than $100 for the
first offense and not less than $100 for each subsequent offense.



   (D)   Any person damaging any part of the city waterworks, supply
system or meter(s) whether through negligence or intentional acts shall pay
the city for the actual cost of repairing and/or replacing the damaged
waterworks supply system or meter(s). The payment of damages shall be in
addition to the fine set forth in divisions (B) and (C) above.



(1999 Code, § 52.999)  (Ord. 1507, passed 9-16-1991; Ord. 1872, passed
9-30-1996; Ord. 2072, passed 11-29-1999)



CHAPTER 53:  CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   53.01   Purpose; scope; applicability; prescription



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Annual registration required; application for franchise
required



   53.04   Permit required; applications and fees



   53.05   Action on permit applications



   53.06   Effect of permit



   53.07   Revised permit drawings



   53.08   Insurance



   53.09   Indemnification



   53.10   Security



   53.11   Permit suspension and revocation



   53.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status



   53.13   General construction standards



   53.14   Traffic control



   53.15   Location of facilities



   53.16   Construction methods and materials



   53.17   Vegetation control



   53.18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities



   53.19   Clean-up and restoration



   53.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance



   53.21   Variances



   53.22   Enforcement



   53.23   Compensation for use of the rights-of- way



 



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  PURPOSE; SCOPE; APPLICABILITY; PRESCRIPTION.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies
and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
city’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the city
rights-of-way and the city as a whole.



   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise
its authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use
of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including,
without limitation:



      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions
and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations
of the city’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in
rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage
to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the city’s residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. Except as provided by
applicable law, this chapter shall apply to all excavations, use,
construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities or structures in the
rights-of-way by any person other than the city. No utility shall commence or
continue with the operation of any facilities or structures in the
rights-of-way, except as provided and in compliance with this chapter.



   (D)   Franchise or license required.



      (1)   Franchise. Except as may be otherwise provided by law,
no utility may construct, maintain, own, control or use facilities or
structures in the rights-of-way without a binding lawful franchise with the
city granting the privilege of locating such facilities on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within the city’s rights-of-way. In the event
of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of any franchise, the provisions of such franchise
shall govern and control during the term of such franchise, and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof authorized by the city. All utilities claiming
to be engaged in the sale of telecommunications at retail pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq. must so state by verified application, and
provide the city with the applicable resale number as provided in ILCS Ch.
35, Act 636, § 5-45(a).



      (2)   License for incidental use. Persons desiring to install
facilities qualifying as merely an incidental use, which includes
installation of temporary structures or minor incidental uses in the
rights-of-way, such as mailboxes, driveway aprons, ingress or egress
facilities, and similar incidental uses, that utilize a small area of the
rights-of-way and serves the principal structure, may be permitted without a
franchise pursuant to a license issued by the Director. The Director shall
have discretion to establish such application, requirements, and conditions
applicable to such uses consistent with the purposes of this chapter or as
otherwise established by law. Any person granted a license hereunder shall be
subject to the applicable requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   Grant and nature of approval; terms and compensation. The
authority granted by the city in franchise or license shall be for
non-exclusive use of the rights-of-way. Such grant does not in any way limit
the continuing authority of the city through the proper exercise of its
statutory powers to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to provide for the
health, safety, and welfare of the public. The city specifically reserves the
right to grant, at any time, such additional agreements or other rights to
use the rights-of-way for any purpose and to any other person, including
itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to all applicable laws. The granting
of any franchise or license shall not be deemed to create any property
interest of any kind in favor of the person, nor shall it create any
relationship of agency, partnership, joint venture, or employment between the
parties. Except as provided in § 53.03(G), all franchises shall be approved
by ordinance or resolution of the City Council on a non-discriminatory basis,
provided that the utility is in compliance with all applicable requirements.
All licenses may be approved by the Director on a nondiscriminatory basis,
provided that the applicant is in compliance with all applicable
requirements. Each franchise and license shall include terms of use and be
deemed to incorporate the terms of this chapter and other applicable laws of
the city, except as may be expressly stated in such franchise or license.
Franchise compensation and terms shall be as provided in this code or as may
be otherwise lawfully established in the franchise.



   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all
chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws; preemption. No
provision of this chapter shall apply to any circumstance in which such
application shall be unlawful under superseding state or federal law.
Furthermore, if any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
of this chapter is now or in the future superseded or preempted by state or
federal law, or found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unauthorized, that provision shall be automatically interpreted and applied
as required by law. In the event that applicable state or federal laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the person or
utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, to the maximum
extent possible without violating  state or federal laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The city shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions and requirements expressed in this chapter when the
city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of
the city to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



   (I)   No warranty. The city makes no express or implied
representation or warranty regarding its rights to authorize the installation
or construction of facilities on any particular segment of rights-of-way and
shall not be liable for any damage therefrom. The burden and responsibility
for making all such determinations in advance of construction or installation
shall be entirely upon the utility. Such utility shall be wholly liable for
any damages to facilities or other property due to excavation, facilities
construction, or other ROW work performed prior to obtaining the location of
all facilities, without cost or liability to the city. No person shall make
or attempt to make repairs, relocation, or replacement of damaged or
disturbed facilities or uses without the approval of the owner of such
facilities.



   (J)   Use of city or third-party facilities. No franchise or license
shall be deemed to grant the right to use facilities or other property owned
or controlled by the city or a third party, and no such use shall occur,
without the express written consent of such party (on file with the city and
subject to other applicable requirements), nor shall any franchise or license
excuse such person from first obtaining a pole attachment agreement or other
express consent for such right or use before locating on the facilities
controlled or owned by the city or a third party.



   (K)   Lease required for public lands. Unless otherwise provided,
use or installation of any facilities in non-rights-of-way public property of
the city shall be permitted only if a lease agreement or other separate
written approval has been negotiated and approved by the city, with such
reasonable terms as the city may require.



   (L)   Condition precedent to permit. Unless otherwise required by
applicable law, no permit required by this chapter may be issued unless or
until such person has a valid franchise or license with the city that
authorizes that person’s use of the rights-of- way. Unless prohibited by
applicable law, in addition to any other reason provided herein, the Director
may deny a permit to any person that does not have a valid franchise or
license with the city.



   (M)   Transferability. Except as provided in this chapter or as
otherwise required by law, no franchise, license, or permit may be
transferred or assigned to a third party without the written application to,
and consent of the city, based on the requirements and policies of this
chapter. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its consent as provided
herein, but any costs incurred shall be paid by the utility to the extent
allowed by law.



   (N)   Forfeiture of agreement and privilege. In case of failure on
the part of the person or utility, including its successors and assigns, to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or the provisions of
franchise or license, or if the person or utility, its successors and
assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in
violation of this chapter, or the terms of the authorization of such use, or
otherwise loses authority to provide its service in the city, the person or
utility, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit all rights and privileges
permitted by this chapter and any franchise or license, and all rights
hereunder shall cease, terminate, and become null and void, provided that the
forfeiture shall not take effect until the city shall carry out the following
proceedings.



      (1)   Before the city declares the forfeiture or revocation of
a franchise or license, it shall first serve a written notice upon the
person, setting forth in detail the neglect or failure complained of.



      (2)   The person shall have 30 days thereafter, or such other
reasonable period established by the City Council, in which to cure the
default by complying with the conditions of the franchise or license, and
fully remedying any default or violation.



      (3)   If at the end of such period the city determines that
the conditions have not been complied with, and that the person did not
reasonably and in the public interest require more than 30 days to cure the
default, the city shall take action by an affirmative vote of the City
Council present at the meeting, and voting to terminate the franchise or
license, setting out the grounds upon which the agreement or other
authorization is to be forfeited or revoked.



      (4)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from invoking any
other remedy or from declaring immediate forfeiture where the default is
incapable of being cured by the utility, including where such defaults or
violations have repeatedly occurred.



   (O)   No cause of action against the city. A person or utility shall
have no damages remedy or monetary recourse whatsoever against the city for
any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or
requirements of any franchise or license, or because of the enforcement
thereof by the city, or from the use of the rights-of-way. Nothing herein
shall preclude the person or utility from seeking injunctive or declaratory
judgment relief against the city where such relief is otherwise available and
the requirements therefor are otherwise satisfied.



   (P)   Review required; use of existing facilities. The design,
location, and nature of all facilities shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City Engineer. Such review shall be on a non- discriminatory
basis in application of city policy, and approvals shall not be unreasonably
withheld. All new facilities or structures shall collocate on existing poles
or existing conduit, trenches or other facilities, to minimize unnecessary
use of rights-of-way space, to reduce potential existing or future
interference and obstructions, and to reduce the cost to the public or others
therefrom, and to maximize the public’s ability to use and license
appropriate private or public uses of the rights-of-way in the public
interest (except where preempted by law or where good cause is established as
determined by the city applying these objectives). Where existing poles or
facilities are available, or exist at or near the proposed use, unless
otherwise approved, the applicant must either use such facilities, or file a
written request, verified by the applicant, for exception specifying the
specific reasons why such facilities are not available or feasible to be
used, and addressing the objectives hereof. City height limitations,
applicable zoning restrictions, and general city policies with regard to all
users of the rights-of-way shall be applicable to all facilities. The City
Engineer may establish such regulations or policies as may be deemed
necessary or appropriate to effect this provision. For applications for
installation of any facility in the rights-of-way, the most restrictive
adjacent underlying zoning district classification shall apply unless
otherwise specifically zoned and designated on the official zoning map.



      (1)   (a)   No utility may erect, construct, or install new
utility poles or other facilities above the surface of the rights-of-way
without the written permission of the city based on good cause established by
the utility and found by the city. Good cause may be shown by demonstrating
the following;



            1.   There exist other utility poles or support
structures, proximate to the area, that are located above ground. For
purposes of showing good cause under this factor, evidence of good cause for
new utility poles shall only be compared to existing utility poles, evidence
of good cause for new support structures shall only be compared to existing
support structures;



            2.   The proposed underground installation is
impossible, impractical, or not technically feasible; or



            3.   When, in the city’s judgment, the proposed
utility pole installation will be made at a location, and will employ
suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the proximate area without adversely affecting safety.



         (b)   Where reasonable and appropriate and where
adequate rights-of-way exist, the utility shall place above-ground facilities
underground in conjunction with city capital improvement projects and/or at
specific locations requested by the city provided that such placement is
practical, efficient, and economically feasible. The requirements herein
shall not prohibit the replacement of existing utility poles.



      (2)   (a)   All small wireless facilities, as defined in
ILCS Ch. 50, Act 840, § 10, in the rights-of-way shall comply with the
following requirements, in addition to any other design, safety, spacing, or
construction requirements as may be outlined in a franchise agreement or the
city’s code:



            1.   The maximum height of a small wireless
facility that is collocated on a utility pole or support structure shall be
no more than ten feet above the utility pole or support structure that such
small wireless facility is collocated;



            2.   All written design standards, currently in
effect or as may hereafter be adopted by the Director, applicable to the
city’s utility poles or support structures shall be followed, along with
all stealth, concealment, and any other aesthetic requirements or written
design plans applicable to such utility poles or support structures on
record, adopted, or in effect within the city, including such stealth,
concealment, or other aesthetic requirements for historic landmarks or within
a district currently, or hereafter, zoned historic;



            3.   The small wireless facility and any
associated equipment permitted shall be painted the same or similar color as
the utility pole or support structure upon which the facility and/or
equipment is collocated. If good cause is shown for ground-mounted equipment,
such ground-mounted equipment associated with a collocated small wireless
facility shall be of such design, including color and size, such that it
maximally blends in to the built environment of the proximate area;



            4.   New or replacement utility poles or support
structures may not exceed the higher of:



               A.    Forty-five feet AGL; or



               B.   Ten feet in height above the tallest
existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless
facilities, that is in place on the date that an applicant submits an
application to the city, that is located within 300 feet of the proposed
utility pole or support structure and that is in the same ROW within the
jurisdiction of the city; provided, however, that the city may designate
which intersecting ROW within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or
support structure shall control the height limitation for such facility;
without a special use permit approved by City Council pursuant to §§
158.095 through 158.102, as may be hereinafter amended;



            5.   A utility must comply with any requirements
imposed by any contract between the city and a private property owner that
concerns, or relates to, design or construction standards for utility poles
located in the rights-of-way;



            6.   No new utility poles or other support
structures may be installed within the city’s rights-of-way without the
prior approval of the city upon good cause shown for compliance with design
and aesthetic requirements. This requirement does not prohibit modification
of existing utility poles or support structures to allow for collocation of
small wireless facilities. Replacement utility poles shall be permitted as
required by applicable law. In such a circumstance requiring a replacement
pole for a small wireless facility, replacement utility poles shall be at the
sole cost of the utility proposing the replacement utility pole;



            7.   No ground-mounted equipment associated with
the small wireless facility will be permitted. Waiver to this requirement may
be granted by the City Administrator upon good cause shown that the utility
requires ground-mounted equipment to utilize the site for a small wireless
facility. If good cause is shown permitting such ground-mounted equipment for
a small wireless facility, no other ground-mounted equipment shall be allowed
for the utility, or for the particular utility if the person provides only
infrastructure-related services for the utility, within 250 feet of that
approved ground-mounted equipment;



            8.   The proposed collocation, modification, or
replacement of utility poles or support structures where approved pursuant to
this franchise, shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the
use of the rights-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact
upon, and interference with, the rights and reasonable convenience of the
property owners who adjoin said rights-of-way;



            9.   The height of all portions of the small
wireless facility shall be located at least eight feet above ground level so
as not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicle traffic;



            10.   No portions of the small wireless facility
shall extend horizontally from the surface of the utility pole or collocated
support structure more than 16 inches;



            11.   If the proposed utility pole or support
structure the person proposes to locate its small wireless facility on is not
structurally sound, but the Director finds such site to be a desired
location, the Director can require the person to install a substantially
similar utility pole or support structure, at the person’s cost; and



            12.    Notwithstanding the maximum size
descriptions which define a small wireless facility contained in ILCS Ch. 50,
Act 840, § 10 or otherwise contained in applicable law, the proposed
installation or collocation shall endeavor to use the smallest suitable
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in
use by the person, regardless of location, for the particular application.



         (b)   The City Administrator may further waive one or
more of these requirements upon good cause shown by the person, and provided
a showing that the waiver is the minimum necessary to accomplish the purposes
of this division (P), or as otherwise required by applicable law. The burden
of proof for any waiver shall be wholly on the person and must be shown by
clear and convincing evidence.



   (Q)   Utility responsible for costs. The utility shall be
responsible for all reasonable costs borne by the city that are directly
associated with the utility’s installation, maintenance, repair, operation,
use, and replacement of its facilities in the rights-of-way that are not
otherwise accounted for as part of a permit fee established pursuant to this
chapter, to the extent permitted by law. All such costs shall be itemized,
and the city’s books and records related to these costs shall be made
available upon request of the utility.



(1999 Code, § 53.01)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010; Ord. 4016, passed
12-4-2017; Ord. 4090, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Admin. Code 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.



   ANTENNA. Any device that transmits and/or receives radio waves for
voice, data or video communications purposes, including, but not limited to,
television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone and similar forms of
communications. A combination of panels, boxes, or other antenna physically
connected and designed in conjunction to receive signals at one location in
the system shall be considered one antenna.



   APPLICANT. A person applying for a franchise, license, or any permit or
other authorization to install, maintain, repair or otherwise physically
access facilities in the rights-of-way under this chapter.



   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).



   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).



   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.



   CITY. The City of O’Fallon, Illinois.



   CITY UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the city in
public rights-of-way.



   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside
Design Guide.



   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.



   CODE. The Municipal Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois.



   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT or BUILDING OPERATIONS. The installation,
repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition,
modification or abandonment in place of facilities.



   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The city’s Director of Public Works or his
or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way, or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.



   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her designee.



   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.



   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including,
but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable,
antenna, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals,
transmitters, meters, foundations, poles, towers, conduits, grates, covers,
pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto, and any other equipment,
infrastructure, structures or obstruction) located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under this chapter. FACILITY
shall not include a temporary, lawful presence on rights-of-way such
vehicular parking.



   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT or FRANCHISE. A binding and accepted ordinance or
right-of-way agreement with a person or utility, executed by the city,
authorizing the operation of facilities within the rights-of-way of the city.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway, where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material that, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is
determined by the City Engineer (Director of Public Works) to pose an
unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons,
property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not
limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables,
corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any
federal or state law, statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic,
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§
1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the State Cable and
Video Competition Law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.



   INCIDENTAL USE. Facilities of a minor nature, such as mailboxes,
driveway aprons, private cross-connections or other incidental facilities,
that may be permitted by license issued by the Director as provided herein.



   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means, with or without boring.



   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   LICENSE. The executed agreement between the city and a person to use
and occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose of installing incidental
facilities in the rights-of-way, or incidental uses such as ingress and
egress facilities, lateral lines, mailboxes or driveway aprons.



   LINEAR FOOT. The length in feet of cable, wire, fiber, conduit or other
linear facilities. Facilities that are physically connected, wrapped or
lashed as a single cable, conduit or bundle of cables or conduit shall be
considered a single facility for purposes of calculating each linear foot,
provided that each conduit or bundle of conduit, up to and including four
inches in exterior diameter, shall constitute a separate facility for
calculating linear feet. Conduit having fiber optic or other cable or wire
installed within it shall not be considered separate facilities, but shall be
considered part of the single “conduit” or bundle for purposes of
calculating linear feet. Each utility shall be subject to a separate linear
foot charge for facilities used by the utility and subject to this code.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility
or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 53.04 and 53.05 of this chapter.



   PERSON. Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, governmental entity, or any natural person, including, but not
limited to, utilities and licensees as referenced herein.



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products, including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe, expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the
city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY,RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW. The area on, under, along, across or
above any street, alley, roadway, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes,
in which the city has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or
permit the location of facilities other than those of the city, and including
such adjacent areas within such public ways within city control, except as
may be limited herein or by law. RIGHT-OF-WAY,RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW shall not
include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described
in the previous two sentences, and shall not include city buildings, fixtures
and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated
in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications, and all services rendered in connection
therewith, for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to § 53.10 of
this chapter.



   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge, and an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless communications facility that meets
both of the following qualifications:



      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six cubic feet  in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and



      (2)   All other wireless equipment attached to a utility pole
or support structure, associated with the small wireless facility, is
cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume, calculated to the extent
permitted by law.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A free-standing structure such as a billboard or
other structure designed to, or capable of, supporting wireless
communications facilities. A SUPPORT STRUCTURE shall not include a utility
pole.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.



      (1)   This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. “Private
line” means a dedicated non-traffic-sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations.



      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value-added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission.



      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.



      (4)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of
the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as
now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.



   UTILITY. A person owning, controlling, leasing, maintaining, using,
installing, or operating any facility as defined in this chapter, and
including all persons subject to the requirement of a franchise or license. A
UTILITY may be made up of multiple persons. As defined in this chapter, a
UTILITY does not require that the person be certified as a “public
utility” by the ICC pursuant to the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, §§ 1-101 et seq.). For purposes of this chapter, a UTILITY does not
include the city except as may otherwise be required by law.



   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by a utility or for electric distribution, lighting, or traffic control.
UTILITY POLE shall not include a support structure.



   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the State Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v).



   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(1999 Code, § 53.02)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010; Ord. 4016, passed
12-4-2017; Ord. 4090, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 53.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED; APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Annual registration required. Every utility that occupies a
right-of-way within the city shall register on January 1 of each year with
the City Engineer, providing the utility’s name, address and regular
business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact
persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies
involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way, and a 24-hour
telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance, as required
in § 53.08 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.



   (B)   Franchise or license application required.  An application
for a franchise or license, on city forms, shall be presented to the Director
of Public Works in writing, and shall include all such information as is
required by this section. The utility shall be responsible for accurately
maintaining the information in the application during the term of any
franchise, and shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city due to
the failure to provide or maintain as accurate any application information
required herein. Wherever any application or code requirement is claimed to
be preempted by state or federal law, as applied to the circumstances of the
applicant and proposed use in the city, such preemption shall be specifically
stated, citing the precise provision of law and the specific requirement
claimed to be preempted, along with documentation establishing applicability
to the circumstances or applicant at issue.



   (C)   Application deposit fee. Except where inconsistent with
applicable law, a $2,500 application deposit fee for review, documentation
and approval of such franchise is required to be submitted with the
application form to recover any actual costs anticipated and incurred by the
city in reviewing, documenting or negotiating such franchise, provided that
no costs shall be included if such inclusion is prohibited by applicable law
as to that person. If the actual costs are thereafter determined to be less
than the application deposit fee, such amount shall be returned to the
person, after written request therefrom. If the actual costs exceed the
application deposit fee, such person shall pay such additional amount prior
to issuance of any final city approval after written notice from the city.



   (D)   Application form. An applicant shall submit a completed
application for a franchise on such form provided by the city, which shall
include information necessary to determine compliance with this chapter,
including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Identity and legal status of the applicant;



      (2)   Name, address, telephone number and email address of
each officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the
application. Each officer, agent or employee shall be familiar with the local
facilities of the applicant, shall be the person(s) to whom notices shall be
sent, and shall be responsible for facilitating all necessary communications,
including, but not limited to, certification to the city of any material
changes to the information provided in such completed application during the
term of any franchise;



      (3)   Name, address, telephone number and email address of the
local representative of the applicant, who shall be available at all times to
act on behalf of the applicant in the event of an emergency;



      (4)   Proof of any necessary permit, license, certification,
grant, registration, franchise, agreement or any other authorization required
by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the
FCC;



      (5)   Description of the applicant’s intended use of the
rights-of-way, including such information as to proposed services so as to
determine the applicable, federal, state and local regulatory provisions as
may apply to such person;



      (6)   A list of authorized agents, contractors and
subcontractors eligible to obtain permits on behalf of the applicant. The
list may be updated to add such person at the time of permit application if
the updated information on the application is submitted by an authorized
representative of the applicant;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance, as required in § 53.08 of this
chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance information sufficient to
determine the amount of net assets of the applicant;



      (8)   Information sufficient to determine whether the
applicant is subject under applicable law to franchising, service regulation,
payment of compensation for the use of the rights-of-way, taxation or other
requirements of the city;



      (9)   Any request to provide telecommunications shall also
include all requirements set forth in the Telephone Company Act (ILCS Ch.
220, Act 65, §§ 0.01 et. seq.) or other applicable law; and



      (10)   Such other information as may be reasonably required by
the Director of Public Works to determine requirements and compliance with
applicable regulations.



   (E)   Standard for approval or renewal of franchises. In reviewing
an application for a new or renewal of a franchise, the city may consider
prior conduct of the person in performance of its obligations or compliance
with the city’s ordinances in the past, or the existence of any outstanding
violations or deficiencies. The city may deny or condition any franchise
where the proposed use would interfere with the public use of the
rights-of-way or otherwise conflict with the legitimate public interests of
the city or as otherwise provided by law. Applications for franchises may be
approved, denied or approved with conditions consistent with requirements of
applicable law or other applicable requirements as may be necessary to
fulfill the requirements and objectives of this chapter.



   (F)   Approval process. After submission by the applicant of a duly
executed and completed application, including applicable application deposit
fee, and an executed franchise as may be provided by the Director of Public
Works or as modified by the Director of Public Works in review of the
specific circumstances of the application, all in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable laws, the Director of Public
Works shall submit the franchise agreement to the City Council for approval.
Upon determining compliance with this chapter, the City Council may authorize
execution of the franchise (or a modified agreement otherwise acceptable to
the city consistent with the purposes of this chapter), and such executed
franchise shall constitute consent to use the rights-of-way; provided that
nothing herein shall preclude the rejection or modification of any executed
franchise submitted to the city, to the extent applicable law does not
prohibit such rejection or modification, including, where necessary to
reasonably, and in a uniform or nondiscriminatory manner, reflect the
distinct engineering, construction, operation, maintenance, public work or
safety requirements applicable to the person.



   (G)   Administrative approval process; form franchises.



      (1)   Various communication related users of the ROW may be
subject to various and differing state and federal approval requirements,
including timing requirements for expedited or shorter approval times.
Accordingly, the City Administrator shall have the authority pursuant to this
division (G) to execute on behalf of the city such franchise agreements as
provided below that are identical to, or substantially the same as, the
city’s “form” franchises currently on file with the City Clerk, and
incorporated herein, where such franchise terms fully comply with applicable
law under the application and applicant at issue. Such administrative City
Administrator approval be authorized only for the following circumstance
which may require more expedited approvals:



         (a)   A franchise authorizing use of the ROW for
facilities authorized solely to provide “telecommunications at retail” as
are subject to specific state law definitions and requirements, specifically
being limited to such services as “sale of telecommunications at retail”
as defined in ILCS Ch. 35, Act 635, § 10 and “telecommunications”
“sale at retail” as defined in ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-7 as may be
applicable; and



         (b)   A franchise authorizing use of the ROW for
facilities authorized to provide communications services that may include
both such “telecommunications at retail” (being limited to such services
as “sale of telecommunications at retail” as defined in ILCS Ch. 35, Act
635, § 10 and “telecommunications” “sale at retail” as defined in
ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-7 as may be applicable), and other services or
facilities (including but not limited to wholesale, dark fiber or other
communications services that are not “telecommunications at retail” and
are subject to the city’s linear foot fee as provided for in § 53.23,
except where may be otherwise provided by applicable law).



      (b)   To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, the City
Administrator may execute these form franchise agreements with applicants
without any additional approval by the City Council upon determination by the
City Administrator that the applicant satisfies the city’s requirements and
policies for issuance of a franchise pursuant to this code. Failure to
include a specific form franchise shall in no way preclude an applicant
seeking to utilize the city’s rights-of-way for any authorized service from
applying for such a franchise and receiving authorization as provided for by
the City Council in this division (G). The administrative approval process in
this division (G) shall not be available for any franchise or license not
provided for herein or any franchise or license for which the City
Administrator determines there are material changes to the form, or where
full compliance with the code has not been demonstrated. Upon determination
by the City Administrator that a form franchise agreement (or such form with
any minor or ministerial changes or clarifications from the application or
review that are consistent with the purposes of the policies and code of the
city) may be properly issued based on the application submitted, the City
Administrator may so indicate to the applicant and request an executed copy
be returned to the city for execution by the City Administrator within a
reasonable time period stated. If actual or potential regulatory or other
deadlines warrant more immediate action by the city, the City Administrator
may alternatively send to the applicant the completed franchise agreement
already executed by the City Administrator, which franchise agreement shall
be valid only if thereafter executed by applicant, dated and returned to the
city all within seven calendar days of the date of execution by the City
Administrator. For purposes of this division (G), RETURNED TO THE CITY shall
mean a complying document delivered to City Hall and date and time stamped by
the counter clerk of such receipt. No franchise or license shall be valid to
authorize use of the ROW if not executed by both parties in conformance with
all applicable requirements of this code. Such executed transmittal to the
applicant shall be deemed completion of the city’s obligation under any
applicable time requirements for a final decision



(1999 Code, § 53.03)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010; Ord. 4016, passed
12-4-2017; Ord. 4090, passed 4-1-2019)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any city
right-of-way which:



         (a)   Changes the location of the facility;



         (b)   Adds a new facility;



         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
chapter); or



         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the
right-of-way, without first filing an application with the City Engineer and
obtaining a permit from the city therefore, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers’ premises where there will
be no disruption of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed
in such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers (including a 24-hour emergency contact telephone number);



      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than
the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest
in the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
city:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
city and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC) regulations for
emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless
the city finds that additional information or assurances are needed;



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 53.08 of this
chapter;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 53.10 of this chapter;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter (see § 53.21 of this chapter); and



      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the city, to include, but not necessarily limited to, digital
submission of data in a format acceptable by the city for inclusion in the
city’s geographical information system (GIS) such as spatially referenced
digitized drawings.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service
or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “certificate of
public convenience and necessity” or other regulatory authorization that
the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected
to obtain, has been issued by the Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC) or other
jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public
Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the State Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, have been satisfied;
or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



      (6)   Small wireless facilities. To the extent permitted by
applicable law, the following additional application for small wireless
facilities shall be as follows:



         (a)   Additional information required. The following
information shall also be required on a permit for any small wireless
facility:



            1.   A site-specific structural integrity report
for each utility pole and support structures, and for city utility poles and
city-controlled support structures, a make-ready analysis prepared by a
structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural
Engineering Practice Act of 1989;



            2.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a
structural engineer for each small wireless facility;



            3.   Location of each proposed small wireless
facility would be installed with photographs of the immediate surrounding
areas depicting where the small wireless facility would be mounted on its
associated structure;



            4.   The equipment types and model numbers for the
antennas and all other equipment associated with the small wireless facility;



            5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and
completion for each small wireless facility;



            6.   Certification that the collocation proposed
complies with the city’s requirements for collocation, to the extent
permitted by applicable law, including the existence of an enforceable
franchise agreement between the city and the utility, undergrounding
requirements, design requirements, and all other requirements of this
chapter, including § 53.15, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge; and



            7.   All application fees to the extent permitted
by law. All application fees to the city shall be non-refundable. If such
application requires replacement utility pole(s), such cost of the
replacement utility pole(s) will also be included in the application.



   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within
30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $100, except for small
wireless facilities, which shall be the maximum amounts established by
applicable law, including, but not limited to, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 840, §§ 1
et seq. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility
that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act (ILCS Ch. 35,
Act 645, §§ 5-1 et seq.)



(1999 Code, § 53.04)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010; Ord. 4090, passed
4-1-2019)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.05  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   City review of permit applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
City Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules
and regulations, the City Engineer shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the City Engineer is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the City Engineer shall issue
a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the
duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in
full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Additional city review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS Ch.
220, Act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that
it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work
requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement
of work requiring excavation. The City Engineer shall specify the portion of
the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the City Engineer fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either:



         (a)   Ten days after service of notice to the city by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction; or



         (b)   Twenty-five days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the city,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 53.04 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject
to the requirements of division (A) above.



   (C)   Additional city review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 21-100 et seq.)
shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the city, unless
otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the holder has complied with
applicable city codes, ordinances and regulations.



(1999 Code, § 53.05)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.06  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest
created. A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights-of-way, and
does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid
for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with
such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will
occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility
facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of
other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction and
access and egress by adjacent property owners.



   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by
the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements
of the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.



(1999 Code, § 53.06)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.07  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate
from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit
also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with § 53.21 of this chapter. If the city
denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the
facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to
the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



(1999 Code, § 53.07)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.08  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming
the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in divisions
(A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as “X”, “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed
operations coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or
death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability.



         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;



         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and



         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to
protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the city within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement:



         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may
not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after
receipt by the city, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Administrator of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.”



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the city of the notice,
and in no event later than ten days prior to the cancellation, the utility
shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance
policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above.
A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A) above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C)
and (D) above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self insurer”
under the Workers Compensation Act (ILCS Ch. 820, Act 305).



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s
liability. The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for
any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state.
(All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or
better and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.)



(1999 Code, § 53.08)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.09  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting
from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or
wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license or similar agreement; provided, however, that, the
utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the
city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(1999 Code, § 53.09)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.10  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the city
occasioned by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant
to this chapter; and



      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the city must
perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s
failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the city from the
permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.



   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the
city in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the city or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant
to this division (B) shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the city and the permittee;



      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and



      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and
within the state at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the City Engineer, and may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be
performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group
of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken
prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or
phases, the City Engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to
each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would
have been required under the provisions of this division (C) for any single
phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals. The city, upon 14-days’ advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the security
fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount
within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:



      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      (3)   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason
of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or



      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that
the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.



   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice
from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in division
(C) above.



   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by
the city, upon written request for the withdrawal to the city, provided that
any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum
balance required in division (C) above.



   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the city to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the city as a result
of the revocation; provided that, any amounts in excess of the costs, loss or
damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with
respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city,
whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no
action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the security fund
shall affect any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with
respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.



(1999 Code, § 53.10)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.11  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;



      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of
permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public
health, safety or welfare; or



      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:



      (1)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;



      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city,
the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of
such correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or



      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the
rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such
removal to the city within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation. The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this division (C).



   (D)   Stop-work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop-work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) above.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply.



      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of
division (C) above, the city or its designee may, at the option of the city:



         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;



         (b)   Upon not less than 20-days’ notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or



         (c)   After not less than 30-days’ notice to the
permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city.



      (2)   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal.



(1999 Code, § 53.11)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.12  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.



   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no
less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
city’s right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



(1999 Code, § 53.12)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.13  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;



      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this chapter, the City Engineer shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the City Engineer shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.



(1999 Code, § 53.13)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.14  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The city’s minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that, in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 53.20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice
as is practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the city.



(1999 Code, § 53.14)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.15  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this division (A).



      (1)   No interference with city facilities. No utility
facilities shall be placed in any location if the City Engineer determines
that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any
of the city’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the
operation or maintenance of any of the city’s utility facilities.



      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with, the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin the right-of-way.



      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of-way.



      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind
the face of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear
zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of- way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way
line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city
highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as
encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the
roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.



      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage
facilities.



      (3)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities
shall cross at or as near to a 90- degree angle to the centerline as
practicable.



      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines (83 III. Admin. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)   Markers. The city may require the utility to provide a
marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify
the type of facility, the utility and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. §
192.707 (1989))



   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The
city may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way
that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The city may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   The city may require any freestanding facility located
within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may
be installed only if:



      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of
the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (H)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property
owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being
traversed.



(1999 Code, § 53.15)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.16  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and  requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the City Engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring
or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked
and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported,
braced and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral
loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches.
Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).



         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the City Engineer.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the Engineer (Director of Public Works),
the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material
to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the Engineer.



      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
division (A)(4) is permitted under § 53.21, the following requirements shall
apply.



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Engineer.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
city.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the city.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent
pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
city approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted
only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is
continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and
spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if:



            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes
future maintenance or repair; and



            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 


Type of Facility

 

Minimum Cover



Communication, cable or video service lines
 
18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by city)


Electric lines
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications
facilities within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Admin. Code 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the State Commerce Commission) entitled Rules
for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National
Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities.



            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing; provided that, special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if:



               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of
“moles”, “whip augers” or other approved method which compress the
earth to make the opening for cable installation; or



               b.   The installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.



            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops
placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year,
also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops,
within ten business days after placement.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of “moles”, “whip augers” or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated
in a city approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192
- Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. part 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer
lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines
and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.



      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the City Engineer. With
the approval of the City Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may
be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
State Commerce Commission or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be
stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the City
Engineer. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the
public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the city.



      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility
to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of- way may, at the
discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations
would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare.
Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when
conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the
right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the City Engineer
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.



      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of
building and construction are those set forth in § 94.01 of this code.



   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the
presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city
will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of
identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the city or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically
mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and
holidays, in accordance with the State Underground Facilities Damage
Prevention Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.)



(1999 Code, § 53.16)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.17  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and
regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable state laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the city as permitted by law.



   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree-trimming
that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations
specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a
permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.



      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may
require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (D)   Chemical use.



      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no
utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees,
shrubs or vegetation in the city for any purpose, including the control of
growth, insects or disease.



      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control.



(1999 Code, § 53.17)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.18  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city,
a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance
or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the
city in or upon, the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject
to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or



      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the
utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify
the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility
within the rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city
within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the City Engineer
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the
utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to
the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person.



(1999 Code, § 53.18)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.19  CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.



   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the City
Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to restore the
right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed
prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this
section may be extended by the City Engineer for good cause shown.



(1999 Code, § 53.19)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.20  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the city and at the utility’s expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility is available.



      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible,
notify the City Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the City Police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the
city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48
hours after an emergency repair.



(1999 Code, § 53.20)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.21  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the City
Engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The City Engineer shall decide
whether a variance is authorizedfor each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The City Engineer may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the City Engineer may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which
carry out the purposes of this chapter.



   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made
by the City Engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the
right to appeal to the City Council, or such other committee, board or
commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted
in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the Council’s next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The
City Council shall timely decide the appeal.



(1999 Code, § 53.21)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.22  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 53.22)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



§ 53.23  COMPENSATION FOR USE OF THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Use fees.



      (1)   Unless otherwise lawfully established by the City
Council, or as required by applicable law, utilities shall pay to the city as
monthly compensation for the use of the rights-of-way, other than for
incidental uses, a monthly use fee of:



         (a)   One thousand dollars per month for the first mile
of linear facilities, or part thereof, plus $0.16 per linear foot per month
thereafter; and



         (b)   Two hundred dollars per month for each antenna in
the rights-of-way, or such other amounts as established by the City Council.



      (2)   Linear foot fees shall be due and payable on a monthly
basis within 30 calendar days of the close of each month for which the
payment applies. If any use fee, or any portion thereof, is not postmarked or
delivered on or before the due date, interest thereon shall accrue from the
due date until received, at the rate of 1.5% per month, unless such other
maximum rate is established by law.



      (3)   Credit. The utility shall be entitled to a credit to the
linear foot fee owed pursuant to division (A)(1)(a) above in the final amount
of any payments owed under the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
(ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq., “SMTT”) and paid to the city for
the same period; provided such amount is specifically shown and documented in
the applicable fee statement accompanying the linear foot payment and such
credit shall not exceed the amount of linear foot fee owed for that period.



      (4)   The use see required in this section shall be paid by
the utility as required herein without offset, credit, refund, or deduction
except for such credit as is expressly provided for above for SMTT paid.



      (5)   Limitation. Nothing herein shall require payment of use
fees described in this division (A) to the extent such use fees are
prohibited by applicable law, including for placement of small wireless
facilities as defined in ILCS Ch. 50, Act 840, § 10 to the extent such use
fees would be prohibited or otherwise limited by federal or state law.



   (B)   Bundled services. The utility expressly acknowledges and
agrees that, to the extent it markets bundled services, including a
combination of goods or services that may be subject to this chapter, it will
fairly reflect to the city an appropriate and reasonable division of services
among the various services offered, based on the actual value of each
separate service. Whether or not the utility separates services on a
subscriber’s bill, it will provide to the city notice of any such
allocation sufficient for city verification. Should the utility engage in
billing or payment practices that, in the reasonable determination of the
city, do not fairly reflect a fair and appropriate allocation, the city may
nullify such allocation and require payment applicable to the full receipts.



   (C)   Fee statement. Each use fee payment shall be accompanied by a
statement showing the manner in which the use fee was calculated, and in such
format as may be required by the city. If any fee statement is determined to
understate the fee owed, then such additional amount owed shall be made with
a corrected statement, including interest on the amount as provided herein.
Within 90 calendar days following the end of the calendar year, each licensee
shall submit a statement, certified as true, setting forth its gross
revenues, the amount of linear foot and antennae within the facilities, and
describing what revenues or receipts (including each type of services were
included and excluded in the fee calculations for the calendar year, and
describing any adjustments, additional payments or credits) arising from
information not known and reflected as of the payment date. Any required
additional payment shall be included with the report, any credit shall be
deducted from the following annual payment.



   (D)   No accord and satisfaction. No acceptance by the city of any
use fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the
correct amount, nor shall acceptance of any use fee payment be construed as a
release of any claim of the city.



   (E)   Maintain records. Utilities shall at all times maintain
complete and accurate books of account, and records of the business,
ownership, and operations of the utility with respect to the facilities, in a
manner that allows the city to determine whether the utility has properly
calculated its use fee in compliance with this chapter. Should the city
reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained in such
manner, the utility shall correct the manner in which the books and/or
records are maintained so that the utility comes into compliance with this
section. All financial books and records  maintained in accordance with FCC
regulations and the regulations of any governmental entity  regulating
utilities in Illinois, and generally accepted accounting principles, shall be
deemed to be acceptable under this section. Such books and records shall be
maintained for a period of at least five years, but nothing herein shall
limit the years or scope of audit if reasonably related to determining or
enforcing compliance.



   (F)   Right of inspection. The city or its designated
representatives shall have the right to inspect, examine or audit, during
normal business hours and upon seven-calendar-day notice, all documents,
records or other information that pertains to the facilities within the ROW
and/or the utility’s user fee obligations. In addition to access to the
records of utility for audits, upon request, the utility shall provide
reasonable access to records necessary to verify compliance with the terms of
this chapter.



(Ord. 4016, passed 12-4-2017; Ord. 4090, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the city will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the city’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon
a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.



(1999 Code, § 53.99)  (Ord. 3694, passed 10-18-2010)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   BICYCLES, TOY VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES



      74.   PEDESTRIANS



      75.   VEHICLE CONDITIONS, EQUIPMENT AND LOADS



      76.   MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES



      77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      78.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




In General




   70.001   Definitions



   70.002   Adoption of Illinois State Vehicle Code




Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws




   70.015   Obedience to police officers



   70.016   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code;
exceptions



   70.017   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving
animal-drawn vehicles



   70.018   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer




Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings




   70.030   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   70.031   Traffic-control signal legend



   70.032   Pedestrian-control signals



   70.033   Lane-control signals



   70.034   Flashing signals



   70.035   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
advertising signs



   70.036   Interference with official traffic- control devices or
railroad signs or signals



   70.037   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and
structures



   70.038   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker



   70.039   Zones of quiet



   70.040   No-turning signs and turning markers



   70.041   Stop and yield signs




Administration




   70.055   Generally



   70.056   Duty of Traffic Division



   70.057   Records of traffic violations



   70.058   Accident investigations



   70.059   Accident studies



   70.060   Accident reports



   70.061   Annual traffic safety report



   70.062   Funeral procession insignia



   70.063   Traffic Engineer



   70.064   Traffic-control regulations and devices



   70.065   Traffic Commission




Impoundment of Motor Vehicle




   70.080   Definitions



   70.081   Violations authorizing impoundment



   70.082   Seizure and impoundment



   70.083   Administrative hearing



   70.084   Disposition of impounded motor vehicle



   70.085   Motor vehicle possession



   70.086   Towing agency



   70.087   Refund of administrative fee



 



   70.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Towing companies, see Ch. 122



IN GENERAL



§ 70.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear
of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102)



   ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S.- or state-numbered route, controlled-access
highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated
by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major
arterial system of streets or highways.



(ILCS Ch. 70, Act 1205, § 3-9)



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of city departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper local
authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department; vehicles of a
HazMat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board under ILCS Ch.
55, Act 5, § 5-1127; ambulances; vehicles of the State Department of
Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice;
vehicles of the State Emergency Management Agency; mine rescue and explosives
emergency response vehicles of the Department of Natural Resources; vehicles
of the State Department of Public Health; vehicles of the State Toll Highway
Authority with a gross vehicle weight rating of 9,000 pounds or more and
those identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles of the State
Department of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic Patrol; and
vehicles of a municipal or county emergency services and disaster agency as
defined by the State Emergency Management Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1
et seq.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105)



   AXLE LOAD.  The total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose
centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40
inches apart extending across the full width of the vehicle. 



(Ord. 3937, passed 6-6-2016



   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106)



   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for
carrying more than ten persons.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107)



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
when within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for
business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks
or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at
least 300 feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both
sides of the highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108)



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of
persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial
enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a
vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose or
a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8)



   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect
to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no
legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over the highway, street or roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112)



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one
side of a highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of
the lateral line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without
the sidewalk, with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of
the highway; and



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface, placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted
by the Department of Transportation as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-301.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113)



   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116)



   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing, two
non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person with an
electric propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of the device to 15
mph or less.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-117.7)



   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled excluding
all-terrain vehicles and off-highway motorcycles as defined in ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120)



   FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLE. Any vehicle, bicycle or electric personal
assistive mobility device that is designated or authorized by proper local
authorities for Fire Department use.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120.7)



   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125)



   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR).  The value specified by the
manufacturer or manufacturers as the maximum load weight of a single
vehicle.  The GVWR of a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the
"Gross Combination Weight Rating" or GCWR) is the specified by the
manufacturer, GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the
total weight of the towed unit and any load on the unit. 



(Ord. 3937, passed 6-6-2016)



   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or located on public school property.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126)



   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively
for agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations, including
farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or
for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry; provided that, no farm
wagon, wagon trailer or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than
36,000 pounds shall be included hereunder.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130)



   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone or gravel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131)



   INTERSECTION.



      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.



      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does
not constitute an INTERSECTION.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132)



   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic- control device consisting of
an electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135)



   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136)



   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control
and responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated
by or for the lessee for a specific period of time.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137)



   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver’s license or any other license or permit
to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of the state including:



      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;



      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle,
whether or not the person holds a valid license or permit; and



      (3)   Any non-resident’s driving privilege, as defined
herein.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138)



   LIMOUSINE. Any privately owned First Division vehicle intended to be
used for the transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based
on a meter charge, but is prearranged for a designated destination.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1)



   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, city, village and other local board or
body having authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the
constitution and laws of this state and each Road District Highway
Commissioner having that authority.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140)



   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A bicycle equipped with fully operable
pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that meets the
requirements of one of the following classes:



      (1)   CLASS 1 LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a
speed of 20 miles per hour;



      (2)   CLASS 2 LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the
bicycle and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour;



      (3)   CLASS 3 LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a
speed of 28 miles per hour.



   A LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE is not a moped or a motor-driven cycle



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.10)



   LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE. A two- or three-wheeled device with fully
operable pedals and a gasoline motor of less than one horsepower, whose
maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor
while ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 mph.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.15)



   MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with
postage prepaid.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141)



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self- propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires,
but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power,
motorized wheelchairs, low-speed electric bicycles and low-speed gas
bicycles. For this section, MOTOR VEHICLES are divided into two divisions:



      (1)   First Division:  motor vehicles designed for carrying
not more than ten persons; and



      (2)   Second Division: motor vehicles designed for carrying
more than ten persons, those designed or used for living quarters, and those
motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo,
and those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and used as
motor vehicles of the Second Division.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146)



   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less
than 150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized
pedalcycles.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001)



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider, and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding an autocycle or tractor.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147)



   MOPED. A motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power derived
from manually operated pedals, whose speed attainable in one mile is at least
20 mph, but not greater than 30 mph, and is equipped with a motor that
produces two brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is
used, the displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and
the power drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2)



   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self- propelled vehicle, including a
three-wheeled vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities,
that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight mph on level ground.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3)



   MULTIFUNCTION SCHOOL ACTIVITY BUS (MFSAB). A school bus manufactured
for the purpose of transporting 11 or more persons, including the driver,
whose purposes do not include transporting students to and from home or
school bus stops. A MFSAB is prohibited from meeting the special requirements
for school buses in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803 and 12-805, and
subsection (a) of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-802.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5)



   NON-COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-151)



   NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153)



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this
title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154)



   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the
event a motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale
or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession
vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of
the motor vehicle is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or
lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155)



   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156)



   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the First Division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than
ten persons.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157)



   PEACE OFFICER. Any person who by virtue of his or her public employment
is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for
offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific
offenses.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157.5)



   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot, including a person with a physical,
hearing or visual disability.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158)



   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. A natural person who, as determined by a
licensed physician, by a licensed physician assistant, or by a licensed
advanced practice registered nurse:



      (1)   Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a
brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair or other
assistive device;



      (2)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his
or her forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured
by spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less
than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest;



      (3)   Uses portable oxygen;



      (4)   Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the
person’s functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or
Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association;



      (5)   Is severely limited in the person’s ability to walk
due to an arthritic, neurological, oncological or orthopedic condition;



      (6)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of
one of the above five conditions; or



      (7)   Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use
of a hand or arm.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,  § 1-159.1)



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic,
or to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162)



   POLICE VEHICLE. Any vehicle, bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device that is designated or authorized by proper local authorities
for police use.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.3)



   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his
or her principal business, or where he or she makes up and approves his or
her payroll, maintains a central file of records, and maintains his or her
principal executive offices. In the event that not all of these functions are
performed in one place, then that place where a majority of these functions
are performed, or the place where the person does in fact principally
transact and control his or her business affairs shall be considered as the
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5)



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and
used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163)



   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166)



   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails
owned or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1)



   RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device, other than an
official traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the
laws governing the same, and intended to give notice of the presence of
railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167)



   RAILROAD TRACK EQUIPMENT. All vehicles operated upon rails for the
purpose of the maintenance of railroads including, but not limited to, all
hi-rail vehicles and on-track roadway maintenance machines, as defined in 49
C.F.R. part 214.7.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5)



   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168)



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor
home, travel trailer, truck camper or van camper used primarily for
recreational purposes, and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial
business.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169)



   REGISTRATION. The registration certificate or certificates and
registration plates issued under the laws of the state pertaining to the
registration of vehicles.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)



   REGISTRATION STICKER. A device to be attached to a registration plate
that will renew the registration and registration plate or plates for a
predetermined period, not to exceed one registration year.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)



   REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering or destroying.



   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals, or a fire
department, dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped
in wrecked vehicles or other hazardous circumstances, and associated with
some unit of government.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6)



   RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life-endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8)



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



      (1)   The territory contiguous to and including a highway, not
comprising a business district, when the property on the highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.



      (2)   For purposes of establishing maximum speed limits, a
RESIDENCE DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a mile long with residences
or residences and buildings in use for businesses spaced no more than 500
feet apart.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172)



   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174)



   REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of
the Secretary, of a person’s license or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle on the public highways, which termination shall not be subject to
renewal or restoration, except that an application for a new license may be
presented and acted upon by the secretary after the expiration of at least
one year after the date of revocation.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176)



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to
danger of collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177)



   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178)



   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used
herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all the
roadways collectively.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179)



   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181)



   SCHOOL BUS.



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2)
below, owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:



         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;



         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a
religious institution; or



         (c)   Any public, private or religious nursery school.



      (2)   This definition does not include the following:



         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, municipal
corporation or common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban
transportation of passengers when the bus is not traveling a specific school
bus route, but is:



            1.   On a regularly scheduled route for the
transportation of other fare-paying passengers;



            2.   Furnishing charter service for the
transportation of groups on field trips or other special trips or in
connection with special events; or



            3.   Being used for shuttle service between
attendance centers or other educational facilities.



         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division; or



         (c)   A multi-function school-activity bus.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182)



   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon
or is carried by another vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187)



   SHOULDER. The portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1)



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)



   SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT.  Every vehicle not designed or used
primarily for the transportation of persons or property and only incidentally
operated or moved over a highway, including but not limited to: street
sweepers, ditch digging apparatus, well boring apparatus and road
construction and maintenance machinery such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous
mixers, bucket loaders, tractors other than truck tractors, ditchers,
leveling graders, finishing machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifies,
each moving carryalls and scrapers, power shovels and drag lines, and
self-propelled cranes and earth moving equipment. The term does not include
house trailers, dump trucks, truck mounted transit mixers, cranes or shovels,
or other vehicles designed for the transportation of persons or property to
which machinery has been attached.  (Ord. 3937, passed 6-6-2016)



   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas,
primarily for the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or
leaving the through traffic lanes.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193)



   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194)



   STATE. A state, territory or possession of the United States, the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a province of the
Dominion of Canada.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195)



   STATE HIGHWAYS. Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may
from time to time be amended.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196)



   STATE POLICE. The Illinois State Police.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197)



   STOP. The complete cessation from movement.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199)



   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic,
or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control
sign or signal.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200)



   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201)



   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. The portion of any city, village or incorporated
town, other than the business and residence districts.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203)



   TANDEM AXLES.  Any two or more single axles whose centers are more
than 40 inches and nor more than 96 inches apart, measured to the nearest
inch between extreme axles in the series, except as provided in ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 15-111 for special hauling vehicles.  (Ord. 3937, passed 6-6-2016)



   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular
traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the
right-of-way to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop
sign or a yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205)



   TOW TRUCK.  Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used
to push, tow, carry upon, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist,
towbar, towline or auxiliary axle, or carried upon to render assistance to
disabled vehicles, except for any truck tractor temporarily converted to a
tow truck by means of a portable wrecker unit attached to the fifth wheel of
the truck tractor and used only by the owner to tow a disabled vehicle also
owned by him or her and never used for hire.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1)



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars
and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207)



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than
a railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208)



   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.



   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a
pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn
by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon
the towing vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209)



   TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, and of a size or
weight not requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01)



   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211)



   TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a
portable unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01)



   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, or a power unit that
carries as property motor vehicles when operating in combination with a
semitrailer in transportating motor vehicles or any other commodity,
including cargo or general freight, on a backhaul.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212)



   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street
which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling
houses, and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-fourth of a mile or more.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214)



   URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential or business purposes.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8)



   VEHICLE.



      (1)   Every device, in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a
certificate of title under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d), except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety
Act.



      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, unless otherwise
prescribed, a device shall be considered to be a VEHICLE until such time it
either comes within the definition of a “junk vehicle”, as defined under
this section, or a junking certificate is issued for it.



      (3)   For this section, VEHICLES are divided into two
divisions:



         (a)   First Division: those motor vehicles which are
designed for the carrying of not more than ten persons;



         (b)   Second Division: those vehicles which are designed
for carrying more than ten persons; those designed or used for living
quarters; those which are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight
or cargo; those vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and used as
vehicles of the Second Division; and those vehicles of the First Division
used and registered as school buses.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217)



(1999 Code, § 70.01)



§ 70.002  ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS STATE VEHICLE CODE.



   (A)   Pursuant to § 20-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 20-204), the Illinois Vehicle Code, including any subsequent
amendment thereto or revision thereof, is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out at length herein.



   (B)   Three copies of provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as
adopted in division (A) above, shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk and there kept, available for public use, inspection and examination
during named business hours.



   (C)   In referring to a violation of any of the provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted in division (A) above, except for
provisions included in this code, the violation shall be noted by referring
to division (A) above, and then citing the appropriate chapter and section
number of the Illinois Vehicle Code as set forth therein.



   (D)   Words and phrases used in this title shall have the same
meaning as that which is given to them in the Illinois Vehicle Code.



(1999 Code, § 70.02)




OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS




§ 70.015  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.



   (A)   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of any police officer, firefighter, person
authorized by a local authority to direct traffic, or school crossing guard
invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203)



   (B)   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter
designated by him or her, may exercise the powers and authority of a police
officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire
Department has responded to an emergency call for so long as Fire Department
equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police.



(1999 Code, § 70.10)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.016  PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers
of vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, the state or any county, city, town,
district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided
in this section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this
title with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.



   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.



   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:



      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
traffic code;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property; and



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of
movement or turning in specified directions.



   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle, other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is
making use of either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals
meeting the requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215.



   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.



   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this
traffic code shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the highway, but shall apply to such persons
and vehicles when traveling to or from work.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205)  (1999 Code, § 70.11)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.017  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING
ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.



   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of
the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except
those provisions of this chapter which, by their very nature, can have no
application.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206)  (1999 Code, § 70.12)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.018  FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor
vehicle who, having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer
directing the driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop,
willfully fails or refuses to obey that direction, increases his or her
speed, extinguishes his or her lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to
elude the officer.



   (B)   The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice,
siren or a red or blue light.



   (C)   However, the officer giving the signal shall be in police
uniform and, if driving a vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to
be an official police vehicle.



(1999 Code, § 70.13)  Penalty, see § 70.999



TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS



§ 70.030  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle in this traffic code.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel
across private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.



   (C)   No provision of this traffic code, for which official
traffic-control devices are required, shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device
is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that official traffic- control devices are required, the section shall be
effective even though no devices are erected or in place.



   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held
in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic
code, the device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the
official act or direction of lawful authority, and comply with the
requirements of this traffic code, unless the contrary shall be established
by competent evidence.



   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic- control signal
on which no signal light facing the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before
entering the intersection, in accordance with rules applicable in making a
stop at a stop sign.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305)  (1999 Code, § 70.30)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.031  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time
or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used,
except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights
shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:



   (A)   Green indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time such signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown
alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other
movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within
an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control
signal, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, pedestrians facing any
green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed
across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Steady yellow indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or
yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is
being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and
no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.



   (C)   Flashing yellow arrow indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow
indication may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by the arrow and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time the signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, may proceed across the roadway within any marked
or unmarked crosswalk that crosses the lane or lanes used to depart the
intersection by traffic controlled by the flashing yellow arrow indication.
Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the
intersection at the time that the flashing yellow arrow indication is first
displayed.



   (D)   Steady red indication.



      (1)   Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this
division (C), vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall
remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown.



      (2)   Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this
division (C), vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not
enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and,
unless entering the intersection to make a movement permitted by another
signal, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such
stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication permitting the
movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.



      (3)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and
local authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation
prohibit any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may
cautiously enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a
one-way street into a one-way street, after stopping as required by
subsections (1) and (2) of this division (C). After stopping, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.



      (4)   In municipalities with less than 2,000,000 inhabitants,
after stopping as required by subsections (1) or (2) of this division (C),
the driver of a motorcycle or bicycle, facing a steady red signal which fails
to change to a green signal within a reasonable period of time not less than
120 seconds because of a signal malfunction or because the signal has failed
to detect the arrival of the motorcycle or bicycle due to the vehicle’s
size or weight, shall have the right to proceed, after yielding the
right-of-way to oncoming traffic facing a green signal, subject to the rules
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign as required by ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-1204. 



      (5)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal
as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, pedestrians facing a steady
circular red or red arrow signal alone shall not enter the roadway.



   (E)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made or, in the
absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.



   (F)   The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the above signals as
applicable to vehicles.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306)  (1999 Code, § 70.31)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.032  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words
“Walk” or “Don’t Walk” or the illuminated symbols of a walking
person or an upraised palm are in place, these signals shall indicate as
follows.



   (A)   “Walk” or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this
signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and
shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.



   (B)   “Don’t Walk” or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian
shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed his or her crossing on the “Walk”
signal or upraised palm symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island
while the “Don’t Walk” signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated,
steady or flashing.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307)  (1999 Code, § 70.32)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.033  LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official
signs, they shall have the following meanings.



   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication
is permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow
normal safe driving practices.



   (B)   Red X symbol.



      (1)   A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the
lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify
accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present.



      (2)   Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic
controls, and follow normal safe driving practices.



   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should
prepare to vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner
to avoid, if possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.



   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use
the lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308)  (1999 Code, § 70.33)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.034  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used
in conjunction with a traffic- control device, it shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows.



      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop
at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on
the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.



      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.



   (B)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309)  (1999 Code, § 70.34)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.035  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS OR ADVERTISING
SIGNS.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports
to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic- control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of
traffic or the effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public
authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.



   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over
the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed
without notice.



   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control
device to be used on any street or highway in the city which does not conform
to the requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information, and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of
State Adopt-A-Highway signs by the city as provided in the State
Adopt-A-Highway Act, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310)  (1999 Code, § 70.35)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.036  INTERFERENCE  WITH  OFFICIAL  TRAFFIC-CONTROL  DEVICES  OR
RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS.



   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon,
or any other part thereof.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311)  (1999 Code, § 70.36)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.037  UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES AND STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any
public highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage,
injure or remove any sign, signpost or structure upon or used or constructed
in connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof,
or for the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully
unusual, improper or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully careless
driving or use of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation, defacing,
destruction or removal thereof.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312)  (1999 Code, § 70.37)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.038  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.



   The City Street Department, with reference to traffic-control signs,
signals or markers owned by the city, is authorized to indicate the ownership
of the signs, signals, or markers in letters not less than three- eighths
inch, or more than three-fourths of an inch in height, by use of a metal
stamp, etching or other permanent means. Except for employees of the City
Street Department, police officers, contractors and their employees engaged
in a highway construction contract or work on the highway approved by the
city, it is unlawful for any person to possess a sign, signal or marker so
identified.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313)  (1999 Code, § 70.38)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.039  ZONES OF QUIET.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no
person operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or
other warning device, except in an emergency.



(1999 Code, § 70.39)



§ 70.040  NO-TURNING  SIGNS  AND  TURNING MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
the sign. When authorized marks, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.



(1999 Code, § 70.40)



§ 70.041  STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated
by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302.



   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or
traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a
streetcar approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the
event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has
a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required
for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204)  (1999 Code, § 70.41)  Penalty, see §
70.999



ADMINISTRATION



§ 70.055  GENERALLY.



   There is hereby established in the Police Department of the city a
patrol division to be under the control of a police officer appointed by and
directly responsible to the Chief of Police.



(1999 Code, § 70.55)



§ 70.056  DUTY OF TRAFFIC DIVISION.



   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division with such aid as may be
rendered by other members of the Police Department to enforce the street
traffic regulations of the city and of all the state vehicle laws, to make
arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, and to cooperate
with the City Traffic Engineer and other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed
upon said division by this code and the traffic codes of the city.



(1999 Code, § 70.56)



§ 70.057  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Records of traffic violations.



      (1)   The Police Department or the Traffic Division thereof
shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the city or of
the State Vehicle Laws of which any person has been charged, together with a
record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record
shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of
each. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from
that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most
recent five- year period.



      (2)   All forms for records for violations and notice of
violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written
record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such
forms.



      (3)   All such records and reports shall be public records.



   (B)   Drivers’ files to be maintained.



      (1)   The Police Department or the Traffic Division thereof
shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests,
convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.



      (2)   The Division shall study the cases of all such drivers
charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved
in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and report such
information to the Department of Motor Vehicles or other appropriate state
agencies.



      (3)   Such records shall accumulate during at least a
five-year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent five-year period.



(1999 Code, § 70.57)



§ 70.058  ACCIDENT INVESTIGATIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, assisted by other police
officers of the Department, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest
and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of
law causing or contributing to such accidents.



(1999 Code, § 70.58)



§ 70.059  ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Traffic Division shall cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.



(1999 Code, § 70.59)



§ 70.060  ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of
filing traffic accident reports.



   (B)   Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location.



   (C)   Such reports shall be available for the use and information of
the City Traffic Engineer.



(1999 Code, § 70.60)



§ 70.061  ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.



   (A)   The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report
which shall be filed with the Mayor.



   (B)   Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in
the city as follows:



      (1)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons
killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident
data;



      (2)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other
pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; and



      (3)   The plans and recommendations of the Division for future
traffic safety activities.



(1999 Code, § 70.61)



§ 70.062  FUNERAL PROCESSION INSIGNIA.



   The Traffic Division shall designate a type of pennant or other
identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to
identify, the vehicles in a funeral procession.



(1999 Code, § 70.62)



§ 70.063  TRAFFIC ENGINEER.



   (A)   The Engineer shall serve as Traffic Engineer in addition to
his or her other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with
respect to traffic as provided in this code.



   (B)   It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to
determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of
traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents
and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of
traffic conditions and to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and
highways of the city, and to cooperate with other city officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out
the additional powers and duties imposed by laws of the city.



(1999 Code, § 70.63)



§ 70.064  TRAFFIC-CONTROL REGULATIONS AND DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the
City Traffic Engineer, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to
make effective the provisions of the traffic laws of the city, and to make
and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions.



      (2)   No such temporary or experimental regulation shall
remain in effect for more than 90 days.



   (B)   The City Traffic Engineer may test traffic- control devices
under actual conditions of traffic.



   (C)   (1)   The Chief of Police may authorize the temporary
placing of official traffic-control devices when required by an emergency.



      (2)   The Chief of Police shall notify the City Traffic
Engineer of his or her action as soon thereafter as is practicable.



(1999 Code, § 70.64)



§ 70.065  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a Traffic Commission to
serve without compensation, consisting of the Traffic Engineer, the Chief of
Police or, in his or her discretion, as his or her representative, the Chief
of the Traffic Division, the city’s Traffic Committee, and one
representative each from the City Engineer’s office and the City
Attorney’s office, and such number of other city officers and
representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined and appointed by
the Mayor.



      (2)   The Chairperson of the Commission shall be appointed by
the Mayor and may be removed by the Mayor.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission, and to this
end it shall have the authority within the limits of the funds at its
disposal, to coordinate traffic activities, to carry on educational
activities in traffic matters, to supervise the preparation and publication
of traffic reports, to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters,
and to recommend to the legislative body of the city and to the Traffic
Engineer, the Chief of the Traffic Division and other city officials ways and
means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement
of traffic regulations.



(1999 Code, § 70.65)



IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE



§ 70.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. Officer who is an attorney licensed to
practice law in the state for a minimum of three years.



   BUSINESS DAY. Any day in which the offices of City Hall are open to the
public for a minimum of seven hours.



   LEVEL 1 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. Means and shall be $500.



   LEVEL 2 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. Means and shall be $250.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters.



   OWNER OF RECORD. The record title holder(s) of the motor vehicle as
registered with the Secretary of State, State of Illinois; or if not
registered in Illinois, the particular state where the motor vehicle is
registered.



(1999 Code, § 70.75)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.081  VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle, operated with the express or implied
permission of the owner of record, that is used in connection with the
following violations, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the
city, and the owner of record of said motor vehicle shall be liable to the
city for a Level 1 administrative fee, as provided for in this subchapter, in
addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided.



 


State Statute

 

Violations





ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303
 
Driving while license revoked


ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-204
 
Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer


ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501
 
Driving under the influence of alcohol/drugs


ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503
 
Reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving


ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206
 
Street racing


ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601.5
 
Driving at 31 mph more, but less than 40 mph over applicable speed limit,
Class B misdemeanor

Speeding in excess of 40 mph, Class A misdemeanor


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,§ 11-6
 
Indecent solicitation of a child


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,§ 12-2
 
Aggravated assault


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-3.05
 
Aggravated battery


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 18-1
 
Robbery


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 18-2
 
Armed robbery


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 19-1
 
Burglary


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 19-3
 
Residential burglary


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-1
 
Arson


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-1.1
 
Aggravated arson


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-2
 
Possession of explosives or incendiary devices


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1
 
Criminal damage to property


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 25-1
 
Mob action


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 401
 
Manufacture or delivery of unauthorized controlled substance


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 401.1
 
Controlled substance trafficking


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402
 
Unauthorized possession under the Controlled Substances Act


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4
 
Possession of more than 10 grams of any substances containing cannabis


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5
 
Manufacture or delivery of cannabis


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5.1
 
Cannabis trafficking


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5.2
 
Delivery of cannabis on school grounds


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 8
 
Unauthorized production or possession of cannabis sativa plant


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
 
Unlawful use of weapons


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1
 
Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition


ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.3
 
Unlawful sale or delivery of firearms on the premises of a school




 



   (B)   For any motor vehicle, operated with the express or implied
permission of the owner of record, that is used in connection with any
violation of federal, state or local law that is not listed in division (A)
above, including arrest warrants, which results in seizure and impoundment of
the vehicle by the city, the owner of record of said motor vehicle shall be
liable to the city for a Level 2 administrative fee, as provided for in this
subchapter, in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter
provided.



(1999 Code, § 70.76)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.082  SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a motor
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this subchapter,
the police officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a
facility approved by the city. This subchapter shall not apply if the motor
vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was
reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the
theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered.



   (B)   The police officer shall notify any person identifying himself
as the owner of the motor vehicle or any person who is found to be in control
of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a
person, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner’s right
to an administrative hearing to be conducted under this section.



(1999 Code, § 70.77)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.083  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   (A)   Within ten days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded
pursuant to this subchapter, the city shall notify by personal service or by
first class mail to the owner of record of the owner’s right to a hearing,
along with the date, time and location of the hearing, to challenge whether a
violation of this subchapter has occurred. The hearing date must be scheduled
and convened no later than 45 days after the mailing of the notice, or
issuance of the notice of hearing. All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible.



   (B)   If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in violation of
this subchapter, then the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the
owner of record of the motor vehicle liable to the city for the applicable
administrative fee.



   (C)   If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer does not determine
by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in such a
violation, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and
for the return of the motor vehicle, or the administrative fees if already
paid.



   (D)   (1)   If owner of record fails to appear at the hearing,
the owner of record shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a
hearing.



      (2)   If the owner of record pays such administrative fee and
the motor vehicle is returned to the owner, no default order need  be
entered if the owner was informed of his or her right to a hearing, in which
case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made when the city
receives the written waiver.



   (E)   (1)   If a bond in the amount equal to the applicable
administrative fee is posted with the Police Department, the impounded motor
vehicle shall be released to the owner of record.



      (2)   The owner of the motor vehicle shall still be liable to
the towing agent for any applicable towing fees.



   (F)   (1)   If an administrative fee is imposed for a violation
of this subchapter, the bond will be forfeited to the city; however, if a
violation of this subchapter is not proven by preponderance of the evidence,
the bond will be returned to the person posting the bond.



      (2)   All bond money posted pursuant to this subchapter shall
be held by the city until the Hearing Officer issues a decision or, if there
is a judicial review, until the court of jurisdiction issues its orders.



   (G)   All decisions of the administrative Hearing Officer shall be
subject to review under the provisions of the State Administrative Review Law.



(1999 Code, § 70.78)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.084  DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   An administrative fee imposed pursuant to this subchapter
shall constitute a debt due and owing the city.



   (B)   A motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this subchapter shall
remain impounded until:



      (1)   The administrative fee is paid to the city and all
applicable towing fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case the owner
of record shall be given possession of the motor vehicle;



      (2)   A bond in an amount equal to the applicable
administrative fee is posted with the Police  Department and all applicable
towing fees are paid to the towing agent, at which time the motor vehicle
will be released to the owner of record; or



      (3)   The motor vehicle is deemed abandoned in which case the
motor vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of abandoned motor vehicles.



(1999 Code, § 70.79)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.085  MOTOR VEHICLE POSSESSION.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 35 days after:



      (1)   The expiration of the time during which the owner of
record may seek judicial review of the city’s action under this subchapter;
or



      (2)   The time at which a final judgment is rendered against
an owner of record who is in default may be disposed of as an unclaimed motor
vehicle as provided by law.



   (B)   Provided, however, that, where proceedings have been
instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the subject
motor vehicle may not be disposed of by the city, except as consistent with
those proceedings.



(1999 Code, § 70.80)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.086  TOWING AGENCY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the towing or storage company in
possession of the motor vehicle to obtain documentation issued by the Police
Department confirming compliance with foregoing requirements, and retain
photocopies of that documentation in their files for a period of not less
than six months following release of the motor vehicle. The foregoing
information shall be made available to the authorities of the city for
inspection and copying, upon their request, by the towing or storage company.
The towing or storage company is prohibited from releasing any motor vehicle
they may tow within the city until and unless they obtain documentation as
aforesaid.



   (B)   The towing or storage company shall be entitled to receive a
reasonable fee from the owner or person entitled to possession of any such
motor vehicle prior to the release of the motor vehicle. The fee shall be to
cover the cost of removing said motor vehicle and, in addition thereto, the
cost of storage of said motor vehicle for each day or fraction thereof that
said motor vehicle shall have remained stored.



   (C)   The fees in this section shall be in addition to any fee
levied or assessed against the owner or operator of said motor vehicle by
reason of violation of any ordinance or statute and any arrest which may have
resulted from such violation.



(1999 Code, § 70.81)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.087  REFUND OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.



   In the event a judgment of “not guilty” is entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction on all underlying charges that could have resulted in
the impoundment of a motor vehicle, then within 30 days of presentation of a
certified copy of said judgment to the Police Department, any administrative
fees or posted bonds obtained by the city shall be refunded to the paying
party.



(1999 Code, § 70.82)  (Ord. 3653, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3743, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 70.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations.



      (1)   Arrests; bail. Any person arrested for a violation of
any provision of this title shall be released upon proper bail being
furnished as required by law.



      (2)   Compromise of parking violations.



         (a)   Any person accused of a violation of a law
prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area, or restricting the length
of time a vehicle maybe there parked, or parking in a metered area without
putting  a coin in the meter to cover the required time, may settle and
compromise the claim against him or her for such illegal parking by paying to
the city $10 for each such offense. Such payment may be made at the police
station, and a receipt shall be issued for all money so received, and such
money shall be promptly turned over to the City Clerk to be credited to the
General Fund. The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved once
the same has been compromised.



         (b)   Provided that, this section shall not apply to
persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place
where Police or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency equipment is
kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance to a hospital. Nor
shall this section apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as
to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley or parking in such a way
as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only; nor to
any person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of
any member of the Police Department.



      (3)   Prima facie proof. The fact that an automobile which is
illegally parked or operated is registered in the name of the person charged
with a violation of this title shall be considered prima facie proof that
such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation.



(1999 Code, § 70.98)



   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
for which no penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of § 10.99.



      (1)   Traffic violations. Whoever violates any provision of
this traffic code for which another penalty is not already otherwise provided
by ordinance or by appropriate statutory penalty as generally set forth in
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 16-101 et seq., shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $750.



      (2)   Parking violations. Any person accused of a violation of
any provision of this traffic code prohibiting parking a vehicle in a
designated area, or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there
parked, or parking in a metered area without putting a coin in the meter to
cover the required time, may settle and compromise the claim against him or
her for the illegal parking by paying to the village $3 for each such offense
if paid within five days, or $10 if paid within 21 days. This payment may be
made at the police station, a receipt shall be issued for all money so
received, and the money shall be promptly turned over to the Village
Treasurer to be credited to the General Fund. The members of the Police
Department are hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution
for the alleged offense involved. This section shall not apply to persons
parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where
Police or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency equipment is kept or
housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance in a hospital; nor shall this
section apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to entirely
obstruct traffic in any street or alley, or parking in such a way as to
reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only; nor to any
person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any
member of the Police Department.



      (3)   Obedience to police officers. Any person convicted of
violating § 70.015 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $150.



      (4)   Interference wit traffic-control devices. Every person
who is convicted of a violation of § 70.036 shall be punished by a fine of
at least $250 in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed.



      (5)   Damage to highways, appurtenances and structures. Every
person who is convicted of a violation of § 70.037 shall be punished by a
fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed.



(1999 Code, § 70.99)



(Ord. 887, passed 10-16-1978)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203, ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-311 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




Speed Restrictions




   71.001   Speed limits



   71.002   Special speed limits while passing schools



   71.003   Maximum attainable operating speed



   71.004   Minimum speed regulation




Turning and Starting; Signals




   71.020   Required position and method of turning at intersections



   71.021   Limitations on U-turns



   71.022   Starting parked vehicle



   71.023   When signal required



   71.024   Signal by hand and arm or signal device



   71.025   Method of giving hand and arm signals




Overtaking and Passing




   71.040   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions



   71.041   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions



   71.042   Overtaking vehicles on the left



   71.043   When overtaking on the right is permitted



   71.044   Limitations on overtaking on the left



   71.045   Meeting or overtaking school bus



   71.046   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands



   71.047   No-passing zones



   71.048   Driving on roadways laned for traffic




Right-of-Way




   71.060   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection



   71.061   Vehicle turning left



   71.062   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk



   71.063   Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection



   71.064   Merging traffic



   71.065   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway



   71.066   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency
vehicles



   71.067   Funeral processions




Special Stops Required




   71.080   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or
railroad track equipment



   71.081   Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings



   71.082   Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway



   71.083   Stop when traffic obstructed




Prohibitions




   71.095   Backing



   71.096   Following vehicle too closely



   71.097   Obstruction of driver’s view or driving mechanism



   71.098   Opening vehicle doors



   71.099   Coasting



   71.100   Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose



   71.101   Driving upon sidewalk



   71.102   Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices



   71.103   Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway
prohibited



   71.104   Obstructing person in highways



   71.105   Farm tractor operation



   71.106   Driving on controlled-access highway



   71.107   Encroachments



   71.108   Trees, bushes and foliage



   71.109   Unattended draft animals



   71.110   Riding on running boards



   71.111   Processions



   71.112   Trucks




Parades




   71.125   Definitions



   71.126   Permit required



   71.127   Application for permit



   71.128   Standards for issuance of permit



   71.129   Notice of rejection of permit application



   71.130   Appeal procedure when permit denied



   71.131   Alternative permit



   71.132   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued



   71.133   Contents of permit



   71.134   Duties of permittee



   71.135   Public conduct during parades



   71.136   Revocation of permit




Street Designations




   71.150   Signs



   71.151   Through streets



   71.152   Yield streets



   71.153   Closed streets



 



   71.999   Penalty



SPEED RESTRICTIONS



§ 71.001  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway of this state at a
speed which is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the highway, or endangers the safety of any person
or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, approaching and
going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



   (B)   No person may drive a vehicle upon any highway of this state
at a speed which is greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit
established by divisions (C) through (G) of this section, by ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-605 or by a regulation or ordinance made under this chapter.



   (C)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit in an urban district and residential
district within the city for all vehicles is:



      (1)   Twenty-five miles per hour, unless otherwise posted; and



      (2)   Fifteen miles per hour in an alley.



   (D)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit outside an urban district for any vehicle is
65 miles per hour for all highways under the jurisdiction of the Illinois
State Toll Highway Authority and for all or part of highways that are
designated by the Department, have at least four lanes of traffic, and have a
separation between the roadways moving in opposite directions and 55 miles
per hour for all other highways, roads and streets.



   (E)   Unless some lesser speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit outside an urban district for a second
division vehicle designed or used for the carrying of a gross weight of 8,001
pounds or more (including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load) is 55
miles per hour.



   (F)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit outside an urban district for a bus is:



      (1)   Sixty-five miles per hour upon any highway which has at
least four lanes of traffic and of which the roadways for traffic moving in
opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground which is not surfaced
or suitable for vehicular traffic, except that the maximum speed limit for a
bus on all highways, roads, or streets not under the jurisdiction of the
Department or the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority is 55 miles per hour;
and



      (2)   Fifty-five miles per hour on any other highway.



(1999 Code, § 71.001)  (Ord. 3044, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see §
71.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate speed, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1 and
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601



§ 71.002  SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS.



   (A)   School zones.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, a SCHOOL DAY shall
begin at 7:00 a.m. and shall conclude at 4:00 p.m.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, SCHOOL means the
following entities:



         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;



         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a
religious institution; and/or



         (c)   A public, private or religious nursery school.



      (3)   On a school day when school children are present and so
close thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity
of the motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in
excess of 20 mph while passing a school zone, or while traveling on a roadway
on public school property or upon any public thoroughfare where children pass
going to and from school.



      (4)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate
signs are posted upon streets and maintained by the city wherein the school
zone is located. The signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone
is being approached, and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed
limit in effect during school days when school children are present. Nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit the use of electronic speed-detecting devices
within 500 feet of signs within a special school speed zone indicating the
zone, as defined in this section, nor shall evidence obtained thereby be
inadmissible in any prosecution for speed, provided the use of the device
shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in the special school
speed zone.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(a))



      (5)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of
electronic speed-detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a special
school speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this section, nor shall
evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding,
provided the use of the device shall apply only to the enforcement of the
speed limit in the special school speed zone.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(c))



   (B)   Special limit while traveling through highway construction or
maintenance speed zones.



      (1)   (a)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a
construction or maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted
speed limit when workers are present.



         (b)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a
construction or maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted
speed limit when workers are not present.



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the use of electronic
speed-detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a construction or
maintenance speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this section, nor
shall evidence obtained by use of those devices be inadmissible in any
prosecution for speeding, provided the use of the device shall apply only to
the enforcement of the speed limit in the construction or maintenance speed
zone.



      (3)   (a)   As used in this section, a CONSTRUCTION OR
MAINTENANCE SPEED ZONE is an area in which the Department, toll highway
authority or a local agency has posted signage advising drivers that a
construction or maintenance speed zone is being approached, or in which the
Department, authority, or local agency has posted a lower speed limit with a
highway construction or maintenance speed zone special speed limit sign after
determining that the preexisting established speed limit through a highway
construction or maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or safe
with respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or
maintenance speed zone.



         (b)   If it is determined that the preexisting
established speed limit is safe with respect to the conditions expected to
exist in the construction or maintenance speed zone, additional speed limit
signs which conform to the requirements of this division (B)(3) shall be
posted.



         (c)   Highway construction or maintenance speed zone
special speed limit signs shall be of a design approved by the Department.
The signs must give proper due warning that a construction or maintenance
speed zone is being approached and must indicate the maximum speed limit in
effect. The signs must also state the amount of the minimum fine for a
violation.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1)aximum speed limit in effect. The signs
must also state the amount of the minimum fine for a violation.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1)



(1999 Code, § 71.002)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.003  MAXIMUM ATTAINABLE OPERATING SPEED.



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any
street or highway in the city where the minimum allowable speed on that
street or highway, as posted, is greater than the maximum attainable
operating speed of the vehicle.



   (B)   Maximum attainable operating speed shall be determined by the
manufacturer of the vehicle and clearly published in the manual of
specifications and operation, or it shall be determined by applicable rule
and regulation promulgated by the Secretary of State.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611)  (1999 Code, § 71.003)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.004  MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and regular movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation of his or her vehicle or in compliance
with law.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a))  (1999 Code, § 71.004)  Penalty, see
§ 71.999



TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS



§ 71.020  REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection
shall do so as follows.



      (1)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.



      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of
the center of the intersection.



      (3)   The State Department of Transportation and local
authorities in their respective jurisdictions may cause official
traffic-control devices to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
such devices are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by those devices.



   (B)   Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers
proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official
traffic-control devices.



      (1)   A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.



      (2)   A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane, except when
preparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when
preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801)  (1999 Code, § 71.020)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.021  LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a
grade, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction within 500 feet.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802)  (1999 Code, § 71.021)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.022  STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.



   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked,
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803)  (1999 Code, § 71.022)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.023  WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the
vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in § 71.020 of
this chapter, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or
otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left upon a
roadway unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person may so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.



   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must
be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning within a business or residence district, and the
signal must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning outside a business or residence
district.



   (C)   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this
chapter to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give a signal.



   (D)   The electric turn signal device required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 12-208, must be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes or
start from a parallel parked position, but must not be flashed on one side
only on a parked or disabled vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or “do
pass” signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear.
However, signal devices may be flashed simultaneously on both sides of a
motor vehicle to indicate the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard
requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking and passing.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804)  (1999 Code, § 71.023)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.024  SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.



   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805)  (1999 Code, § 71.024)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.025  METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.



   All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of
the vehicle in the following manner, and the signals shall indicate as
follows:



   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;



   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; except that, a
person operating a bicycle may extend the right hand and arm horizontally and
to the right side of the bicycle; and



   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed. Hand and arm extended downward.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806)  (1999 Code, § 71.025)  Penalty, see §
71.999



OVERTAKING AND PASSING



§ 71.040  DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction under the rules governing those movements;



      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive
to the left of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon
the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;



      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for
traffic under the rules applicable thereon;



      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; or



      (5)   Whenever there is a single-track paved road on one side
of the public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose
right is the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on the pavement to
the other vehicle.



   (B)   Upon a two-lane roadway, providing for two-way movement of
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane available for
traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into
a private road or driveway.



   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic,
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by
official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side
of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to
use the lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2) above. However,
this division (C) shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or
driveway.



   (D)   (1)   Upon an interstate highway or fully access-controlled
freeway, a vehicle may not be driven in the left lane, except when overtaking
and passing another vehicle.



      (2)   Division (D)(1) above does not apply:



         (a)   When no other vehicle is directly behind the
vehicle in the left lane;



         (b)   When traffic conditions and congestion make it
impractical to drive in the right lane;



         (c)   When snow and other inclement weather conditions
make it necessary to drive in the left lane;



         (d)   When obstructions or hazards exist in the right
lane;



         (e)   When a vehicle change lanes to  comply with ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-907, 11-907.5, and 11-908;



         (f)   When, because of highway design, a vehicle must be
driven in the left lane when preparing to exit;



         (g)   On toll highways when necessary to use I-Pass, and
on toll and other highways when driving in the left lane is required to
comply with an official traffic-control device; or



         (h)   To law enforcement vehicles, ambulances and other
emergency vehicles engaged in official duties an vehicles engaged in highway
maintenance and construction operation.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701)  (1999 Code, § 71.040)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.041  PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.



   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line
of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702)  (1999 Code, § 71.041)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.042  OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.



   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions
and special rules otherwise stated in this chapter.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle. In no event shall the movement be made by driving off
the pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.



   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted,
the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of
his or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



   (C)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon
the left of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an
unobstructed lane of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.



   (D)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or
individual proceeding in the same direction on a highway shall leave a safe
distance, but not less than three feet, when passing the bicycle or
individual and shall maintain that distance until safely past the overtaken
bicycle or individual.



   (E)   A driver of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in
the same direction on a highway may, subject to the provisions in division
(D) of  this section and § 71.044 of this chapter, pass to the left of the
bicycle on a portion of the highway designated as a no-passing zone under §
71.047 of this chapter if the driver is able to overtake and pass the bicycle
when:



      (1)   The bicycle is traveling at a speed of less than half of
the posted speed limit of the highway;



      (2)   The driver is able to overtake and pass the bicycle
without exceeding the posted speed limit of the highway; and



      (3)   There is sufficient distance to the left of



the centerline of the highway for the motor vehicle to meet the overtaking
and passing requirements under this section.



   (F)   A person driving a motor vehicle shall not, in a reckless
manner, drive the motor vehicle unnecessarily close to, toward or near a
bicyclist, pedestrian or a person riding a horse or driving an animal drawn
vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703)  (1999 Code, § 71.042)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.043  WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake
and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following
conditions:



      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a
left turn;



      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction
being traveled by the overtaking vehicle; and



      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which
traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free
from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving
vehicles.



   (B)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the
right of any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the
unobstructed pavement to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width
of not less than eight feet. This division does not apply to devices
propelled by human power.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
upon the right only under conditions permitting the movement in safety. This
movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704)  (1999 Code, § 71.043)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.044  LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.



   (A)   Passing on the left.



      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the
center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter, and
unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken.



      (2)   In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an
authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the
passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705)



   (B)   Conditions where passing on the left is prohibited.



      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the
roadway under the following conditions:



         (a)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a
curve in the highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within a
distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction;



         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing
any intersection or railroad grade crossing; and/or



         (c)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching
within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.



      (2)   The limitations in division (B)(1) above do not apply
upon a one-way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction,
nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private
road or driveway when the movements can be made with safety.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706)



(1999 Code, § 71.044)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.045  MEETING OR OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop the vehicle before meeting
or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped on a highway,
roadway, private road, parking lot, school property, or at any other
location, including, without limitation, a location that is not a highway or
roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils. The stop is
required before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the
school bus the visual signals as specified in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
12-803 and 12-805. The driver of the vehicle shall not proceed until the
school bus resumes motion or the driver of the vehicle is signaled by the
school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated.



   (B)   The stop signal arm required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
12-803, shall be extended after the school bus has come to a complete stop
for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed before
the school bus is placed in motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be
extended at any other time.



   (C)   The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an eight-lamp
flashing signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805, shall be
actuated after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of
loading or discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus
is placed in motion again. The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at any
other time except as provided in division (D) below.



   (D)   (1)   The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an
eight-lamp flashing signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805,
shall be actuated continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the school bus before stopping for the purpose of loading or
discharging pupils within an urban area, and during not less than the last
200 feet traveled by the school bus outside an urban area. The amber signal
lamps shall remain actuated until the school bus is stopped. The amber signal
lamps shall not be actuated at any other time.



      (2)   The alternately flashing headlamps permitted by ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 12-805, may be operated while the alternately flashing red or
amber signal maps required by that section are actuated.



   (E)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more
lanes which permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite
directions need not stop the vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is
stopped in the opposing roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving
upon a controlled access highway when passing a school bus traveling in
either direction that is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced
or improved part of the controlled access highway where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414)  (1999 Code, § 71.045)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.046  ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.



   (A)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall
be driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be
driven only to the right of the island.



   (C)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more
roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a
clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, every vehicle must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless
directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control
devices or police officers. No vehicle may be driven over, across or within
any dividing space, barrier or section except through an opening in the
physical barrier, or dividing section, or space, or at a cross-over or
intersection as established by public authority.



   (D)   The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved
non-curbed dividing space unless prohibited by an official traffic-control
device.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708)  (1999 Code, § 71.046)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.047  NO-PASSING ZONES.



   (A)   The City Council is authorized to determine those portions of
any highway within the city where overtaking and passing or driving on the
left of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may by appropriate
signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of the zones,
and when signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily
observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.



   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing
zone as set forth in division (A) above, no driver may, at any time, drive on
the left side of the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side
of any pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its
length.



   (C)   This section does not apply under the conditions described in
§ 71.040(A)(2) and § 71.042(E) of this chapter, nor to the driver of a
vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. The
pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone may be crossed from
the left-hand lane for the purpose of completing a pass that was begun prior
to the beginning of the zone in the driver’s direction of travel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707)  (1999 Code, § 71.047)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.048  DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.



   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply.



   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely
within a single lane and shall not be moved from that lane until the driver
has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides
for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the
same direction when the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe
distance, or in preparation for making a left turn or where the center lane
is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction
that the vehicle is proceeding and the allocation is designated by official
traffic-control devices.



   (C)   Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing
specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be
used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of
the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such
device. Drivers must obey lane designation signing except when it is
necessary to use a different lane to make a turning maneuver.



   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting
the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall
obey the directions of every such device.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709)  (1999 Code, § 71.048)  Penalty, see §
71.999



RIGHT-OF-WAY



§ 71.060  VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.



   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
roadways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the
left must yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. This rule may
be modified at through highways or streets and where otherwise inconsistent
with the provisions of this traffic code.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901)  (1999 Code, § 71.060)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.061  VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so
yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval occurs.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902)  (1999 Code, § 71.061)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.062  VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.



   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection, or flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked
crosswalk between intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the
crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right-of-way over
vehicles so stopped. Drivers of vehicles having so yielded the right-of-way
to pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at an intersection
shall also yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within any other crosswalk
at the intersection.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903)  (1999 Code, § 71.062)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.063  VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.



   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated
by stop or yield signs.



   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or
traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another roadway, or which is approaching so closely on the
roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver
is moving across or within the intersection, but the driver, having so
yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval occurs.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in
obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions, and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, of if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving across or within the intersection.



   (D)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign, the collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-of- way.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904)  (1999 Code, § 71.063)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.064  MERGING TRAFFIC.



   Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in § 71.060 of this
chapter, at an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging
traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging roadways is required to
adjust his or her vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a
collision with another vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905)  (1999 Code, § 71.064)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.065  VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an
alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906)  (1999 Code, § 71.065)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.066  OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY 
VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this
chapter, or a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
or visual signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the
emergency vehicle, stop and remain in that position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(b))



(1999 Code, § 71.066)  Penalty, see § 71.999



Statutory reference:



   Additional offenses; statutory penalties, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-907



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a)(1)



§ 71.067  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections
when vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights and hazard
lights lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:



      (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall
yield the right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
giving an audible or visible signal;



      (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall
yield the right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer; and



      (3)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral
procession shall comply with stop signs and traffic-control signals, but when
the leading vehicle has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with
the signal or after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in
the procession may proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or
signal, and the leading vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed
with due caution.



   (B)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall
not drive his or her vehicle in the funeral procession, except when
authorized to do so by a traffic officer or when the vehicle is an authorized
emergency vehicle giving audible or visible signal.



   (C)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may
not form a procession or convoy and have their headlights or hazard lights or
both lighted for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this
section to funeral processions.



   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may
overtake and pass the vehicles in the procession if the overtaking and
passing can be accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering
with such procession.



   (E)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped
with a flashing amber light which may be used only when the vehicle is used
as a lead vehicle in the procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession
may utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers or flashing
hazard warning signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in such a
procession.



   (F)   In the absence of law enforcement traffic- control assistance
for a funeral procession, a funeral director or his or her designee may
direct traffic during a funeral procession.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420)  (1999 Code, § 71.067)  Penalty, see §
71.999



SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED



§ 71.080  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN OR RAILROAD
TRACK EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing where the driver is not always required to stop, the
person must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad
track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet
but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall
not proceed until the tracks are clear and he or she can do so safely. The
foregoing requirements shall apply when:



         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or
railroad track equipment;



         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger
gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train or railroad track equipment;



         (c)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment
approaching a highway crossing emits a warning signal and the train or
railroad track equipment, by reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing,
is an immediate hazard;



         (d)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track
equipment is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing; or



         (e)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is
approaching so closely that an immediate hazard is created.



      (2)   Whenever a person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing where the driver is not always required to stop but
must slow down, the person must exercise due care and caution as the
existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and
under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall slow
down within 50 feet, but not less that 15 feet, from the nearest rail of the
railroad and shall not proceed until he or she checks that the tracks are
clear of an approaching train or railroad track equipment.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   When stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the
driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall proceed only upon exercising
due care.



   (D)   At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad
crossbuck signs, without automatic, electric or mechanical signal devices,
crossing gates or a human flagger giving a signal of the approach or passage
of a train or railroad track equipment, the driver of a vehicle shall in
obedience to the railroad crossbuck sign, yield the right-of-way and slow
down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall stop, if
required for safety, at a clearly marked stopped line, or if no stop line,
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the
railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely. If a driver
is involved in a collision at a railroad crossing or interferes with the
movement of a train or railroad track equipment after driving past the
railroad crossbuck sign, the collision or interference is prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-of- way.



   (E)   No person shall, while driving a commercial motor vehicle,
fail to negotiate a railroad-highway grade railroad crossing because of
insufficient undercarriage clearance.



   (F)   It is unlawful to violate any part of this section.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201)  (1999 Code, § 71.080)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.081  CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before
crossing a railroad track or tracks at grade, stop that vehicle within 50
feet, but not less than 15 feet, from the nearest rail, and while so stopped,
shall listen and look for the approach of a train or railroad track
equipment, and shall not proceed until that movement can be made with safety:



      (1)   Any Second Division vehicle carrying passengers for hire;



      (2)   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for
school buses in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803 and 12-805. The
driver of the bus, in addition to complying with all other applicable
requirements of this division (A), must also turn off all noise-producing
accessories, including heater blowers, defroster fans, auxiliary fans and
radios, and open the service door and driver’s window, before crossing a
railroad track or tracks; and



      (3)   Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state
law to be placarded when carrying as a cargo or part of a cargo “hazardous
material”, as defined in ILCS Ch. 430, Act 30, § 3. After stopping as
required in this section, the driver shall proceed only in a gear not
requiring a change of gears during the crossing, and the driver shall not
shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.



   (B)   This section shall not apply:



      (1)   At any railroad grade crossing where traffic is
controlled by a police officer or flagger;



      (2)   At any railroad grade crossing controlled by a
functioning traffic-control signal transmitting a green indication which,
under law, permits the vehicle to proceed across the railroad tracks without
slowing or stopping, except that division (A) of this section shall apply to
any school bus;



      (3)   At any streetcar grade crossing within a business or
residence district; or



      (4)   At any abandoned industrial or spur track railroad grade
crossing designated as exempt by the Illinois Commerce Commission and marked
with an official sign as authorized in the State Manual of Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices for Streets and Highways.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202)  (1999 Code, § 71.081)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.082  EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road
or driveway within an urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving into the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance,
road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at
the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205)  (1999 Code, § 71.082)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.083  STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.



   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk,
or drive onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection, crosswalk or railroad grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding
any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



   (B)   No driver shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade
crossing to accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the
passage of a train or other railroad equipment using the rails,
notwithstanding any traffic- control signal indication to proceed.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425)  (1999 Code, § 71.083)  Penalty, see §
71.999



PROHIBITIONS



§ 71.095  BACKING.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the
movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any
shoulder or roadway of any controlled- access highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402)  (1999 Code, § 71.095)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.096  FOLLOWING VEHICLE TOO CLOSELY.



   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710)  (1999 Code, § 71.096)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.097  OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to
obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as
to interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle.



   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in a
position as to interfere with the driver’s or motorman’s view ahead or to
the sides, or to interfere with his or her control over the driving mechanism
of the vehicle or streetcar.



   (C)   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position
as to interfere with the driver’s view ahead or to the side or to the rear,
or to interfere with his or her control of the driving mechanism of the bus.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406)  (1999 Code, § 71.097)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.098  OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.



   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be
done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407)  (1999 Code, § 71.098)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.099  COASTING.



   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down
grade shall not coast with the gears or transmission of the vehicle in
neutral.



   (B)   The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade
shall not coast with the clutch disengaged.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410)  (1999 Code, § 71.099)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.100  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business
shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm
closer than 500 feet or stop the vehicle within 500 feet of any fire
apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411)



   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the
Fire Department when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412)



(1999 Code, § 71.100)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.101  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.



   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk
area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.



   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any vehicle moved
exclusively by human power, to any electric personal assistive mobility
device, nor to any motorized wheelchair.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or
preempt the authority of any home rule or non-home rule unit of the village
from regulating or prohibiting the use of electric personal assistive
mobility devices.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1) 



   (C)   A person may not operate an electric personal assistive
mobility device upon a public sidewalk at a speed greater than eight mph.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.2)



(1999 Code, § 71.101)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.102  USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS OR SIMILAR DEVICES.



   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as
play streets when authorized by the traffic authority.



(1999 Code, § 71.102)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.103  PUTTING GLASS OR OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall throw, spill or deposit upon any highway any
bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any litter, as defined in the
Litter Control Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3.



   (B)   Any person who violates division (A) above upon any highway
shall immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed.



   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other debris, except any hazardous
substance as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215, hazardous waste as
defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.220, and potentially infectious medical
waste as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360, dropped upon the highway
from such vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413)  (1999 Code, § 71.103)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.104  OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.



   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay,
or willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other
person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway within the
city, or offer for barter or sale merchandise on the highway so as to
interfere with the effective movement of traffic.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416)  (1999 Code, § 71.104)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.105  FARM TRACTOR OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway in the
city unless the tractor is being used as an implement of husbandry in
connection with farming operations.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the use of a farm tractor as
an implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be
deemed to include use of the tractor in connection with the transportation of
agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment and supplies, as well
as the transportation of the implement of husbandry from its place of
purchase to its place of storage, in connection with the obtaining of repairs
of the implement of husbandry, and the towing of a registered truck of not
more than 8,000 pounds for use as return transportation after the tractor is
left at the place of work or repair.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418)  (1999 Code, § 71.105)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.106  DRIVING ON CONTROLLED- ACCESS HIGHWAY.



   No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
highway, except at entrances and exits established by public authority.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711)  (1999 Code, § 71.106)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.107  ENCROACHMENTS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA.The area lying between the project
right-of-way limits and the platted street limits which the city, by
concurrence in the establishment of the project right- of-way lines, will
permit the state to enter to perform all necessary construction operations.



      ENCROACHMENT. Any building, fence, sign or any other structure or
object of any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs),
which is placed, located or maintained in, on, under or over any portion of
the project right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project
right-of-way line has been established.



      PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT. Any existing awning, marquee,
advertising sign or similar overhanging structure supported from a building
immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there is a
sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free
and safe flow of traffic on the highway; the permissive retention of
overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs
supported from poles constructed outside the project right-of-way line and
not confined by adjacent buildings.



      PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY.Those areas within the project right-of-way
lines established jointly by the city and the state, which will be free of
encroachments, except as herein defined.



      ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas existing or acquired by
dedication or by fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by
temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect.



   (B)   Prohibition of encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to erect or cause to be erected, to retain or
cause to be retained, any encroachment (hereinabove defined) within the
limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project
right-of-way lines have been established.



   (C)   Right-of-way lines. Project right-of-way lines have been
established as coincidental with the right-of- way lines.



   (D)   Conflicts. This section is intended to and shall be in
addition to all other ordinances, rules and regulations concerning
encroachments and shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other
ordinance unless in direct conflict herewith.



(1999 Code, § 71.107)  (Ord. 1686, passed 4-4-1994)  Penalty, see § 71.999



Cross-reference:



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 98



§ 71.108  TREES, BUSHES AND FOLIAGE.



   (A)   No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall be so placed,
maintained, allowed to remain or displayed upon either public or private
property in such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement
of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic-control devices, sign or
signal.



   (B)   All such trees, bushes or foliage are hereby declared to be
nuisances and may be removed by any police officer or under his or her
direction and supervision.



(1999 Code, § 71.108)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.109  UNATTENDED DRAFT ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal
unattended in any street without having such animal securely fastened.



(1999 Code, § 71.109)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.110  RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running
board, bumpers, top or outside step of any vehicle.



(1999 Code, § 71.110)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.111  PROCESSIONS.



   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand side of the roadway as close as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as practical and safe.



(1999 Code, § 71.111)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.112  TRUCKS.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a truck upon any street where truck
operation is prohibited by law and where such signs of prohibition are
posted; except that, a truck may be driven on such street for not more than
the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making deliveries or
picking up loads.



(1999 Code, § 71.112)  Penalty, see § 71.999



Cross-reference:



   Truck routes, see Ch. 77, Schd. VI



PARADES



§ 71.125  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CRUISING. The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a
continuous or nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.



   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park or other public place in the city, or CRUISING as defined above.



   PARADE  PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.



   PARKING  LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.



(1999 Code, § 71.120)



§ 71.126  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form
or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief
of Police or other authorized city official.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities, provided the conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(1999 Code, § 71.121)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.127  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Procedure. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall
file an application with the Chief of Police or other authorized city
official on forms provided by such officer.



   (B)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be
filed not less than five days, or not more than 60 days, before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.



   (C)   Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth
the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads
of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public
place proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit
shall file a communication in writing from the person authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; and



      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.



   (D)   Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing an application
for a parade permit a fee in an amount as established by the City Council
from time to time.



(1999 Code, § 71.122)



§ 71.128  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a
permit when, from a consideration of the application and from other
information obtained, he or she finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly
areas;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route;



   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designated to be held
purely for private profit; and



   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval
in writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of
the parking lot which is the site of the parade.



(1999 Code, § 71.123)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.129  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall
act on the application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays excepted, after filing thereof.



   (B)   If he or she disapproves the application, he or she shall mail
to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice of his
or her action stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit.



(1999 Code, § 71.124)



§ 71.130  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days
after notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30
days after its receipt.



(1999 Code, § 71.125)



§ 71.131  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different than that named
by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall
file a written notice of his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit
shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade
permit under this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 71.126)



§ 71.132  NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be
sent to the Mayor and the Fire Chief.



(1999 Code, § 71.127)



§ 71.133  CONTENTS  OF  PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions
thereof; and



   (G)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 71.128)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.134  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade
chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the
parade permit on his or her person during the conduct of the parade.



(1999 Code, § 71.129)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.135  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, except a
police car or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when those vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police or other
authorized city official shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or other
public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a
parade. Signs shall be posted to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No
person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public thoroughfare
unless signs have been posted in accordance with this section.



(1999 Code, § 71.130)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.136  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.



(1999 Code, § 71.132)



STREET DESIGNATIONS



§ 71.150  SIGNS.



   Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop and yield
right-of-way streets; all one- way streets and alleys; and all stop
intersections.



(1999 Code, § 71.145)



§ 71.151  THROUGH STREETS.



   The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by law as
through streets are hereby declared to be through streets.



(1999 Code, § 71.146)



Cross-reference:



   Stop/through street intersections, see Ch. 77, Schd. III



§ 71.152  YIELD STREETS.



   (A)   Any street designated by law as a yield right- of-way street
and so posted is hereby declared to be a yield right-of-way street.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right-of-way
sign shall reduce the speed of his or her vehicle to not more than 20 mph and
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersecting street either from the right or left or which are approaching so
closely on such intersection as to constitute a hazard; but the driver having
so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.



   (C)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the
driver’s failure to yield right-of-way.



(1999 Code, § 71.147)  Penalty, see § 71.999



Cross-reference:



   Yield intersections, see Ch. 77, Schd. II



§ 71.153  CLOSED STREETS.



   No person shall drive any vehicle onto or across any road or
intersection designated as a closed road on Schedule VIII (“Closed
Roads”) of Chapter 77 of this code, except for such exceptions as may be
provided therein. The City Engineer shall be authorized to place signage,
barricades or other traffic-control devices to effect this provision.



(1999 Code, § 71.148)  (Ord. 3596, passed 11-17-2008)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in §
70.999 of this code.



   (B)   A first violation of § 71.001 of this chapter is a petty
offense with a minimum fine of $150. A second or subsequent violation of §
71.001 of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $300.



(1999 Code, § 71.001)



   (C)   (1)   A first violation of § 71.002(A) of this chapter is
a petty offense with a minimum fine of $150. A second or subsequent violation
of this section is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $300.



      (2)   (a)   When a fine for a violation of § 71.002(A) of
this chapter is $150 or greater, the person who violates § 71.002(A)(1) and
(A)(2) of this chapter shall be charged an additional $50 to be paid to the
unit school district where the violation occurred for school safety purposes.
If the violation occurred in a dual school district, $25 of the surcharge
shall be paid to the elementary school district for school safety purposes
and $25 of the surcharge shall be paid to the high school district for school
safety purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire $50
surcharge shall be paid to the appropriate school district or districts.



         (b)   For purposes of this division (C)(2) of this
chapter, SCHOOL SAFETY PURPOSES include the costs associated with school zone
safety education, the Safe Routes to School Program under § 2705-317 of the
Department of Transportation Law of the Civil Administrative Code of the
state, safety programs within the School Safety and Educational Improvement
Block Grant Program under ILCS Ch. 105, Act 5, § 2-3.51.5 of the School
Code, and the purchase, installation, and maintenance of caution lights which
are mounted on school speed zone signs.



   (D)   (1)   A first violation of § 71.002(B) of this chapter is
a petty offense with a minimum fine of $250. A second or subsequent violation
of division (B) of this section is a petty offense with a minimum fine of
$750.



      (2)   If a fine or violation of § 71.002(B) of this chapter
is $250 or greater, the person who violated § 71.002(B) of this chapter
shall be charged an additional $125, which shall be deposited into the
Transportation Safety Highway Hire-Back Fund in the state treasury, unless
the violation occurred on a highway other than an interstate highway and a
county police officer wrote the ticket for the violation, in which case the
$125 shall be deposited into that county’s Transportation Safety Highway
Hire-Back Fund. In the case of a second or subsequent violation of §
71.002(B) of this chapter, if the fine is $750 or greater, the person who
violated § 71.002(B) of this chapter shall be charged an additional $250,
which shall be deposited into the Transportation Safety Highway Hire-Back
Fund in the state treasury, unless the violation occurred on a highway other
than an interstate highway and a county police officer wrote the ticket for
the violation, in which case the $125 shall be deposited into that county’s
Transportation Safety Highway Hire-Back Fund.



      (3)   The Transportation Safety Highway Hire-Back Fund, which
was created by Pub. Act No. 92-619, shall continue to be a special fund in
the State Treasury. Subject to appropriation by the General Assembly and
approval by the Secretary, the Secretary of Transportation shall use all
moneys in the Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund to hire off-duty
Department of State Police Officers to  monitor construction or maintenance
zones.



      (4)   For a second or subsequent violation of § 71.002(B) of
this chapter within two years of the date of the previous violation, the
Secretary of State shall suspend the driver’s license of the violator for a
period of 90 days.



(1999 Code, § 71.002)



   (E)   Every person convicted of § 71.042(E) of this chapter shall
be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor if the violation does not result in great
bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement to another.



(1999 Code, § 71.042)



   (F)   In addition to the suspensions authorized by ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-1414, any person convicted of violating § 71.045 of this chapter or
a similar provision of a local ordinance shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of $150 or, upon a second or subsequent violation, $500.



(1999 Code, § 71.045)



   (G)   (1)   A violation of § 71.080 of this chapter is a petty
offense for which a fine of $250 shall be imposed for a first violation, and
a fine of $500 shall be imposed for a second or subsequent violation. The
court may impose 25 hours of community service in place of the $250 fine for
the first violation.



      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation, the Secretary of
State may suspend the driving privileges of the offender for a minimum of six
months.



(1999 Code, § 71.080)



   (H)   (1)   Any person found in violation of § 71.083(B) of this
chapter shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community
service.



(1999 Code, § 71.083)



      (2)   Beginning with 1-1-2009, the Secretary of State shall
suspend, for a period of one month, the driving privileges of any person
convicted of a violation of § 71.083(B) of this chapter or a similar
provision of a local ordinance; the Secretary shall suspend for a period of
three months the driving privileges of any person convicted of a second or
subsequent violation of § 71.083(B) of this chapter or a similar provision
of a local ordinance if the second or subsequent violation occurs within five
years of a prior conviction for the same offense. In addition to the
suspensions authorized by this section, any person convicted of violating §
71.083(B) of this chapter or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall
be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community service. Any
person given a disposition of court supervision for violating § 71.083(B) 
or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall also be subject to a
mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community service. Upon a second or
subsequent violation, in addition to the suspensions authorized by this
section, the person shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 and 50 hours
community service. The Secretary may also grant, for the duration of any
suspension issued under this division, a restricted driving permit granting
the privilege of driving a motor vehicle between the driver’s residence and
place of employment or within other proper limits that the Secretary of State
shall find necessary to avoid any undue hardship. A restricted driving permit
issued hereunder shall be subject to cancellation, revocation and suspension
by the Secretary of State in like manner and for like cause as a driver’s
license may be cancelled, revoked or suspended; except that, a conviction
upon one or more offenses against laws or ordinances regulating the movement
of traffic shall be deemed sufficient cause for the revocation, suspension or
cancellation of the restricted driving permit. The Secretary of State may, as
a condition to the issuance of a restricted driving permit, require the
applicant to participate in a designated driver remedial or rehabilitative
program. Any conviction for a violation of this division (H) shall be
included as an offense for the purposes of determining suspension action
under any other provision of the Vehicle Code; provided, however, that, the
penalties provided under this division (H) shall be imposed unless those
penalties imposed under other applicable provisions are greater.



   (I)   Whoever violates any provision of § 71.153 of this chapter
for which another penalty is not otherwise provided by this title or by
appropriate statutory penalty as generally set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 16-101 et seq., shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



(1999 Code, § 71.999)  (Ord. 3044, passed 2-20-2001; Ord. 3596, passed
11-17-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601,



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(e),



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(e-5),



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(f),



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1,



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703,



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201,



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414 and



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425



   Violation of § 71.042(E) resulting in great bodily harm or permanent
disability or disfigurement to another, a Class 3 felony, see ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-703



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section




Method of Parking




   72.01   General parking regulations



   72.02   Unattended motor vehicles




Restrictions on Stopping, Standing and Parking




   72.15   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places



   72.16   Stopping, standing or parking outside business or residence
district



   72.17   Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with
disabilities



   72.18   Fire lanes



   72.19   On-street parking



   72.20   Limited parking



   72.21   Vehicles for sale



   72.22   Alleys



   72.23   Cab and bus stands



   72.24   Parking on private property



   72.25   Signs




Snow Emergencies




   72.40   Announcement of snow emergency



   72.41   Termination of emergency



   72.42   Snow emergency routes




Violations




   72.55   Officers authorized to remove vehicles



   72.56   Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this
chapter



 



   72.99   Penalty



METHOD OF PARKING



§ 72.01  GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with
the right- hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand
curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.



   (B)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one- way roadway shall
be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the
direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within
12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge
of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of
the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the
left-hand shoulder.



   (C)   No angle parking shall be permitted, except as set forth by
ordinance.



   (D)   No person shall park in violation of signs placed by and under
the jurisdiction of the State Department of Transportation which prohibit,
limit or restrict the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any
highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304)  (1999 Code, § 72.01)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.02  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Except for a law enforcement officer or an operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle performing his or her official duties, no person driving or
in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the
ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any
perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the
highway. An unattended motor vehicle shall not include an unattended locked
motor vehicle with the engine running after being started by a remote starter
system.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401)  (1999 Code, § 72.02)  Penalty, see §
72.99




RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING




§ 72.15  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer, or an official
traffic- control device, no person shall:



      (1)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:



         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street;



         (b)   On a sidewalk;



         (c)   Within an intersection;



         (d)   On a crosswalk;



         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or
within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a
safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;



         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon
a highway or within a highway tunnel;



         (h)   On any railroad tracks;



         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit
stopping;



         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;



         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway,
including crossovers; and



         (l)   In the Ferncliffe Court Stub (off of Shadow Ridge
Crossing) except the occupants of 1110 and 1114 Shadow Ridge Crossing.



      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:



         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;



         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



         (d)   Within 30 feet of any intersection or as otherwise
approved by the City Engineer;



         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any
fire station  and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted); and



         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit
standing.



      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading property or passengers:



         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing; and



         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her
control into any prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is
unlawful.



   (C)   It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a
passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
loading or unloading of passengers, in any place designated by the City
Council as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following
designated places:



      (1)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before
the entrance to any hospital or hotel at the time;



      (2)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb line
before the entrance to a public building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
except on Sunday; and



      (3)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any
time that the theater is open.



(1999 Code, § 72.10)  (Ord. 3313, passed 1-18-2005; Ord. 3638, passed
9-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 72.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303



§ 72.16  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall
stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle
off the roadway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway
opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other
vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a
distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the highway.



   (B)   The city, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or
for the maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting
or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway
where, in its opinion, stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those
using the highway, or where stopping, standing or parking vehicles would
unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any regulations
adopted by the city regarding the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
upon any specific street, streets or highways become effective at the time of
the erection of appropriate signs indicating the regulations.



   (C)   This section, and § 72.15 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-1304, shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in
such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the vehicle in that position.



   (D)   Any Second Division vehicle used exclusively for the
collection of garbage, refuse or recyclable material may stop or stand on the
road in a business, rural or residential district for the sole purpose of
collecting garbage, refuse or recyclable material. The vehicle, in addition
to having its hazard lights lighted at all time that it is engaged in
stopping or standing, shall also use its amber oscillating, rotating or
flashing light or lights as authorized under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
12-215(b)(12), if so equipped.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301)  (1999 Code, § 72.11)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.17  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle
which is not properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a
person with disabilities, as defined by § 70.001, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2, or to a veteran with a disability
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609, as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a person with disabilities or a veteran with a disability,
in any parking place, including any private or public off-street parking
facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as
designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor vehicles
displaying such registration plates. It shall be prohibited to park any motor
vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any parking place
specifically reserved for persons with disabilities, by the posting of an
official sign as designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor
vehicles displaying such registration plates. When using the parking
privileges for persons with disabilities, the parking decal or device must be
displayed properly in the vehicle where it is clearly visible to law
enforcement personnel, either hanging from the rearview mirror or placed on
the dashboard of the vehicle in clear view. Disability license plates and
parking decals and devices are not transferable from person to person. Proper
usage of the disability license plate or parking decal or device requires the
authorized holder to be present and enter or exit the vehicle at the time the
parking privileges are being used. It is a violation of this section to park
in a space reserved for a person with disabilities if the authorized holder
of the disability license plate or parking decal or device does not enter or
exit the vehicle at the time the parking privileges are being used. Any motor
vehicle properly displaying a disability license plate or a parking decal or
device containing the international symbol of access issued to persons with
disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory or foreign
country shall be recognized by state and city authorities as a valid license
plate or device and receive the same parking privileges as residents of the
state.



      (2)   An individual with a vehicle displaying disability
license plates or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with
a disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2,
or to a veteran with a disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609, is in
violation of this section if:



         (a)   The person using the disability license plate or
parking decal or device is not the authorized holder of the disability
license plate or parking decal or device or is not transporting the
authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device
to or from the parking location; and



         (b)   The person uses the disability license plate or
parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through the
disability license plate or parking decals or devices under this code.



      (3)   A driver of a vehicle displaying disability license
plates or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a
disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or
to a veteran with a disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 is in
violation of this section if:



         (a)   The person to whom the disability license plate or
parking decal or device was issued is deceased; and



         (b)   The driver uses the disability license plate or
parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through a
disability license plate or parking decal or device under this code.



   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public
or private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the Police
Department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other
place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use
by a person with disabilities which does not display person with
disabilities  registration plates or a special decal or device as required
under this section.



   (C)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions
of division (A)(1) above shall be fined as set forth in § 72.99 of this
chapter in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or
storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this section. The city shall
display signs indicating the fine imposed, and if the amount of the fine is
subsequently changed, the city shall change the sign to indicate the current
amount of the fine. It shall not be a defense to a charge under this section
that either the sign posted pursuant to this section or the intended
accessible parking place does not comply with the technical requirements of 
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, Department regulations, or local ordinance if
a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or notice on or near the
parking place that the place is reserved for a person with disabilities.



      (2)   The Circuit Clerk shall distribute 50% of the fine
imposed on any person who is found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating
this section, including any person placed on court supervision for violating
this section, to the law enforcement agency that issued the citation or made
the arrest. If more than one law enforcement agency is responsible for
issuing the citation or making the arrest, the 50% shall be shared equally.



   (D)   As used in this section, AUTHORIZED HOLDER means an individual
issued a disability license plate under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616, an
individual issued a parking decal or device under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-1301.2, or an individual issued a license plate for veterans with
disabilities under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609.



   (E)   Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from
any person who commits a violation of this section. Any police officer may
seize the disability license plate upon authorization from the Secretary of
State. Any police officer may request that the Secretary of State revoke the
parking decal or device or the disability license plate of any person who
commits a violation of this section.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3)  (1999 Code, § 72.12)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.18  FIRE LANES.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand at any time in any
area designated as a fire lane by official signs, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device.



(1999 Code, § 72.13)  (Ord. 1072, passed 8-15-1983)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.19  ON-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Street cleaning. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on
any public street or portion thereof in the city at any time when such street
is being cleaned. Signs indicating such cleaning shall be posted before the
work is done.



   (B)   Snow removal. Refer to §§ 72.40 through 72.42 of this
chapter.



   (C)   Parking of certain vehicles restricted.  It shall be unlawful
to park any commercial vehicle, truck, except those commonly referred to as
"pick-up" trucks, any motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of more
than 10,000 pounds or GVWR of more than 12,000 pounds and/or an overall
length of more than 21 feet, trailer, semitrailer, travel trailers, or boats
attached or unattached to vehicles on any street, except during loading and
unloading, and that any commercial vehicle parked or stopped for the purpose
of pick-up or delivery of residents and/or personal property for a period not
to exceed eight hours shall be exempt. Fire Department vehicles, ambulances,
and vehicles owned or used by the city are exempt.



(1999 Code, § 72.14)  (Ord. 831, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 1048, passed
2-23-1983; Ord. 1799, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 3041, passed 1-16-2001; Ord.
3846, passed 11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.20  LIMITED PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess
of the amount of time designated by law and so posted.



(1999 Code, § 72.15)  Penalty, see § 72.99



Cross-reference:



   Limited parking, see Ch. 78, Schd. II



§ 72.21  VEHICLES FOR SALE.



   It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any street from which
vehicle merchandise is peddled or sold.



(1999 Code, § 72.16)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.22  ALLEYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except for the purpose
of loading and unloading merchandise and then in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(1999 Code, § 72.17)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.23  CAB AND BUS STANDS.



   No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area
designated by law as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be
parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.



(1999 Code, § 72.18)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.24  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.



(1999 Code, § 72.19)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.25  SIGNS.



   Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited
or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions.



(1999 Code, § 72.20)



SNOW EMERGENCIES



§ 72.40  ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Mayor finds that falling snow, sleet and freezing rain
will create a condition which makes it necessary that the parking of motor
vehicles on SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES be prohibited, or whenever he or she finds
on the basis of a firm forecast of snow, sleet or freezing rain that the
weather conditions so forecasted may create a condition making it necessary
that such parking be prohibited, he or she is authorized to announce such
prohibition, to become effective at a time specified by him. After the
effective time of such prohibition no person shall park any vehicle or permit
any vehicle to remain parked on a SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE. However, if a fall of
snow, sleet or freezing rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m.,
and the Mayor has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that the parking on SNOW
EMERGENCY ROUTES is to be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle parked
on a SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following such
fall. The prohibition of parking announced by the Mayor under the authority
of this section shall remain in effect until he or she announces the
termination of the snow emergency, in part or in whole, after which the
prohibition of parking authorized by this section shall no longer be in
effect.



(1999 Code, § 72.35)  (Ord. 3041, passed 1-16-2001)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.41  TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Mayor shall find that some or all of the conditions which
gave rise to the snow emergency prohibition no longer exist, he or she is
authorized to declare the termination of the emergency, in part or in whole,
effective immediately on announcement. If the announcement is made other than
between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.



(1999 Code, § 72.36)



§ 72.42  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   (A)   (1)   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route as
designated and listed in Ch. 78 of the city’s code of ordinances.



      (2)   On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency
route, special signs shall be posted to this effect.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any
public street or portion thereof designated as a “Snow Emergency Route”
in the city at any time when snow is being removed from such street.



      (2)   This provision will take effect when the snow has
reached a depth of two inches and it is determined by the Mayor that a
“Snow Emergency” is necessary. Signs indicating “Snow Emergency
Route”, as per Ch. 78 of the city’s code of ordinances, shall be posted
before this provision takes effect.



(1999 Code, § 72.37)  (Ord. 3041, passed 1-16-2001)  Penalty, see § 72.99



VIOLATIONS



§ 72.55  OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of
any of the provisions of § 72.16 of this chapter or any other applicable
section of this traffic code or ordinance of the city, the officer is
authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the roadway.



   (B)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be
removed to a place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing
upon any highway, bridge, causeway or in a tunnel, or in a position or under
circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.



   (C)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be
removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon
a highway when:



      (1)   Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or
taken without the consent of its owner;



      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
unable to provide for its custody or removal;



      (3)   The person driving or in control of the vehicle is
arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to
take the person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary
delay; or



      (4)   The registration of the vehicle has been suspended,
cancelled, or revoked.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302)



   (D)   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to
traffic duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and
towed away by commercial towing service any car or other vehicle illegally
parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a
traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may
obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle, any vehicle which has been
parked in any public street for a period of 24 consecutive hours, or any
vehicle parked on a designated snow route after a snow emergency has been
declared by the Director of Public Safety.



(1999 Code, § 72.60)



§ 72.56  DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and
who leases the vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a
violation of this chapter involving the vehicle, shall upon request provide
such police officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having
jurisdiction thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the
lessee at the time of the offense and the identifying number upon the
registration plates and registration sticker or stickers of the vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305)  (1999 Code, § 72.61)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in §
70.999 of this title.



   (B)   A violation of any part of § 72.15(A)(1)(h) of this chapter
shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community service.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303)



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates § 72.17(A)(1) of this chapter shall
be fined $250 in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal
or storage of the motor vehicle, but municipalities by ordinance may impose a
fine up to $350 and shall display signs indicating the fine imposed.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.3(c))



      (2)   (a)   1.   Any person found guilty of violating
the provisions of § 72.17(A)(2) of this chapter shall be fined $600 for a
first offense.



            2.   Any person found guilty of violating §
72.17(A)(2) of this chapter a second or subsequent time shall be fined $1,000.



         (b)   Any person who violates § 72.17(A)(3) is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be fined $2,500.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.3(c-1))



      (3)   Any person who commits a violation of § 72.17(A)(2) of
this chapter may have his or her driving privileges suspended or revoked by
the Secretary of State for a period of time determined by the Secretary of
State. Any person who commits a violation of § 72.17(A)(3) shall have his or
her driving privileges revoked by the Secretary of State. The Secretary of
State may also suspend or revoke the disability license plates or parking
decal or device for a period of time determined by the Secretary of State.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.3(f))



(1999 Code, § 72.99)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES, TOY VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES



Section




Bicycles




   73.01   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles



   73.02   Riding on bicycles



   73.03   Clinging to vehicles



   73.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths



   73.05   Carrying articles



   73.06   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles




Motorcycles and Mopeds




   73.20   Riding on motorcycles



   73.21   Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles



   73.22   Required equipment on motorcycles



   73.23   Operating motorcycle on one wheel



   73.24   Lamps on mopeds



   73.25   Riding on mopeds



   73.26   Clinging to vehicles



BICYCLES



§ 73.01  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of
the rights, including, but not limited to, rights under Article IX of ILCS
Ch. 625, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this
traffic code, and those provisions of this traffic code which, by their
nature, can have no application.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502)  (1999 Code, § 73.01)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.02  RIDING ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon
or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped; except that, an adult
rider may carry a child securely attached to his or her person in a backpack
or sling.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503)  (1999 Code, § 73.02)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.03  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504)  (1999 Code, § 73.03)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.04  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a
roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and
under the conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and
safe to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except under the
following situations:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized
pedalcycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction;



      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or
into a private road or driveway;



      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including,
but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
bicycles, motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards or
substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand
curb or edge. For purposes of this division (A)(3), a SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE
means a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a
vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane; or



      (4)   When approaching a place where a right turn is
authorized.



   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a
one-way highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the
left-hand curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505)



   (C)   (1)   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon
a roadway shall not ride more than two  abreast, except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for their exclusive use.



      (2)   Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within
a single lane subject to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1)



(1999 Code, § 73.04)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 73.05  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of
the bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the
handlebars at all times.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506)  (1999 Code, § 73.05)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.06  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a
type approved by the State Department of Transportation which shall be
visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle,
except that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the
red reflector.



   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle, any siren. This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle that
is a police vehicle or Fire Department vehicle.



   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
adequately control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.



   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a
bicycle that is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to
specifications prescribed by the State Department of Transportation, on each
pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a
distance of 200 feet.



   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is
not equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each
side of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet, and shall be essentially
colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially
colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The
requirements of this division may be met by reflective materials which shall
be at least three-sixteenths inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to
indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the
tires or rims of the bicycle, and which reflective materials may be of the
same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. The reflectors shall
conform to specifications prescribed by the State Department of
Transportation.



   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is
not equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507)  (1999 Code, § 73.06)  Penalty, see §
70.999



MOTORCYCLES AND MOPEDS



§ 73.20  RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.



   (A)   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and the operator shall not carry
any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the
motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two
persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear
or side of the operator.



   (B)   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting
astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.



   (C)   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars higher
than the height of the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated
in the normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle
occupied by the operator.



   (D)   The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on
a handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403)  (1999 Code, § 73.20)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.21  SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES.



   The operator and every passenger of a motorcycle shall be protected by
glasses, goggles or a transparent shield. This equipment shall meet the
requirements based upon those set forth in Vehicle Equipment Safety
Commission Regulation VESC-8, “Minimum Requirements for Motorcyclists’
Eye Protection”.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404)  (1999 Code, § 73.21)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.22  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTORCYCLES.



   Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or
enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for the passenger.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405)  (1999 Code, § 73.22)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.23  OPERATING MOTORCYCLE ON ONE WHEEL.



   Any person who operates a motorcycle, motor driven cycle or moped on
one wheel is guilty of reckless driving, as defined in § 76.01 of this code.



(1999 Code, § 73.23)  Penalty, see § 70.999



Statutory reference:



   Operating on 1 wheel prohibited, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2



§ 73.24  LAMPS ON MOPEDS.



   Every moped, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the State Department of Transportation which shall be visible
from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of
lawful, low-powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a
red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1)  (1999 Code, § 73.07)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 73.25  RIDING ON MOPEDS.



   (A)   The operator of a moped shall ride only astride the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit two persons to ride
thereon at the same time, unless the moped is designed to carry two persons.
Any moped designed for two persons must be equipped with a passenger seat and
footrests for use of a passenger.



   (B)   Neither the operator nor any passenger on a moped shall be
required to wear any special goggles, shield, helmet or glasses.



   (C)   The provisions of §§ 73.01 through 73.06 and 73.24 of this
chapter shall be applicable to the operation of mopeds, except for those
provisions which by their nature can have no application to moped.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1)  (1999 Code, § 73.08)  Penalty, see §
70.999



Cross-reference:



   Operating on 1 wheel, see § 73.23



§ 73.26  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a motorcycle
to cling to or attach himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any moving
motor vehicle or wagon.



(1999 Code, § 73.24)  Penalty, see § 70.999



CHAPTER 74:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   74.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic
regulations



   74.02   Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks; school zones



   74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks



   74.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians



   74.05   Blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian
right-of-way



   74.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks



   74.07   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business



   74.08   Pedestrians walking on highways



   74.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks



   74.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles



   74.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs



   74.12   Bridge and railroad signals



   74.13   Motorized wheelchairs



   74.14   Electric personal assistive mobility devices



   74.15   Standing or loitering



 



   74.99   Penalty



§ 74.01  PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device specifically applicable to him or her, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control
signals provided in §§ 70.031 and 70.032 of this traffic code; but at all
other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be
subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001)  (1999 Code, § 74.01)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.02  PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS; SCHOOL ZONES.



   (A)   (1)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not
in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian
is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when
the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.



      (2)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place
of safety, and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so
close as to constitute an immediate hazard.



      (3)   Division (A)(1) of this section shall not apply under
the condition stated in § 74.03(B) of this chapter.



      (4)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or
at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall
not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



      (5)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place
at an intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections,
drivers shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in § 71.062 of
this code.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002) 



   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), “school”
has the meaning ascribed to that term in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.



         (a)   On a school day when school children are present
and so close thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close
proximity of the motorized traffic and when traffic-control signals are not
in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield
the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when
the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.



         (b)   For the purpose of this division (B), a school day
shall begin at 7:00 a.m. and shall conclude at 4:00 p.m.



         (c)   This division (B) shall not be applicable unless
appropriate signs are posted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-605.



(1999 Code, § 74.02)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.03  CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place, except in
a marked crosswalk.



   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized
to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.



   (E)   Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point
other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where
the intersection is physically inaccessible to them, but they shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003)  (1999 Code, § 74.03)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.04  DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.



   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or
any person operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused,
incapacitated or intoxicated person.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1)  (1999 Code, § 74.04)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.05  BLIND, HEARING-IMPAIRED OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PEDESTRIAN
RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to any blind,
hearing-impaired or physically handicapped pedestrian carrying a clearly
visible white cane or accompanied by a support or guide dog.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004)  (1999 Code, § 74.05)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.06  PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005)  (1999 Code, § 74.06)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.07  PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of
soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of
soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, unless expressly
permitted by this code. Solicitation on highways within the city shall be
allowed only at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full
stop. Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age
or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest. The soliciting agency
shall be:



      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable
organization as provided by an Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of
Funds for Charitable Purposes, Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making
an Appropriation Therefor, approved 7-26-1963, as amended;



      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity; and



      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during
the solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence
of the soliciting agent.



   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a roadway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006)  (1999 Code, § 74.07)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.08  PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.



   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking
along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable
from the edge of the roadway.



   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable
to an outside edge of a roadway and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only
on the left side of the roadway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian
upon a roadway shall yield the right-of- way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007)  (1999 Code, § 74.08)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to any
pedestrians on a sidewalk.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008)  (1999 Code, § 74.09)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.10  PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-217, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully
making use of an audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the
right-of-way to the authorized emergency vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009)  (1999 Code, § 74.10)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.11  PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.



   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a
degree which renders himself or herself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a
highway, except on a sidewalk.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010)  (1999 Code, § 74.11)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.12  BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon or traverse over a
railroad grade crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when
an audible bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is
operational giving warning of the approach of a railroad train or railroad
track equipment.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011)  (1999 Code, § 74.12)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.13  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.



   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or
roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the
duties applicable to a pedestrian.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1)  (1999 Code, § 74.13)



§ 74.14  ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.



   Every person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device
upon a sidewalk or roadway has all the rights and is subject to all the
duties applicable to a pedestrian. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
limit or preempt the authority of any home rule or non-home rule unit of
local government from regulating or prohibiting the use of electric personal
assistive mobility devices.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005.1)



§ 74.15  STANDING OR LOITERING.



   (A)   No person shall stand or loiter in a street or roadway other
than a safety zone.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any
sidewalk, except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb
line, if such standing interferes with the use of the sidewalk by other
pedestrians.



(1999 Code, § 74.14)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of § 70.999 of
this code.



   (B)   (1)   A first violation of § 74.02(B) of this chapter is a
petty offense with a minimum fine of $150. A second or subsequent violation
of § 74.02(B) of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $300.



      (2)   (a)   When a fine for a violation of § 74.02(B)(1)
of this chapter is $150 or greater, the person who violates § 74.02(B)(1) of
this chapter shall be charged an additional $50 to be paid to the unit school
district where the violation occurred for school safety purposes. If the
violation occurred in a dual school district, $25 of the surcharge shall be
paid to the elementary school district for school safety purposes and $25 of
the surcharge shall be paid to the high school district for school safety
purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire $50
surcharge shall be paid to the appropriate school district or districts.



         (b)   For purposes of this division (B)(2), “school
safety purposes” has the meaning ascribed to that term in ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-605.



   (C)   (1)   A violation of § 74.12 of this chapter is a petty
offense for which a $250 fine shall be imposed for a first violation, and a
$500 fine shall be imposed for a second or subsequent violation. The court
may impose 25 hours of community service in place of the $250 fine for a
first violation.



      (2)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in
division (C)(1) above for pedestrians who fail to obey signals indicating the
presence, approach, passage or departure of a train or railroad track
equipment.



(1999 Code, § 74.99)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002.5



     ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011



CHAPTER 75:  VEHICLE CONDITIONS, EQUIPMENT AND LOADS



Section




Condition and Equipment of Vehicles




   75.01   Scope and effect of equipment requirements



   75.02   Gas and smoke



   75.03   Noise



   75.04   Mufflers, prevention of noise



   75.05   Excessive engine braking noise prohibited




Size, Weight and Loads




   75.15   Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations



   75.16   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles



   75.17   Protruding members of vehicles



   75.18   Spilling loads prohibited



   75.19   Covers or tarpaulins required for certain loads



   75.20   Pushing of disabled vehicles



   75.21   Limited load streets




Overweight and Oversized Vehicle Permits




   75.30   Definitions



   75.31   Permits



   75.32   Applications for and issuance of permit



   75.33   Police escorts



   75.34   Bonds, indemnification and insurance



   75.35   Suspension and reinstatement



   75.36   Permit fee schedules



   75.37   Overweight on registration



   75.38   Penalty for violations



CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES



§ 75.01  SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the
owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in an unsafe condition as to
endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is
not at all times equipped with the lamps and other equipment in proper
condition and adjustment as required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et
seq., or which is equipped in any manner in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 12-101 et seq., or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.



   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.,
with respect to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of
husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or farm tractors, or to farm-wagon
type trailers having a fertilizer spreader attachment permanently mounted
thereon, having a gross weight of not to exceed 36,000 pounds and used only
for the transportation of bulk fertilizer, or to farm-wagon type tank
trailers of not to exceed 2,000 gallons capacity, used during the liquid
fertilizer season as field-storage “nurse tanks”, supplying the
fertilizer to a field applicator and highways only for bringing the
fertilizer to a field applicator from a local source of supply to the farm or
field or from one farm or field to another.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101)  (1999 Code, § 75.01) (Ord. 3848, passed
11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 75.02  GAS AND SMOKE.



   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or
such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons
or to endanger the drivers of other vehicles.



(1999 Code, § 75.02)  (Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 75.03  NOISE.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise.



(1999 Code, § 75.03)  (Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 75.04  MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE.



   Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the highways of this city
shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in
constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or
unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a
cutout, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system
of a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of
such vehicle above that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the
vehicle, and such original muffler shall comply with all the requirements of
this section.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602) (Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 70.999



§ 75.05  EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The driver of a commercial vehicle, as defined in § 70.001 of
this Code, is prohibited from operating or actuating any engine braking
system that emits excessive noise. Signs shall be posted indicating the
prohibition.



   (B)   The sign shall state, "EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE
PROHIBITED". The State Department of Transportation shall adopt rules
providing for the erection and placement of these signs.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of an engine braking
system that has an adequate sound muffling system in proper working order
that prevents excessive noise.



   (D)   It is a defense to this section that the driver used an engine
braking system that emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a
collision with a person or another vehicle on the highway.



   (E)   A violation of this section is an equipment violation
punishable as provided in § 70.999.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602.1) (Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014)  Penalty,
see § 70.999



SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOADS



§ 75.15  SCOPE AND EFFECT OF SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive,
to park, or move on, upon, or across, or for the owner to cause to knowingly
permit to be parked, driven or moved on, upon, or across any highway any
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq., or otherwise
in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq.



   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq.
governing size, weight and load do not apply to equipment for snow and ice
removal operations owned or operated by the city, or to implements of
husbandry, as defined in § 70.001, temporarily operated or towed in a
combination upon a highway provided such combination does not consist of more
than three vehicles or, in the case of hauling fresh, perishable  fruits or
vegetables from farm to the point of first processing, not more than three
wagons being towed by an implement of husbandry, or to a vehicle operated
under the terms of a special permit. Except for the weight limits on Class I
highways under this chapter, the provisions of this chapter governing size,
weight, and load do not apply to fire apparatus or emergency vehicles.



   (C)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101 et seq.,
governing size, weight and load do not apply to any snow and ice removal
equipment that is no more than 12 feet in width, if the equipment displays
flags at least 18 inches square mounted on the driver’s side of the snow
plow. These vehicles must be equipped with an illuminated rotating,
oscillating or flashing amber light or lights, or a flashing amber strobe
light or lights, mounted on the top of the cab and of sufficient intensity to
be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. If the load on the transport
vehicle blocks the visibility of the amber lighting from the rear of the
vehicle, the vehicle must also be equipped with an illuminated rotating,
oscillating or flashing amber light or lights, or a flashing amber strobe
light or lights, mounted on the rear of the load and of sufficient intensity
to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101)



   (D)   No person shall use the highways under the jurisdiction of the
city in violation of weight and location restrictions and commercial vehicle
restrictions set forth in any applicable ordinance.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to refuse to
stop and submit his vehicle and load to weighing after being directed to do
so by an officer or move or cause the removal of the load or part of it prior
to weighing. Any person convicted of such violation shall be fined in an
amount not less than $500 nor more than $2,000.



(1999 Code, § 75.10)  (Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. 3936, passed
6-6-2016)  Penalty, see § 70.999



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate loads, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1



§ 75.16  PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.



   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street with any load
carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of
the vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the
fenders on the right side thereof.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105)  (1999 Code, § 75.11)  (Ord. 3848, passed
11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 75.17  PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES.



   No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig or other protruding component
shall be operated upon any highway in this city unless the protruding
component is fastened so as to prevent shifting, bouncing or moving in any
manner.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106)  (1999 Code, § 75.12)  (Ord. 3848, passed
11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 75.18  SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless the
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; except that,
sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.



   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any
load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a
hazard to other users of the highway.



   (C)   The State Department of Transportation shall adopt those rules
and regulations it deems appropriate which require the securing of steel
rolls and other objects on flatbed trucks so as to prevent injury to users of
highways and damage to property. Any person who operates a flatbed truck on
any highway in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the
State Department of Transportation under this division (C) shall be punished
as provided in § 70.999 of this code.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109)  (1999 Code, § 75.13)  (Ord. 3848, passed
11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 75.19  COVERS OR TARPAULINS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN LOADS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on a highway,
any second division vehicle loaded with dirt, aggregate, garbage, refuse, or
other similar material, when any portion of the load is falling, sifting,
blowing, dropping or in any way escaping from the vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on a highway,
any second division vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,000
pounds or more loaded with dirt, aggregate, garbage, refuse, or other similar
material in or on any part of the vehicle other than in the cargo area. In
addition, no person shall operate on any highway, such vehicle unless the
tailgate on the vehicle is in good repair and operating condition and closes
securely so as to prevent any load, residue, or other material from escaping.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to the operation of highway
maintenance vehicles engaged in removing snow and ice from the roadway, nor
to implements of husbandry or other farm vehicles while transporting
agricultural products to or from the original place of production.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section "aggregate" shall include all
ores, minerals, sand, gravel, shale, coal, clay, limestone or any other ore
or mineral which may be mined.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any other penalty, whenever a police officer
determines that the operator of a vehicle is in violation of this section, as
evidenced by the issuance of a citation for a violation of § 75.19 of this
Code, or where a police officer determines that a dangerous condition exists
whereby any portion of the load may fall, sift, blow, drop, or in any way
escape or fall from the vehicle, the police officer shall require the
operator to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and keep such vehicle
stationary until the load has either been reduced, secured, or covered with a
cover or tarpaulin of sufficient size to prevent any further violation of
this section.



   (F)   Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
petty offense punishable as provided in § 70.999.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109.1) (Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014)  Penalty,
see § 70.999



§ 75.20  PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any
other vehicle on or along any highway outside an urban area in the city,
except in an extreme emergency, and then the vehicle shall not be pushed
farther than is reasonably necessary to remove it from the roadway or from
the immediate hazard that exists.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114)  (1999 Code, § 75.14)  (Ord. 3848, passed
11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 75.21  LIMITED LOAD STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the city
when the gross weight on the surface of the road through any axle of such
vehicles exceeds 16,000 pounds. Where lower limits are imposed by law and
signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate
a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of
making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be
driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for
the purpose.  In addition to other fees and fines contained in this section,
the owner or driver of the vehicle who pleads guilty or is found guilty of
violating this section, shall be fined $50 for any weight exceeding the
posted limit up to the axel or gross weight limit allowed a vehicle as
provided for in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 and $75 per every 500 pounds
or fraction thereof for any weight exceeding that which is provide for in
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111.



(1999 Code, § 75.15)  (Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. 3936, passed
6-6-2016)  Penalty, see § 70.999



Cross-reference:



   Preferred truck routes, see Ch. 77, Schedule VI



OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZED VEHICLE PERMITS



§ 75.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of §§ 75.30 et seq., the following definitions apply:



   ANNUAL PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power
unit, or piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves
for a period not to exceed one-year from the date of issuance.



   NON-DIVISIBLE. A vehicle and load will be considered non-divisible when
further separating or dismantling the vehicle or load:



      (1)   Would require more than eight work hours to dismantle
using appropriate equipment. The applicant has the burden of proof as to the
number of work hours required to dismantle the load.



      (2)   Will compromise or destroy the intended use of the load
only. A load can be either permanently mounted or temporarily secured
equipment. Any parts, fluids, or material necessary to the operation of only
the power unit portion of the vehicle shall be deemed non-divisible.



      (3)   Would prohibit the vehicle from hauling one attachment
that is necessary to the operation of the load. To be considered
non-divisible, the attachment must be securely mounted to the load in the
manner it is to be used and not carried as a separate object on the hauling
vehicle. It is the duty of the applicant to declare such an attachment in the
permit application.



   ONE-WAY or SINGLE TRIP PERMIT. One move from the point of origin to the
point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and
the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are
valid for five consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise
directed by the Police Department.



   QUARTERLY PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor
power unit, or piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited
moves for a period not to exceed three months from the date of issuance.



   ROUND-TRIP MOVEMENT. Two trips over the same route in opposite
directions. Round-trip permits are valid for ten consecutive days from the
date of issuance.



(Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014) 



§ 75.31  PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   A permit shall be required for the movement of any
vehicle or combinations of vehicles that is non-divisible or is carrying a
load that is non-divisible, while operating on roadways and bridges within
the jurisdiction of the city which exceeds the following limits:



         (a)   Maximum weight specified in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-111;



         (b)   Maximum overall length specified in ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 15-107;



         (c)   Maximum overall width specified in ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 15-102;



         (d)   Maximum overall height specified in ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 15-103;



      (2)   Exempt from permits are the following:



         (a)   Fire departments vehicles;



         (b)   Those vehicles operating under an emergency
declaration;



         (c)   City owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility
repair;



         (d)   Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned by
any governmental body.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm,
business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or
that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement.



   (C)   Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and/or oversized
are valid only a half hour before sunrise until a half hour after sunset, on
any day which a permit issued by the Illinois Department of Transportation is
valid.



   (D)   Permits are non-transferable and apply only to the permittee.



   (E)   The city may issue revisions to permits:



      (1)   To correct an error attributed to the city;



      (2)   To correct an error attributed to the applicant,
discovered before the move;



      (3)   To adjust weights, dimension or routes as issued on the
permit, before the move is made.



   (F)   The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the
permittee and the city that the move described in the application will take
place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to
the Police Department any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the
city or the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima
facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms.



   (G)   The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole
extent of the authority granted by the permit for the use of roads under the
jurisdiction of the city, and any vehicle and/or load found to be off route
will be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the
drivers possession at all times unless otherwise directed by the Police
Department and presented upon demand to any and all police officers for the
purpose of inspection.



   (H)   Any vehicle(s) and/or load found to be divisible will render
the permit null and void. The entire gross weight and axles weights of the
vehicles(s) with the load are subject to legal weights. It is the duty of the
applicant to verify the non-divisibility of the vehicle(s) before making
application for the permit. The permit application itself is prima facie
evidence that that applicant confirmed the vehicle(s) and/or load were
non-divisible.



   (I)   If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to
have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridge or highway
analysis performed and completed in advance of any permit movement.



   (J)   All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.



   (K)   Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of
deception. The permits issued under this section constitute the grant of
privilege by the city and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the
city may deem rationally related to its governmental interests including, but
not limited to:



      (1)   A permittee knowingly provided incorrect information in
an application for a permit;



      (2)   A permittee, its agents, or employees operating on a
permit which has been altered for purposes of deception;



      (3)   Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees
with federal, state, or local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods
or operation of a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods;



      (4)   Moving on city streets without a valid permit as
required under this section.



   (L)   All single-trip or round-trip permits are limited to movements
on assigned routes only.



   (M)   (1)   All quarterly or annual overweight permits are
restricted to the following maximum limitations and routing:



         (a)   Twelve feet in width;



         (b)   Thirteen feet six inches in height;



         (c)   One hundred fifteen feet in length;



         (d)   May not move across bridges or structures that are
posted or listed as such on the city truck route map.



         (e)   May not move on a "no-truck" route that is posted
or listed as such on the city truck route map, without written permission
from a member of the Police Department.



         (f)   May not use any city street as a cut-thru to avoid
using a state, country, or township highway.



      (2)   These permits are subject to all standards of
application set forth in § 75.32, except that the load may be interchanged
provided none of the above listed maximum weight and size dimensions are
exceeded. Quarterly and annual permits shall list the registration number and
state for the power unit, and vehicle identification number (VIN). The serial
number of the power unit, and/or owner applied number shall also be listed,
if applicable.  Any violation of these terms will render the permit null and
void, and subject the driver, firm, business, or corporation that owns the
vehicle to legal weight and dimension laws. The arresting police officer will
immediately confiscate the permit.



(Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. 3936, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 75.32  APPLICATIONS FOR AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city with respect to any roadway under its jurisdiction
may upon application to the Police Department issue a permit to move an
oversized and/or overweight vehicle, and/or load. All applications for
permits shall be given full consideration. Permits for proposed moves may be
issued:



      (1)   When the city roadways and bridges will not be unduly
damaged; and



      (2)   When the safety of the traveling public will be
adequately protected.



   (B)   The following information shall be included on the permit:



      (1)   Company name, address, fax and telephone numbers.



      (2)   Applicant name and contact number.



      (3)   Whether the permit is for a single trip, round trip, or
for multiple moves.



      (4)   Description of hauling vehicle or power unit, including
registration number, state and year.



      (5)   Description of load to be moved and if the load is
carrying an attachment.



      (6)   Maximum dimensions, gross weight, and axle weights of
vehicle including load.



      (7)   Roads under the jurisdiction of the city to be traveled,
including points of origin and destination.



      (8)   Any special conditions.



      (9)   Permit number.



(Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014) 



§ 75.33  POLICE ESCORTS.



   Police escorts are required for certain vehicles and loads as indicated
in subsection herein. The total number of officers necessary to provide for a
safe move shall be determined by the Police Department, based upon the size
and weight of the permit move. Fees for escorts shall be in addition to the
permit fees set forth herein. Escort fees shall provide for a minimum of two
hours of service calculated by the most current overtime rate established by
the Police Department.



(Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014) 



§ 75.34  BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   The permittee shall assume total liability for any and all
damages to streets, bridges, city owned appurtenances and private or public
property while engaged in a permit move. The measure of liability shall be
the cost of repairing the damaged street or roadway improvements or facility
partially damaged or the depreciated replacement cost of said roadway
improvement or facility damaged beyond repair together with all other
expenses incurred by the authorities in control of said street or roadway
improvements in providing a temporary detour, including a temporary
structure, to serve the needs of traffic during the period of repair or
replacement of the damaged roadway improvement or street.



   (B)   The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and
members of the Police Department from any costs, judgments or settlements,
including attorneys' fees, arising from physical injuries, including loss of
life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions by
permittee, its officers, agents, or employees pursuant to the permit.



   (C)   Upon application for a permit each applicant shall provide
evidence of a valid comprehensive general liability insurance police, with an
insurance company approved by the city, for protection against personal
injury or property damage in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence. The
city shall be listed as a certificate holder on the policy.



   (D)   Any person driving any motor vehicle upon any street within
the O'Fallon corporate limits without a permit as required by § 75.31, as
well as the driver's employer, shall be liable for any damage which said
street or appurtenant roadway improvements may sustain as a result of any
operation, driving or moving of such vehicle exceeding the maximum weight
specified in this section.  The measure of damage shall be as defined in
division (A) above.



(Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. 3936, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 75.35  DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time
determined appropriate by the Police Department; however, reinstatement may
be made upon conditions determined by the city and payment of all outstanding
settlements or judgments,



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety or their designee shall
administer and enforce §§ 75.30 et seq. and shall have the authority to
grant, deny, suspend, or reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied
a permit or who has had a permit suspended, upon request, shall be given a
hearing before the Director of Public Safety and, if applicant or permittee
desires, may appeal the decision to the Hearing Officer.



   (C)   No permits shall be issued to an applicant or company who has
outstanding fees or payments due to the city.



(Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014) 



§ 75.36  PERMIT FEE SCHEDULES.



   (A)   The city with respect to highways under its jurisdiction shall
collect a fee as shown herein from applicants for the issuance of a permit to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicle(s), and/or loads, which
fit the categories shown. Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum
weights set forth in this chapter are subject to special assessment and
investigation to determine appropriate fees.



   (B)   The Police Department is responsible for the billing,
invoicing, and collection of permit fees. The Police Department, in their
discretion, may make rules and regulations as to acceptable methods of
payment and due dates. Any unpaid permit fees will be turned over to a
collection agency under contract of the city.



   (C)   Fee schedule.



      (1)   The fee schedule for single vehicles shall be as follows:



 

CATEGORY
 
AXLES
 
MAX WEIGHTS
 
AXLES
 
SINGLE TRIP
 
ROUND TRIP
 
QUARTERLY
 
ANNUAL




1A
 
2
 
48,000

25,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE
 
$15.00
 
$25.00
 
$85.00
 
$340.00


2A
 
2
 
54,000

28,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE
 
$20.00
 
$35.00
 
$100.00
 
$400.00


3A
 
3+
 
60,000

21,000 40,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM
 
$25.00
 
$45.00
 
$115.00
 
$460.00


4A
 
3+
 
68,000

25,000 48,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM
 
$30.00
 
$55.00
 
$130.00
 
$520.00


5A
 
3+
 
72,000

25,000 48,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM
 
$60.00
 
$115.00
 
$270.00
 
$1080.00


6A
 
3+
 
80,000

27,000 54,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM
 
$70.00
 
$135.00
 
$285.00
 
$1140.00


7A
 
4+
 
72,000

21,000 40,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM
 
$35.00
 
$65.00
 
$145.00
 
$580.00


8A
 
4+
 
76,000

23,000 44,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM
 
$40.00
 
$75.00
 
$160.00
 
$640.00


9A
 
4+
 
80,000

27,000 54,000

60,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM

3 OR 4 AXLE GROUP
 
$60.00
 
$100.00
 
$225.00
 
$900.00




 



      (2)   The fee schedule for combination vehicles shall be as
follows:



 

CATEGORY
 
AXLES
 
MAX WEIGHTS
 
AXLES
 
SINGLE TRIP
 
ROUND TRIP
 
QUARTERLY
 
ANNUAL




1B
 
5+
 
88,000

23,000

44,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM or

3 OR 4 AXLE GROUP
 
$30.00
 
$55.00
 
$190.00
 
$760.00


2B
 
5+
 
100,000

25,000

48,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM or

3 OR 4 AXLE GROUP
 
$40.00
 
$75.00
 
$220.00
 
$880.00


3B
 
6+
 
110,000

23,000

44,000

54,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM

3 or 4 AXLE GROUP
 
$45.00
 
$85.00
 
$235.00
 
$940.00


4B
 
6+
 
120,000

25,000

48,000

60,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM

3 or 4 AXLE GROUP
 
$50.00
 
$95.00
 
$250.00
 
$1000.00


5B
 
6+
 
143,000

27,000

54,000

78,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM

3 or 4 AXLE GROUP
 
$60.00
 
$115.00
 
$325.00
 
$1300.00


6B
 
7+
 
162,000

25,000

50,000

75,000

100,000
 
GROSS

ANY SINGLE AXLE

2 AXLE TANDEM

3 AXLE GROUP

4 AXLE GROUP
 
$70.00
 
$135.00
 
$400.00
 
$1600.00


7B
 
8+
 
187,000
 
GROSS

SAME AXLE WEIGHTS AS 6B
 
$80.00
 
$155.00
 
$500.00
 
$2000.00




 



      (3)   The fee schedule for overdimension (oversized vehicles)
shall be as follows:



 

CATEGORY
 
MAX SIZE
 
POLICE ESCORT
 
SINGLE TRIP
 
ROUND TRIP
 
QUARTERLY
 
ANNUAL


1C
 
WIDTH: 10'

HEIGHT: 13'6"

LENGTH: 115'
 
NO
 
$15.00
 
$25.00
 
$75.00
 
$300.00


2C
 
WIDTH: 12'

HEIGHT: 13'6"

LENGTH: 115'
 
NO
 
$20.00
 
$40.00
 
$120.00
 
$480.00


3C
 
WIDTH: 14'

HEIGHT: 13'6"

LENGTH: 115'
 
NO
 
$30.00
 
$55.00
 
$165.00
 
$660.00


4C
 
WIDTH: 18'

HEIGHT: 16'

LENGTH: 135'
 
YES
 
$50.00
 
$95.00
 
X
 
X


5C
 
WIDTH: >18'

HEIGHT: >16'

LENGTH: >135'
 
YES
 
$100.00
 
$195.00
 
X
 
X



 



(Ord. 3848, passed 11-3-2014)



§ 75.37  OVERWEIGHT ON REGISTRATION.



   If a vehicle and load are operated in the State of Illinois and the
appropriate fees and taxes have not been paid or the vehicle and load exceed
the registered gross weight for which the required fees and taxes have been
paid by 2,001 pounds or more, the operator or owner shall be fined as
provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code, § 15-113 (ILCS Ch. 625 Act 5, §
15-113). However, an owner or operator shall not be subject to arrest under
this section for any weight in excess of 80,000 pounds. Further, no fine
shall exceed the actual cost of what the appropriate registration for that
vehicle and load should have been as established in subsection (a) of §
3-815 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815(a))
regardless of the route traveled. For the purposes of this section,
APPROPRIATE REGISTRATION means the full annual cost of the required
registration and its associated fees.



(Ord. 3936, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 75.38  PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person charged with the violation of § 75.15(A) may be
prosecuted for such violation.  Any person who pleads guilty or is found
guilty of violating § 75.15(A), shall be fined according to the Illinois
Vehicle Code, § 15-113 (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-113).



   (B)   (1)   A permittee, its officers, agents or employees,
charged with violation of § 75.31(K), may be prosecuted for such violation.
Any person found guilty of moving an oversized or overweight vehicle or load
on a highway under a fraudulent permit or permit altered for purposes of
deception shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than
$2,500.



      (2)   The fines in this division (B) shall be in addition to
any other fees or fines contained in this chapter or under statutory law.



   (C)   (1)   Whenever any vehicle is operated or movement made in
violation of a permit issued in accordance with § 15-301 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-301), the person or entity to whom
such permit was granted or the driver of such vehicle, but not both, may be
prosecuted for such violation as stated in this division (C). Any person,
firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined for the first offense, not less than $50 nor more
than $200 and, for the second offense by the same person, firm or corporation
within a period of one year, not less than $200 nor more than $300 and, for
the third offense by the same person, firm or corporation within a period of
one year after the date of the first offense, not less than $300 nor more
than $500.



      (2)   The fines in this division (C) shall be in addition to
any other fees or fines contained in this chapter or under statutory law.



   (D)   (1)   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of § 15-301 (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 15-301) of the Illinois Vehicle Code by operating with axle
weights in excess of those authorized in such permit, the person or entity to
whom such permit was granted or the driver of such vehicle, but not both, may
be prosecuted for such violation as stated in this division (D). Any person,
firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be fined in an amount
not less than $.02 nor more than $.05 per pound for each pound of excess
weight on such axle or tandem axle in excess of the weight authorized in the
permit when the excess is 1,000 pounds or less; not less than $.05 nor more
than $.10 per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds
1,000 pounds and is 2,000 pounds or less; not less than $.10 nor more than
$.15 per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 2,000
pounds and is 3,000 pounds or less; and not less than $.15 nor more than $.20
per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 3,000
pounds.



      (2)   The fines in this division (D) shall be in addition to
any other fees or fines contained in this chapter or under statutory law.



   (E)   (1)   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of § 75.37 by operating
with the gross weight in excess of that authorized in such permit, the person
or entity to whom such permit was granted or the driver of such vehicle, but
not both, may be prosecuted for such violation as stated in this division
(E). Any person, firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be
fined in an amount not less than $.02 nor more than $.05 per pound for each
pound of excess weight in excess of the gross weight authorized in the permit
when the excess is 1,000 pounds or less; not less than $.04 nor more than
$.07 per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 1,000
pounds and is 2,000 pounds or less; not less than $.07 nor more than $.10 per
pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 2,000 pounds
and is 3,000 pounds or less; not less than $.10 nor more than $.15 per pound
for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 3,000 pounds and is
4,000 pounds or less; not less than $.15 nor more than $.20 per pound for
each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 4,000 pounds and is 5,000
pounds or less; and not less than $.17 nor more than $.25 per pound for each
pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 5,000 pounds.



      (2)   The fines in this division (E) shall be in addition to
any other fees or fines contained in this chapter or under statutory law.



(Ord. 3936, passed 6-6-2016)



CHAPTER 76:  MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES



Section



   76.01   Reckless driving



   76.02   Street racing



   76.03   Accidents involving death or personal injuries



   76.04   Duty to give information and render aid



   76.05   Accident involving damage to vehicle



   76.06   Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property



   76.07   Duty to report accident



   76.08   False reports



   76.09   When driver fails to report



 



   76.99   Penalty



§ 76.01  RECKLESS DRIVING.



   A person commits reckless driving if he or she:



   (A)   Drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property; or



   (B)   Knowingly drives a vehicle and uses an incline in a roadway,
such as a railroad crossing, bridge approach or hill, to cause the vehicle to
become airborne.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a))  (1999 Code, § 76.01)  Penalty, see §
76.99



§ 76.02  STREET RACING.



   (A)   No person shall engage in street racing on any street or
highway of the state.



   (B)   No owner of any vehicle shall acquiesce in or permit his or
her vehicle to be used by another for the purpose of street racing.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACQUIESCE or PERMIT. Actual knowledge that the motor vehicle was
to be used for the purpose of street racing.



      STREET RACING.



         (a)   The operation of two or more vehicles from a point
side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance
each other;



         (b)   The operation of one or more vehicles over a
common selected course, each starting at the same point, for the purpose of
comparing the relative speeds or power of acceleration of such vehicle or
vehicles within a certain distance or time limit;



         (c)   The use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to
outgain or outdistance another vehicle;



         (d)   The use of one or more vehicles to prevent another
vehicle from passing;



         (e)   The use of one or more vehicles to arrive at a
given destination ahead of another vehicle or vehicles; or



         (f)   The use of one or more vehicles to test the
physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long-distance driving routes.



   (D)   Every person convicted of committing a violation of division
(A) above shall be guilty of aggravated street racing if the person, in
committing a violation of division (A) above was involved in a motor vehicle
accident that resulted in great bodily harm or permanent disability or
disfigurement to another, where the violation was a proximate cause of the
injury.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506)  (1999 Code, § 76.02)  Penalty, see §
76.99



§ 76.03  ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop
the vehicle at the scene of the accident, or as close thereto as possible,
and shall then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the
scene of the accident until the requirements of § 76.04 of this chapter have
been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, PERSONAL INJURY shall mean any
injury requiring immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or
doctor’s office.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401)  (1999 Code, § 76.03)  Penalty, see §
76.99



§ 76.04  DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which
is driven or attended by any person shall give the driver’s name, address,
registration number and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and
shall upon request and if available, exhibit the driver’s license to the
person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle
collided with, and shall render to any person injured in the accident
reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements
for the carrying of the person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for
medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is
necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.



   (B)   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to
this section is in condition to receive and understand the information and no
police officer is present, the driver, after rendering reasonable assistance,
shall forthwith report the accident at the Police Department, disclosing the
information required by this section.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403)  (1999 Code, § 76.04)  Penalty, see §
76.99



§ 76.05  ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the motor vehicle
accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and
in every event shall remain at the scene of the motor vehicle accident until
the requirements of this chapter have been fulfilled.



   (B)   Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than
is necessary.



   (C)   If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver
of the vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have
it moved so as not to block the traffic lanes.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402)  (1999 Code, § 76.05)  Penalty, see §
76.99



§ 76.06  DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY.



   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a motor
vehicle accident with any vehicle which is unattended, or other property,
resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall immediately
stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner
of such vehicle or other property of the driver’s name, address,
registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or
shall attach securely in a conspicuous place on or in the vehicle or other
property struck a written notice giving the driver’s name, address,
registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was driving and
shall without unnecessary delay notify the Police Department and shall make a
written report of such accident when and as required in § 76.07 of this
chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than
is necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver
of the vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have
it moved so as not to block the traffic lanes.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404)  (1999 Code, § 76.06)  Penalty, see §
76.99



§ 76.07  DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an
accident within the city, resulting in injury to or death of any person or in
which damage to the property of any one person, including himself or herself,
in excess of  $1,500 (or $500 if any of the vehicles involved in the
accident is subject to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601, but is not covered by a
liability insurance policy in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601)
is sustained, shall, as soon as possible but not later than ten days after
the accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the written report
required to be filed with the state under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(a).



   (B)   Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in the city,
caused by a collision, a sudden stop or otherwise, resulting in any property
damage, personal injury or death, and  whenever an accident occurs within 50
feet of a school bus in the city resulting in personal injury to or the death
of any person while awaiting or preparing to board the bus or immediately
after exiting the bus, the driver shall as soon as possible, but not later
than ten days after the accident, file with the Police Department a copy of
the written report required to be filed with the state under ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-406(b). If a report is also required under division (A) above,
that report and the report required by this division (B) shall be submitted
on a single form.



   (C)   The Chief of Police may require any driver, occupant or owner
of a vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided
in this section or § 76.09 of this chapter to file supplemental reports
whenever the original report is insufficient in the opinion of the Chief of
Police and may require witnesses of the accident to submit written reports.
The report may include photographs, charts, sketches and graphs.



   (D)   Should the Police Department learn through other reports of
accidents required by law of the occurrence of an accident reportable under
this chapter and the driver, owner or witness has not reported as required
under divisions (A) through (C) above or § 76.09 of this chapter within the
time specified, the person is not relieved of the responsibility and the
Police Department shall notify the person by first class mail directed to his
or her last known address of his or her legal obligation. However, the
notification is not a condition precedent to impose the penalty for failure
to report as provided in division (E) below.



   (E)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the driver’s license or
any non-resident’s driving privilege of any person who fails or neglects to
make report of a traffic accident as herein required or as required by any
other law of the state.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406)  (1999 Code, § 76.07)



Statutory reference:



   Authorization for city to require accident reports, see ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-415



§ 76.08  FALSE REPORTS.



   Any person who provides information in an oral or written report
required by this chapter with knowledge or reason to believe that the
information is false shall be fined as provided in § 76.99 of this chapter.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409)  (1999 Code, § 76.08)



§ 76.09  WHEN DRIVER FAILS TO REPORT.



   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required written accident report and if there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the motor vehicle accident capable of making a written
report, the occupant shall make or cause the written report to be made. If
the driver fails for any reason to make the report the owner of the vehicle
involved in the motor vehicle accident shall, as soon as practicable, make
the report to the Police Department.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410)  (1999 Code, § 76.09)



§ 76.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter for which no penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Reckless driving. Every person convicted of reckless driving,
per § 76.01 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor,
except as provided under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503, for felony offenses.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503)



   (C)   Street racing.



      (1)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of §
76.02(A) of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor for the
first offense and shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250. The driver’s
license of any person convicted of § 76.02(A) of this chapter shall be
revoked in the manner provided by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-205.



      (2)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of §
76.02(B) of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any person
who is convicted of § 76.02(B) of this chapter for a second or subsequent
time shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506)



(1999 Code, § 76.99)



   (D)   Accidents.



      (1)   Upon conviction of a violation of § 76.05 of this
chapter, the court shall make a finding as to whether the damage to a vehicle
is in excess of $1,000, and in such case a statement of this finding shall be
reported to the Secretary of State with the report of conviction.



      (2)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds
either a vehicle standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a
prohibition, limitation or restriction on stopping, standing or parking
imposed under this traffic code, or a disabled vehicle that obstructs the
roadway of a highway or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority
official is authorized to move the vehicle or to require the operator of the
vehicle to move the vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a position where
parking is permitted, or to public parking or storage premises. The removal
may be performed by, or under the direction of, the peace officer or highway
authority official or may be contracted for by local authorities. After the
vehicle has been removed, the peace officer or highway authority official
shall follow appropriate procedures, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
4-203.



      (3)   A towing service, its officers and its employees are not
liable for loss of or damages to any real or personal property that occurs as
the result of the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (D)(2)
above, as provided in subsection (b) of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402)  (1999 Code, § 76.05)



CHAPTER 77:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Speed restrictions



      II.   Yield intersections



      III.   Stop/through street intersections



      IV.   Three- and four-way stop intersections



      V.   One-way streets and alleys



      VI.   Preferred truck routes



      VII.   Turn restrictions



      VIII.   Closed streets



SCHEDULE I. SPEED RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The speed limit on all public streets within the city limits,
and under the enforcement of the City Police Department, shall be 25 mph and
posted accordingly.



   (B)   Exceptions shall include:



      (1)   North-South:



 


North-South Speed Restrictions




Street

 

Location

 

Speed Limit (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





All school zones
 
 
 

See School Speed Zone Ordinance

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Hartman Lane
 
Highway 50 to Meadowbrook
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



North Lincoln
 
State Street to Fairwood Hills
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Fairwood Hills to Deer Creek
 

35

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Deer Creek north to city limits
 

45

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Oberneufemann Road
 
 
 

35

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Old Collinsville Road
 
Highway 50 north to city limit
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



From I-64 Frontage Road to Chesapeake Junction
 

30

 

3607

 

2-2-2009



Pausch Road
 
From Milburn School Road north approximately 1,660 feet
 

35

 

3599

 

12-1-2008



Porter Road
 
Venita Drive to 1,000 feet west of Simmons Road
 

35

 

3490

 

12-4-2006



Regency Park
 
Highway 50 to Green Mount Road
 

35

 

3510

 

4-16-2007



Seven Hills Road
 
Highway 50 to State Street
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



State Street north to city limits
 

40

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Simmons Road
 
Porter Road to Fairwood Hills Road
 

35

 

3221,



3490

 

12-15-2003,



12-4-2006



South Lincoln
 
State Street to Highway 50
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Highway 50 south to city limits
 

35

 

3221

 

12-15-2003





 



      (2)   East-West:



 


East-West Speed Restrictions




Street

 

Location

 

Speed Limit (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





All roadways within the Sports Park
 
Between Obernuefmann Road, Venita Drive and Porter Road
 

20

 

3537

 

9-4-2007



Cambridge Boulevard
 
 
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Central Park Plaza Drive
 
 
 

35

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



East State Street
 
 
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Kyle Road
 
 
 

40

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Milburn School Road
 
Old Collinsville Road to Merriam Parkway
 

45

 

3591

 

10-20-2008



Merriam Parkway to Simmons Road
 

35

 

3592

 

11-3-2008



Old Vincennes Trail
 
Seven Hills Road to Scott-Troy Road
 

45

 

3510

 

4-16-2007



Porter Road
 
Ogle Road to 1,000 feet west of Simmons Road
 

35

 

3490

 

12-4-2006



Obernuefemann road to Venita Road
 

35

 

3598

 

12-1-2008



Wesley Drive
 
Lincoln to Bevirt Court
 

20

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



West State Street
 
Lincoln to Oak
 

30

 

3221

 

12-15-2003



Oak to Highway 50
 

35

 

3221

 

12-15-2003





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Schd. I)



SCHEDULE II. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   The following are designated as yield right-of-way intersections:



 


Yield Intersections




Through Street

 

Yield Street

 

Direction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Adams Street, East
 
Hilgard Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Orange Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Penn Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Vine Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Anne Drive
 
Alma Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Cherry Street, North
 
Washington Street, West
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



White Oak Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Cherry Street, South
 
Joy Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Cottage Hill Drive
 
Renee Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Ventura Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Cottage Hill Road
 
Ventura Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Crestview Drive
 
Creekview Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Delmar Avenue
 
School Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Emily Drive
 
Emily Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Julia Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Fountainebleau Street
 
Penn Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Harvard Drive
 
Vanderbilt Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Wellesley Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Hickory Street
 
Fourth Street, West
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Highway 50, West (Frontage Road)
 
Brookside Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Indian Springs Road
 
Lakeshore Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Jackson Street
 
Vine Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Jackson Street, West
 
Cherry Street, North
 

Northbound

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Jefferson Street, East
 
Cart Road
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Estate Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Hilgard Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Howard Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Lee Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Orange Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Vine Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Jefferson Street, West
 
Cherry Street, North
 

Northbound

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Spruce Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Joshua Drive
 
Brandonwood Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Juniper Drive
 
Willow Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Lee Drive
 
Estate Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Howard Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Long Drive
 
Atlantic Street
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Belt Avenue
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Central Avenue
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Delmar Avenue
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Easton Avenue
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Famous Avenue
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Madison Street, West
 
Cedar Street
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Cherry Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Linden Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Nixon Drive, West
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Westbrook Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Main Street
 
Carolina Street
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Carr Street
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Harding Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Saint Clair Street
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Marilyn Drive
 
Alma Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Matthew Drive
 
Broadmoor Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



DeSoto Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Doral Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Kim Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Rebecca Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Monterey Drive
 
Broadmoor Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Nixon Drive, West
 
Linden Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Westbrook Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Oak Street, North
 
Adams Street, West
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Cedar Street, North
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Pierce Boulevard
 
Ponderosa Avenue
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Sugar Pine Lane
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Ponderosa Avenue
 
Evergreen Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Red Pine Avenue
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Sugar Pine Lane
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Powell Drive
 
Ellen Lane
 

Both

 

813

 

4-18-1977



Meadowbrook Drive
 

Both

 

813

 

4-18-1977



Meadows Drive
 

Both

 

813

 

4-18-1977



Mylaun Drive
 

Both

 

813

 

4-18-1977



Princeton Drive
 
Matthew Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Rebecca Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Westminster Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Ravenwood Circle
 
Ravenwood Circle
 

Eastbound

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Rebecca Drive
 
Kim Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Red Pine Avenue
 
Sugar Pine Lane
 

Northbound

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Sugar Pine Lane
 

Southbound

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Reiss Road
 
Belpre Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Fox Run
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Meadowlark Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Second Street, East
 
Annice Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Edna Drive
 

Both

 

736

 

6-18-1973



Smiley Street
 
Deer Run
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Wildwood Lane
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Southview Drive
 
Rebecca Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Southview Drive
 
Susan Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Spruce Drive
 
Adams Street, West
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Washington Street, West
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Third Street, East
 
Annice Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Hilgard Street, South
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Third Street, West
 
Hickory Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Vanderbilt Drive
 
Princeton Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Yale Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Vine Street, North
 
Monroe Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Vine Street, South
 
Fifth Street, East
 

Westbound

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Walnut Street, South
 
Fourth Street, West
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Orchard Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Washington Street, East
 
Hilgard Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Orange Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Penn Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Washington, West
 
Brookside Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Weber Drive
 
Second Street, East
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Third Street, East
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Agnes Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Edna Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Wesley Drive
 
Bevirt Court
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Cherry Street, North
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Emily Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Jackson Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Lakeshore Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Ravenwood Circle
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Westfield Drive
 
Princeton Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Westminster Drive
 
Amherst Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Wellesley Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Yale Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



White Oak Drive
 
Wesley Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Whitehall Drive
 
Harvard Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Westminster Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Yale Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Willow Drive
 
Adams Street, West
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Jefferson Street, West
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Yale Drive
 
Park Entrance Place
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Westfield Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Schd. II)  (Ord. 3543, passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 3541,
passed 10-1-2007)



SCHEDULE III. STOP/THROUGH STREET INTERSECTIONS.



   The drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering any of the
designated through streets and stop intersections unless otherwise directed
by a police officer or traffic-control signal:



 


Stop/Through Street Intersections




Stop Street

 

Through Street

 

Direction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Abington Station Drive (Park Bridge Station)
 
Park Bridge Avenue
 

Westbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Affirm Drive
 
Aladar Drive
 



 

1300,
1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Thomas
 

West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Aladar Drive
 
Affirm Drive
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Schwaegel 
 



 

1722

 

10-17-1994



Walnut, South
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Walnut Street
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Alder Ridge Drive (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Ashton Falls Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Alder Ridge Drive (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Ashton Falls Drive
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Alexandra Court
 
Hightower Place
 

Northbound

 

3479

 

10-16-2006



All streets for the length of the city
 
Lincoln Street (stops at Third Street and State Street)
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



State Street
 



 

287

 

10-6-1947



All streets from State Street to Fountainebleau Street
 
Smiley Street, North
 



 

480

 

1-6-1964



All streets from State Street to Wesley Drive
 
Smiley Street, North
 

Eastbound

 

541

 

4-17-1967



All streets from U.S. Route 50 to State Street
 
Smiley Street, South
 



 

480

 

1-6-1964



Allenbrook Avenue
 
Savannah Hills Boulevard
 

Northbound

 

3420

 

3-6-2006



Allenbrook Avenue (Savannah Hills)
 
Savannah Hills Boulevard
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Alley between Fourth Street and Seventh Street
 
Fine Street
 

Eastbound

 

402

 

3-3-1958



Alysheba Drive (Cambridge Commons)
 
Aladar Drive
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Alyssa Creek Court
 
Knob Creek Lane
 



 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Ambercrombie Square Court
 
Carnegie Knolls Drive
 

Southbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Amberleaf Court
 
Deer Creek Road 
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Amherst Drive
 
Dartmouth Drive
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Westminster
 



 

1352,



1364

 

11-21-1988, 3-6-1989



Amy Drive
 
Shamrock Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3026

 

10-16-2000



Walnut Street
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Andy Drive
 
Janeita Court
 

Eastbound

 

3632

 

7-6-2009



Anne Drive
 
Edward Street
 



 

3286

 

10-18-2004



Apple Street
 
Fifth Street, East
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



First Street
 

Northbound

 

4082

 

2-19-2019



Fourth Street
 



 

1476

 

4-1-1991



Second Street
 

Northbound

 

644

 

5-18-1970



Second Street
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Third Street, East
 



 

836

 

12-5-1977



Applewhite Road
 
Tanglewood Trace
 

East

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Wildwood Lane
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Arbor
 
Eastgate Crossing
 



 

2022

 

1-19-1999



East Highway 50
 



 

2022

 

1-19-1999



Arbor Green Trail
 
Simmons
 

Eastbound

 

3478

 

10-16-2006



Armsleigh Place
 
Scott-Troy Road
 

Westbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Arrowhead
 
Lincoln Avenue
 



 

1088,



1125

 

1-3-1984, 11-5-1984



Ashfield Glen Court
 
Arbor Green Trail
 

Eastbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Ashton Falls Drive (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Flagstone Pass Drive
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Atlantic
 
Hartman Lane
 



 

1088

 

1-3-1984



Augusta
 
Second Street
 

Northbound

 

644

 

5-18-1970



Seventh Street
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Sixth Street
 



 

1300

 

2-29-1988



Augusta, South
 
Fourth Street
 



 

1269

 

8-31-1987



Augusta Street
 
Third Street, East
 



 

836

 

12-5-1977



Azalea Court
 
Hearthstone Drive
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

3573

 

4-21-2008



Bassett Street (Savannah Hills)
 
Allenbrook Avenue
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Bassett Street (Savannah Hills)
 
Allenbrook Avenue
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Bayley Drive (Park Bridge Station)
 
Park Bridge Avenue
 

Westbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Beaconsfield Lane
 
Carnegie Knolls Drive
 

Southbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Carnegie Knolls Drive
 

Northbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Arbor Green Trail
 

Northbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Arbor Green Trail
 

Southbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Belclare Court (Park Bridge Station)
 
Park Bridge Avenue
 

Eastbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Bellingham Circle (north end)
 
Allenbrook Avenue
 

Westbound

 

3420

 

3-6-2006



Bellingham Circle (south end)
 
Allenbrook Avenue
 

Westbound

 

3420

 

3-6-2006



Belpre Drive
 
Wesley Drive
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Bethel Ridge Farms Boulevard
(Bethel Ridge Farms)
 
Bethel Road
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Belt
 
Hartman Lane
 



 

1088

 

1-3-1984



Betty Lane
 
Seven Hills Road
 



 

1330

 

9-19-1988



Bevirt Court
 
Emily
 



 

1536

 

4-20-1992



Fountainebleau
 



 

1536

 

4-20-1992



Wesley Drive
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Birch Creek Court (Deer Creek)
 
Engle Creek Drive
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Bird Dog Lane
 
Benjamin Drive
 

Southbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Buran Drive
 

Northbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Blackberry Lane
 
Deer Creek Road
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Bob White Circle
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Bossler Lane (Manors at Fairwood Hills)
 
Deer Creek Road, West
 

South

 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Braeswood Estates Drive
 
Scott-Troy Road
 

Westbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Bradstreet Drive
 
Dickinson Drive
 

Southbound

 

3940

 

6-20-2016



Briar Meadow Court (Stone Briar)
 
Stone Briar Drive
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Bridgeway Drive (Savannah Hills)
 
Allenbrook Avenue
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Bristlecone
 
Pierce
 

Northbound

 

1927,



3026

 

6-30-1997, 10-16-2000



Ponderosa
 

Southbound

 

1927,



3026

 

6-30-1997, 10-16-2000



Brittany, East
 
Lincoln Avenue
 



 

1088,



1125

 

1-3-1984,



11-5-1984



Brittany, West
 
Lincoln Avenue
 



 

1088,



1125

 

1-3-1984,



11-5-1984



Broadmore
 
Matthew
 



 

1364,



1352

 

3-6-1989,



11-21-1988



Brookdale Court
 
Donna
 



 

1751

 

4-17-1995



Brudenell Court
 
Carnegie Knolls Dive
 

Eastbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Buran Drive
 
Victoria Lane
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Butternut Lane
 
Edgewood Drive
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Cabot Court (Stone Briar)
 
Sturbridge Trail
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Cambridge Boulevard
 
Greenmount Road, North
 



 

1998

 

6-29-1998



Cardiff
 
Nottinghill Drive
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

3460

 

7-3-2006



Carnegie Knolls
 
Arbor Green Trail
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

3478,



3505

 

10-16-2006,



2-20-2007



Carol Ann Drive
 
Donna Drive
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1751

 

4-17-1995



Cart Road
 
State Street, East
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Catalina Drive (Marko Villa)
 
Cherylwood Drive
 

Southbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Catalpa Drive (Fairwood Hills)
 
Elisabeth Drive
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Center Grove
 
Countryside Lane
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Centergrove
 
Schwagle Road
 

Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Central Park Drive
 
Hartman Lane
 



 

1886

 

12-2-1996



Chamberlains Crossing
 
Lincoln Farm Road
 

Eastbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Peach Orchard Road
 

Westbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Chapel Hill Drive
 
Three Rivers Drive
 

Northbound

 

3506

 

2-20-2007



Richland Park Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3506

 

2-20-2007



Cherry
 
Third
 



 

1493

 

7-29-1991



Cherry, North
 
Jefferson, West
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Cherry Street
 
Madison Street, West
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Monroe Street
 

Northbound

 

992

 

10-1-1981



Wesley Drive
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Cherry Street, South
 
Virginia Drive
 



 

1416

 

1-29-1980



Cherylwood
 
Old Collinsville Road
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Chesapeake Junction
 
Old Collinsville Road
 

Westbound

 

3309

 

12-20-2004



Chevalier Lane
 
Gambier Terrace Court
 

Northbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Chickasaw Lane
 
Shawnee Court
 

Northbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Shawnee Court
 

Southbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Chiswick Court (Thornbury Hill)
 
Thornbury Place
 



 

1963

 

5-2-1994



Clarendon Drive
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Claredon Avenue
 
Lincoln Crossing
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Coachlight Road (Thornbury Hill)
 
Victoria Lane
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Cobble Ridge Drive (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Shadow Rock Court
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Cobblestone Ridge Drive (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Weil Road
 

Eastbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Coleridge Court
 
Dickinson Drive
 

Southbound

 

3940

 

6-20-2016



Coles County Drive
 
Lincoln Farm Road
 

Eastbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Colleen
 
Nancy
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Colony Court
 
Dartmouth Drive
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Coral Drive (Coral Gables)
 
Cherylwood Drive
 

Southbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Cottonwood Court
 
Hawthorne Place
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



County Pine Court
 
Shamrock Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3026

 

10-16-2000



Crabapple Drive
 
Benjamin Drive
 

Southbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Creekside Court
 
Edgewood
 



 

1514

 

10-21-1991



Crestview Drive
 
Collinsville Road, Old
 

Westbound

 

672

 

2-1-1971



Crown
 
Emerald Green
 

Eastbound

 

3486

 

11-20-2006



Dale Street
 
Joy
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Ruth
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Virginia
 

East and West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Marilyn Drive
 



 

1118

 

9-17-1984



Danzig Drive (Cambridge Commons)
 
Aladar Drive
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Dartmouth Drive
 
Oak Tree
 

South

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Timber Creek Drive
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Colony Court
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Daylily Place
 
Marigold Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3573

 

4-21-2008



Deer Creek Road
 
Plum Court
 

South

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Seven Hills Road
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Deer Creek Road, West
 
Bossler Lane
 



 

1894

 

12-30-1996



Fieldspring Court
 



 

1894

 

12-30-1996



Fairwood Hills Road
 



 

1894

 

12-30-1996



Deer Creek Road, West (Manors at Fairwood Hills)
 
Lincoln, North
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Del Ray
 
Cherylwood
 

Southbound

 

3555

 

12-17-2007



Delmar
 
Hartman Lane
 



 

1088

 

1-3-1984



Dennison Drive
 
Macon Court
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Farmington Avenue
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Derrick Drive
 
Montebello Lane
 

Northbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Desoto Drive
 
Matthew
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Dartmouth Drive
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



DeWitt
 
Tazewell
 

Eastbound

 

2006

 

8-17-1998



Dickinson Drive
 
Merriam Parkway
 

Westbound

 

3893

 

8-17-2015



Dogwood Drive
 
Heatherwood Drive
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Storybrook Drive
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Donna Drive
 
Nancy
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Brookdale
 

Southbound

 

1859

 

7-15-1996



Carol Ann
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1859

 

7-15-1996



Georgetowne Drive
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Greenmount, North
 



 

1751

 

4-17-1995



Northridge
 

Southbound

 

1859

 

7-15-1996



Walnut Street, South
 



 

1177

 

12-2-1985



Dustin Lane
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

3309

 

12-20-2004



Easton
 
Hartman Lane
 



 

1088

 

1-3-1984



Edgewood Drive
 
Timber Creek
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Edna Street
 
Third Street, East
 

Both

 

736

 

6-18-1973



Edward Street
 
Joy Drive
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Nancy
 

Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Elisabeth Drive
 
Fairwood Hills Drive
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Henrietta Drive
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

2074

 

12-6-1999



Mary Lu Drive
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

2074

 

12-6-1999



Elizabeth
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

2038

 

4-19-1999



Ellen Lane
 
Powell Drive
 



 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Emerald Green Drive
 
Terrace Green Lane
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Emily Drive
 
None
 

All

 

3244

 

4-19-2004



Engle Court
 
Engle Creek Drive
 

Southbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Engle Court (Deer Creek)
 
Engle Creek Drive
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Engle Creek Drive
 
Deer Creek Road
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



English Pine
 
Pierce Boulevard
 

Northbound

 

3184

 

6-16-2003



Eric’s Run
 
Nottinghill Drive
 

Northbound

 

3460

 

7-3-2006



Nottinghill Drive
 

Southbound

 

3460

 

7-3-2006



Estates at Prairie Crossing

   Bluestem Court

   Coneflower Court

   Coreopsis Court

   Prairie Crossing

   Prairie Crossing

   Sunflower Court
 
 

Prairie Crossing

Saint Nicholas Drive

East Wesley Drive

East Wesley Drive

Saint Nicholas Drive

Prairie Crossing
 





Northbound



Westbound



Southbound



Southbound



Northbound



Westbound

 

4055

 

9-17-2018



Evan Drive
 
Donna Drive
 

Northbound

 

2083

 

1-18-2000



Executive Plaza Drive
 
Lake St. Ellen Drive
 

Northbound

 

3950

 

8-15-2016



Fairbanks Street (Savannah Hills)
 
Merrifields Drive
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Fairway Wood
 
Green Jacket
 

Northbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Green Jacket
 

Southbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Tea Olive
 

Eastbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Fairwood Hills Drive
 
Heatherwood
 

North and South

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Peachtree Court
 

North

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Faith
 
Cherylwood
 

Southbound

 

3555

 

12-17-2007



Famous 
 
Hartman Lane
 



 

1088

 

1-3-1984



Farmington Drive
 
Macon Court
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Ferncliffe Drive
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Ferncliffe Court
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 

Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Fifth Street, East
 
Augusta, South
 



 

1269

 

8-31-1987



Fifth Street
 
Hilgard Street
 



 

644

 

5-18-1970



Lincoln Avenue
 



 

153

 

4-10-1930



Vine Street, South
 

Westbound

 

644

 

5-18-1970



Vine Street
 

Eastbound

 

552

 

8-7-1967



Fired Brick Drive (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Shadow Rock Court
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Fired Brick Drive (north end) (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Torchlight Lane
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Fired Brick Drive (south end) (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Shadow Rock Court
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



First Street, West
 
Cherry Street, South
 

Westbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Oak Street
 

Both

 

736

 

6-18-1973



Forest Green Drive
 
Hillock
 

Southbound

 

3486

 

11-20-2006



Terrace Green Lane
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Fourth Street
 
Cherry Street, South
 



 

573

 

1-15-1968



Frost Court
 
Merriam Parkway
 

Westbound

 

3519

 

5-21-2007



Gambier Terrace Court
 
Arbor Green Trail
 

Westbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Arbor Green Trail
 

Eastbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Gastorf Court
 
Smiley, North
 



 

1732

 

12-19-1994



Glen Hollow
 
Stoneybrook
 



 

1512

 

9-30-1991



Green Jacket
 
Old Collinsville Road
 

Northbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Green Jacket
 
Old Collinsville Road
 

Westbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Greenbank Way
 
Carnegie Knolls
 

Westbound

 

3478,



3505

 

10-16-2006,



2-20-2007



Greentrail
 
Quail Run
 

Northbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Greentree Court
 
Heatherwood
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Elisabeth Drive
 



 

1751

 

4-17-1995



Heatherwood Drive
 



 

1751

 

4-17-1995



Gregerson Court
 
Longfellow Drive
 

Southbound

 

3479

 

10-16-2006



Griffen Gate
 
Walnut Street, South
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Haddington Lane
 
Armsleigh Place
 

Northbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Haps Lane  (Manors at Fairwood Hills)
 
Deer Creek Road, West
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Hamlin Court
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Hawthorne Place
 
Edgewood Drive
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Hearthstone Drive
 
O’Fallon-Troy Road
 

Southbound

 

3573

 

4-21-2008



Heatherwood Drive
 
Fairwood Hills Drive
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Greentree
 

East and West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Greentree
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988,



11-21-1988



Greentree Circle
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988,



11-21-1988



Storybrook Drive
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Heritage Crest Court (Millburn Estates)
 
Royal Crest Way
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Hesse Way
 
North Madison
 

Westbound

 

3942

 

7-5-2016



Hickory Point (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Flagstone Pass Drive
 

Southbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Hickory Street
 
Third, West
 



 

1501

 

8-19-1991



Fifth Street
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Hidden Wagon Way (Bethel Ridge Farms)
 
Bethel Ridge Farms Boulevard
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Hightower Place
 
Longfellow Drive
 

Northbound

 

3479

 

10-16-2006



Hilgard Street
 
Fourth Street
 



 

684

 

7-6-1971



Second Street
 

Northbound

 

644

 

5-18-1970



Third Street, East
 



 

836

 

12-5-1977



Hodgens Mill Lane
 
Lincoln Farm Road
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Hollander Court
 
Longfellow Drive
 

Northbound

 

3893

 

8-17-2015



Hollander Court
 
Longfellow Drive
 

Southbound

 

3893

 

8-17-2015



Honeysuckle Lane
 
Misty Valley Road
 



 

1571

 

9-21-1992



Hunters Point Court
 
Wildwood Lane
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Illini Drive
 
Kyle Road
 



 

2017

 

12-22-1998



Indian Creek Road
 
Aladar
 



 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Cambridge Boulevard
 



 

2006

 

8-17-1998



Aladar
 

Southbound

 

1774

 

7-31-1995



Indian Springs
 
Lincoln Street, North
 

Westbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Irongate Court (Savannah Hills)
 
Monaco Drive
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Jacks Bend (Bethel Ridge Farms)
 
Bethel Ridge Farms Boulevard
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Jackson, East
 
 
 



 

1786

 

9-5-1995



Jackson Street
 
Wesley Drive
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Jagged Rock Road (Bethel Ridge Farms)
 
Jacks Bend
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Jamestowne
 
Holliday Drive Northwest
 



 

1041

 

1-17-1983



Janeita Court
 
Nottinghill Drive
 

Northbound

 

3460

 

7-3-2006



Nottinghill Drive
 

Southbound

 

3460

 

7-3-2006



Keck Ridge Drive
 

Northbound

 

3632

 

7-6-2009



Jefferson, West
 
Mulberry
 

Eastbound

 

1774

 

7-31-1995



Cherry, North
 



 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Jeffrey Pine Court
 
Bristlecone Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3026

 

10-16-2000



Jennifer Court
 
Lincoln Avenue, North
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Jordan Drive
 
Victoria Lane
 

Eastbound

 

3224

 

12-5-2003



Joy Drive
 
Dale
 



 

1300, 1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Walnut Street
 

Both

 

954

 

3-17-1980



Juniper Drive
 
Persimmon Drive
 



 

716

 

9-18-1972



Karl Place
 
Willow Drive
 



 

1177

 

12-2-1985



Keats Way Court
 
Longfellow Drive
 

Northbound

 

3893

 

8-17-2015



Keck Ridge Drive
 
Erics Run Drive
 

Westbound

 

3632

 

7-6-2009



Scott-Troy Road
 

Eastbound

 

3632

 

7-6-2009



Keenland Place (Cambridge Commons)
 
Aladar Drive
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Kelly Drive
 
Hillock
 

Southbound

 

3486

 

11-20-2006



Terrace Green Lane
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Kensington Place
 
Oak Meadow Drive
 



 

2006

 

8-17-1998



Knob Creek Lane
 
Sinking Springs Drive
 

Westbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Knollhaven Trail
 
Hearthstone Drive
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

3573

 

4-21-2008



Marigold Drive
 

Westbound

 

3573

 

4-21-2008



Lake St. Ellen Drive
 
Old Collinsville Road
 

Westbound

 

3950

 

8-15-2016



Lake St. Ellen Drive
 
Arrow Ridge Road
 

Eastbound

 

3950

 

8-15-2016



Lake Vista Way (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Timber Ridge Trace Drive
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Lakeshore Drive
 
Wesley Drive
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Lakewood Court
 
Third Street
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Lantern Lights Circle (east end) (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Torchlight Lane
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Lantern Lights Circle (west end) (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Torchlight Lane
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Larkway
 
Pausch Road
 

Westbound

 

3309

 

12-20-2004



Laurel Wood Court (Millburn Estates)
 
Willowbrook Way
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Lazy Hollow Court
 
Knollhaven Trail
 

Westbound

 

3573

 

4-21-2008



LeClaire Court
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Lee Drive
 
State Street, East
 



 

680

 

4-19-1971



Legend Court
 
Arrow Ridge Road
 

Eastbound

 

3950

 

8-15-2016



Liberty Crossing
 
Lincoln Farm Road
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Lincoln Crossing
 
Simmons Road
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Lincoln Farm Road
 
Kyle Road
 



 

1792

 

10-16-1995



Summerlin Ridge
 

Northbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Loblobby Court (Pine Meadows)
 
Amy Drive
 

Southbound

 

1693,



3026

 

5-2-1994, 10-16-2000



Logan Square Court
 
Carnegie Knolls Drive
 

Westbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Longfellow Drive
 
Merriam Parkway
 

Eastbound

 

3519

 

5-21-2007



Merriam Parkway
 

Westbound

 

3519

 

5-21-2007



Longleaf Court
 
Pierce Boulevard
 

Northbound

 

3026

 

10-16-2000



Lonnie
 
Nottinghill Drive
 

Southbound

 

3460

 

7-3-2006



Lorien Court
 
Wildwood Lane
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Luca James Point (Bethel Ridge Farms)
 
Bethel Ridge Farms Boulevard
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Maces Grove
 
White Oak Drive
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Macintosh Court
 
Longfellow Drive
 

Northbound

 

3893

 

8-17-2015



Madison, East
 
Penn Street
 



 

3322

 

3-21-2005



Madison, West
 
Oak
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Obernuefemann Road
 

Westbound

 

684

 

7-6-1971



Magnolia Drive
 
Jefferson Street
 

Southbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Marbleton Circle
 
Treybrooke Place
 

Southbound

 

3468

 

8-7-2006



Marigold Drive
 
Hearthstone Drive
 

Southbound

 

3573

 

4-21-2008



Marilyn Drive
 
Cherry Street, South
 

Eastbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Edward Street
 



 

3286

 

10-18-2004



Mary Lu Drive
 
Conrad Lane
 

Westbound

 

2074

 

12-6-1999



Ruppel Lane
 

Eastbound

 

2074

 

12-6-1999



Mary Todd Lane
 
Summerlin Ridge
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Meadowbrook Drive
 
Blackhills Drive
 



 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Powell Drive
 



 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Powell Drive
 

Westbound

 

813

 

4-18-1977



Meadowlark Road
 
Wesley Drive
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Meadows Lane
 
Blackhills Drive
 



 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Powell Drive
 



 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Melissa Court
 
Third Street
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Merrifields Drive
 
Savannah Hills Boulevard
 

Northbound

 

3420

 

3-6-2006



Miami Court
 
Chickasaw Lane
 

Eastbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Millbrook Lane
 
Allenbrook Avenue
 

Eastbound

 

3420

 

3-6-2006



Misty Valley Road
 
Schwaegel
 



 

1648

 

10-18-1994



Schwagel Road
 



 

1571

 

9-21-1992



Monaco Drive (Savannah Hills)
 
Merrifields Drive
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Monaco Drive (Savannah Hills)
 
Seagate Drive
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Montebello Lane
 
Obernuefemann Road
 

Westbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Moorfield Park Drive
 
Gambier Terrace Court
 

Southbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Ashfield Glen Court
 

Northbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Morel Court (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Torchlight Lane
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Mylaun Drive
 
Blackhills Drive
 



 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Nancy Drive
 
Colleen
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Donna
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Ruth
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Virginia
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Walnut Street, South
 



 

1177

 

12-2-1985



White Pine Avenue
 

Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Nandina Green
 
Fairway Wood
 

Westbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



New Britain Court
 
Oxford Hill Road
 

Eastbound

 

3052

 

5-21-2001



Newport Lane (Savannah Hills)
 
Fairbanks Street
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Nicole Court
 
Lincoln Avenue, North
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Nixon Drive, West
 
Obernuefemann Road
 

Westbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Madison Street, North
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Nolin Creek Drive
 
Lincoln, North
 

Eastbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Norfolk Way (Stone Briar)
 
Sturbridge Trail
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Norfolk Way (Stone Briar)
 
Sturbridge Trail
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Northern Dancer
 
Aladar Drive
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

2083

 

1-1981-2000



Northgate Court
 
Allenbrook Avenue
 

Westbound

 

3420

 

3-6-2006



Northridge Court
 
Donna Drive
 



 

1751

 

4-17-1995



Nottinghill Drive
 
Greystone Place
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

3385

 

11-7-2005



Oak Creek
 
Oak Meadow
 

Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Oak Meadow
 
Country Oaks
 

Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Oak Street
 
Madison, West
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Third Street
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Oak Tree
 
Dartmouth
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Ole Town Bridge Drive (Park Bridge Station)
 
Park Bridge Avenue
 

Eastbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Oriole Drive
 
Stoneybrook Drive
 



 

1751

 

4-17-1995



Osage Drive
 
Juniper Drive
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Magnolia Drive
 

Northbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Mulberry Lane
 

Eastbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Overbrook Circle
 
Armsleigh Place
 

Southbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Oxford Hill Road
 
Greystone Place
 

Eastbound

 

3385

 

11-7-2005



Greystone Place
 

Westbound

 

3385

 

11-7-2005



Thornbury Place
 

Northbound

 

3052

 

5-21-2001



Thornbury Place
 

Southbound

 

3052

 

5-21-2001



Pacific Crossing Drive
 
Chesapeake Junction Lane
 

Northbound

 

3741

 

12-19-2011



Paige Lane
 
Moye School Drive
 

Northbound

 

3224

 

12-15-2003



Moye School Drive
 

Southbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Park Plaza Drive
 
Central Park Drive
 



 

2017

 

12-22-1998



Hartman Lane
 



 

1886

 

12-2-1996



Park roads
 
Traffic emerging from the city park onto Hilgard Street shall come to a full
stop at the intersection of the park roads at Fifth Street and Seventh Street
with Hilgard Street
 



 

588

 

7-1-1968



Park Street
 
Fifth Street, East
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Fourth Street
 



 

3286

 

10-18-2004



Oak Street
 



 

3286

 

10-18-2004



Second Street
 

Northbound

 

644

 

5-18-1970



Third Street, East
 



 

836

 

12-5-1977



Parkview Drive
 
Fifth Street, East
 

Northbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Peachtree Court
 
Fairwood Hills Drive
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Penn
 
Jefferson, East
 



 

1488

 

5-3-1991



Peoria Lane
 
Sauk Trail
 

Eastbound

 

3549

 

11-19-2007



Pepperidge Court
 
Seven Hills Road
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Pepperidge Drive
 
Seven Hills Road
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Pepperwood Court (Lakewood Estates)
 
Third Street, East
 

North and South

 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Persimmon Drive
 
Madison Street, West
 

Northbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Pheasant Run
 
Lincoln Avenue
 



 

1088

 

1-3-1984



Lincoln Avenue
 



 

1125

 

11-5-1984



Phillip Court
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Wesley Drive East
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Picketts Court
 
Picketts Run
 

Northbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Picketts Run
 
Lincoln Farm Road
 

Westbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Pierce
 
White Pine
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988,



11-21-1988



Pierce Boulevard
 
North Greenmount Road
 

Westbound

 

2088

 

2-7-2000



Pinehurst Drive
 
Matthew Drive
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Planters Crossing
 
Keck Ridge
 

Northbound

 

3385

 

11-7-2005



Keck Ridge
 

Southbound

 

3385

 

11-7-2005



Nottinghill Drive
 

Northbound

 

3385

 

11-7-2005



Plum Court
 
Deer Creek
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Plum Tree Court
 
Deer Creek Road
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Ponderosa Avenue
 
Pierce Boulevard
 



 

1037

 

12-6-1982



Princeton Drive
 
Southview
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Dartmouth Drive
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Pucketts Point (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Flagstone Pass Drive
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Quail Run
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 

Eastbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Smiley Street, North
 



 

1177

 

12-2-1985



Rain Hollow Drive (Misty Valley)
 
Misty Valley Road
 

South

 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Misty Valley Road
 

North

 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Rainfield Gardens Court
 
Carnegie Knolls Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3505

 

2-20-2007



Ramblewood
 
Quail Run
 

Northbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Somerset Lane
 

Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Ravenwood Circle
 
None
 

All

 

1020,



3244

 

7-19-1982, 4-19-2004



Red Fox Trail
 
Deer Creek Road 
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Red Leaf Court (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Torchlight Lane
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Red Pine Avenue
 
Pierce Boulevard
 



 

1037

 

12-6-1982



Reiss Road
 
Smiley Street
 



 

1118

 

9-17-1984



Wesley Drive
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Remington Court
 
Arrow Ridge Road
 

Eastbound

 

3950

 

8-15-2016



Ridge Pointe Drive
 
Sturbridge Trail
 

Southbound

 

3741

 

12-19-2011



River Birch
 
Larkway
 



 

3544

 

11-5-2007



Robert Drive
 
Lincoln Street, North
 

Eastbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Roundtable Court
 
Aladar Drive
 

Southbound

 

2083

 

1-18-2000



Round Top Ridge
 
Lincoln Farm Road
 



 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Royal Crest Way (north end) (Millburn Estates)
 
Milburn Estates Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Royal Crest Way (south end) (Millburn Estates)
 
Milburn Estates Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Royal Oak Court
 
Country Oaks
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Rustic Barn Road (Bethel Ridge Farms)
 
Bethel Ridge Farms Boulevard
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Ruth
 
Dale
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Nancy
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Saint Nicholas Drive
 
East Wesley Drive
 

Southbound

 

3309

 

12-20-2004



Woodlake
 

North and South

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Sauk Trail
 
Kyle Road
 

Eastbound

 

3549

 

11-19-2007



Savoy
 
Ingleside
 

Eastbound

 

3468

 

8-7-2006



Schwarz Road
 
Deer Creek Road 
 



 

1676

 

2-7-1994



Deer Creek
 

Northbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Engle Creek
 

Southbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Smiley, North
 

Eastbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Schwarz Road (Deer Creek)
 
Engle Creek Drive
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Second Street
 
Cherry Street
 



 

298

 

3-14-1949



Cherry Street
 



 

298

 

3-4-1949



Lincoln Avenue
 



 

153

 

4-10-1930



Vine Street
 



 

-

 

- -



Second Street, West
 
Oak Street, South
 



 

716

 

9-18-1972



Seward Drive
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 

North and South

 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Lincoln Crossing
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Seven Hills Road
 
Third Street
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Deer Creek
 

East

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Pepperidge Court
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Pepperidge Drive
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Seventh Street
 
Augusta
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Cherry Street, South
 



 

573

 

1-15-1968



Vine Street
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

3079

 

10-29-2001



Seventh Street, East
 
Hilgard Street
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Parkview Drive
 

Eastbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Shadow Ridge Crossing
 
Bob White Circle
 

West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Ferncliffe Drive
 

West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Phillip Court
 

West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Somerset
 

East

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Saint Nicholas Drive
 

East and West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Tanglewood Trace
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Wesley Drive East
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Wheatfield Road
 

Southbound

 

3353

 

7-5-2005



Wildwood Lane
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Shallow Brook
 
Smiley
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Shadow Rock Court (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Natalyns Trace
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Shamrock Drive
 
Aladar
 



 

1732

 

12-19-1994



Pierce Boulevard
 

Southbound

 

3026

 

10-16-2000



Shawnee Court (Illini Trails)
 
Sauk Trail
 

Eastbound

 

3549

 

11-19-2007




Westbound

 

4070

 

12-17-2018



Shawnee Lane
 
Hodgens Mill Lane
 

Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Summerlin Ridge
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Shingle Pine Court (Pine Meadows)
 
Amy Drive
 

Southbound

 

1693, 3026

 

5-2-1994, 10-16-2000



Shoreline Drive
 
Third Street, East
 

Northbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Silverlink Drive
 
Chesapeake Junction Lane
 

Eastbound

 

3741

 

12-19-2011



Pacific Crossing Drive
 

Westbound

 

3741

 

12-19-2011



Simmons Road
 
Kyle Road
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Sinking Springs Drive
 
Hodgens Mill
 

Northbound

 

1910

 

4-7-1997



Sinking Springs Road
 
Hodgens Mill Lane
 

Northbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Sixth Street
 
Augusta
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Cherry Street, South
 



 

573

 

1-15-1968



Sixth Street, East
 
Hilgard Street
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Smiley, North
 
Deer Creek
 

Northbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Wildwood
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Smiley Street
 
Joshua Drive
 



 

954,



1693

 

3-17-1980, 5-2-1994



Somerset Lane
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Woodleaf
 

Westbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Southview
 
Princeton
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Westfield
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988



Spruce Street
 
State Street
 



 

474

 

7-15-1963



State Street
 
Lincoln Avenue
 



 

153

 

4-10-1930



Talon Court
 

South

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Still Hollow Run (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Timber Ridge Trace Drive
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Stone Creek Drive (Deer Creek)
 
Deer Creek Road, East
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Schwarz
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Stone Creek Drive
 
Schwarz Road
 

Southbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Storybrook Drive
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Stone Hill Drive
 
Three Rivers Drive
 

Southbound

 

3506

 

2-20-2007



Sturbridge Trail
 
Stone Briar Drive
 

Northbound

 

3741

 

12-19-2011



Summerlin Ridge
 
Lincoln, North
 

Eastbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Lincoln Farm Road
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Mary Todd Lane
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Sunset Boulevard
 
Cambridge Boulevard
 

Southbound

 

2083

 

1-18-2000



Sycamore Place
 
Edgewood Drive
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Talbert Place
 
Armsleigh Place
 

Southbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Talon Court
 
Eagle Drive
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



State Street
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Tanglewood Trace
 
Applewhite
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Shadow Ridge Crossing
 

North

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Wildwood Lane
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Tazewell
 
Kyle Road
 

Northbound

 

2006

 

8-17-1998



Tea Olive
 
Milburn School Road
 

Southbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Terracotta Place
 
Treybrooke Place
 

Westbound

 

3468

 

8-7-2006



Savoy
 

Northbound

 

3468

 

8-7-2006



Third Street
 
Oak
 



 

1493

 

7-29-1991



Seven Hills Road
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Turtle Creek
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988,



11-21-1988



Weber Drive
 



 

1162

 

9-30-1985



Third Street, East
 
Agnes Drive
 



 

954,



1693

 

3-17-1980, 5-2-1994



Thomas Drive
 
Affirm Drive
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Nancy Drive
 

Eastbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Thoreau Drive
 
Hollander Court
 

Westbound

 

3893

 

8-17-2015



Thornbury Place
 
Greystone Place
 

Eastbound

 

3385

 

11-7-2005



Seven Hills Road
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Victoria
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

1806

 

12-18-1995



Three Rivers Drive
 
Richland Park Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3506

 

2-20-2007



Timber Creek
 
Edgewood Drive
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Timber Ridge Trace Drive  (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Flagstone Pass Drive
 

Northbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Timber Ridge Trace Drive  (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Simmons Road
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Timber Run
 
Wildwood Lane
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Timothy Drive
 
Elisabeth Drive
 

Eastbound

 

2074

 

12-6-1999



Illini Drive
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

2074

 

12-6-1999



Macon Court
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Torchlight Lane (Cobblestone Ridge)
 
Weil Road
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Trailwood Court
 
Wildwood Lane
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Treybrooke Place
 
Scott-Troy Road
 

Westbound

 

3468

 

8-7-2006



Troon Hollow
 
Summerlin Ridge
 

Southbound

 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Turn Creek Court
 
Knob Creek Lane
 



 

1927

 

6-30-1997



Turtle Creek
 
Third Street
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Usher Drive
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Van Dunn Drive
 
Thoreau Drive
 

Northbound

 

3479

 

10-16-2006



Longfellow Drive
 

Southbound

 

3479

 

10-16-2006



Vanderbilt Drive
 
Whitehall Drive
 



 

716

 

9-18-1972



Ventura Drive
 
Venita Drive
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Vermillion Drive
 
Tazewell
 

Eastbound

 

2006

 

8-17-1998



Victoria Lane
 
Moye School Drive
 

Northbound

 

3224

 

12-15-2003



Moye School Drive
 

Southbound

 

3220

 

12-1-2003



Thornbury Place
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Vine Street
 
Second Street
 



 

741

 

11-5-1973



Vine Street, North
 
Madison Street, East
 

Both

 

736

 

6-18-1973



Washington Street, East
 



 

716

 

9-18-1972



Vine Street, South
 
Fourth Street, East
 

Both

 

736

 

6-18-1973



Parkview Drive
 

Eastbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Third Street, East
 



 

664

 

10-5-1970



Virginia
 
Dale
 



 

1300,



1352,



1364

 

2-29-1988, 11-21-1988,



3-6-1989



Nancy
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Wadsworth Court
 
Thoreau Drive
 

Southbound

 

3893

 

8-17-2015



Waghorn Drive
 
Cardiff Court
 

Westbound

 

3632

 

7-6-2009



Waldman Court
 
Frost Court
 

Southbound

 

3519

 

5-21-2007



Wall Street
 
Cambridge Boulevard
 

Southbound

 

2083

 

1-18-2000



Walnut Street
 
Third, West
 



 

1501

 

8-19-1991



Aladar Drive
 

East

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Pierce Boulevard
 

Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Walnut Street, South
 
Aladar Drive
 



 

1300,



1352

 

2-29-1988 11-21-1988



Griffin Gate
 

West

 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Washington Street, West
 
Collinsville Road, Old
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Willow Drive
 



 

716

 

9-18-1972



Wayne Court
 
Mary Lu Drive
 

Southbound

 

2074

 

12-6-1999



Weber Drive
 
First Street
 



 

954

 

3-17-1980



Wellesley Drive
 
Westminster
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Dartmouth Drive
 



 

1352

 

1-21-1988



Harvard Drive
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Welles Court
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 



 

2068

 

11-15-1999



Wesley Court
 
Wesley Drive
 

Northbound

 

2088

 

2-7-2000



Wesley Drive
 
None
 

All

 

2088,



3244

 

2-7-2000, 4-19-2004



Wesley Drive, East
 
Seven Hills Road
 

Eastbound and Westbound

 

3309

 

12-20-2004



Westfield
 
Southview
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Westminster
 
Princeton
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Princeton
 



 

1352

 

11-21-1988



Westwood
 
Third, West
 



 

1501

 

8-19-1991



Westwood Street
 
Second Street, West
 

Northbound

 

448

 

10-16-1961



Whippoorwill Court
 
Wildwood Lane
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



White Horse Lane
 
Thornsbury Place
 

Northbound

 

3052

 

5-21-2001



Thornsbury Place
 

Southbound

 

3052

 

5-21-2001



White Oak Drive
 
Cherry Street
 



 

992

 

10-1-1981



Mace Grove
 



 

1020

 

7-19-1982



White Pine
 
Pierce
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Whitehall Drive
 
Dartmouth Drive
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Wiegerstown
 
Pausch Road
 

Westbound

 

3309

 

12-20-2004



Wildwood Lane
 
Seven Hills Road
 



 

1213

 

10-6-1986



Smiley Street, North
 



 

1177

 

12-2-1985



Willa Court (Bethel Ridge Farms)
 
Bethel Ridge Farms Boulevard
 

Westbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Willow Point Trail (Reserves at Timber Ridge)
 
Timber Ridge Trace Drive
 

Southbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Willowbrook Way (north end) (Millburn Estates)
 
Milburn Estates Drive
 

Eastbound

 

3992

 

7-17-2017



Willowbrook Way (south end)
 
Milburn Estates Drive
 

Eastbound

 

4038

 

5-21-2018



Willow Drive
 
Juniper Drive
 



 

1177

 

12-2-1985



Winding Creek Court
 
Deer Creek Road
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Winfield
 
Indian Creek Road
 

Eastbound

 

2083

 

1-18-2000



Wintergreen
 
Misty Valley Road
 



 

1571

 

9-21-1992



Wintergreen Drive (Misty Valley)
 
Misty Valley Road
 



 

1693

 

5-2-1994



Woodlake Court
 
Saint Nicholas Drive
 



 

1364

 

3-6-1989



Wesley Drive East
 



 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Woodlawn Court
 
Glen Hollow
 



 

1512

 

9-30-1991



Woodleaf Drive
 
Quail Run
 

Northbound and Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Saint Nicholas Drive
 

Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Woods Way
 
Dartmouth Drive
 

Southbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Timber Creek Drive
 

Eastbound

 

1257

 

5-18-1987



Yale
 
Westminster
 



 

1352,



1364

 

11-21-1988, 3-6-1989



Yale Drive, South
 
Dartmouth Drive
 

Southbound

 

716

 

9-18-1972



Yeats Court
 
Dickinson Drive
 

Southbound

 

3940

 

6-20-2016



Yeats Court
 
Dickinson Drive
 

Northbound

 

3940

 

6-20-2016





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Schd. III)



SCHEDULE IV. THREE- AND FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   Drivers of all vehicles shall stop as indicated before entering the
following three-way stop and four-way stop intersections:



 


Three- and Four-Way Stop Intersections




Street

 

Street

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Agnes Drive
 
Weber Drive
 

1109

 

7-2-1984



Aladar
 
Shamrock
 

1774

 

7-31-1995



Walnut
 

1937

 

9-2-1997



Cherry Street, North
 
Adams Street, West
 

3541

 

10-1-2007



Collen Street
 
Walnut Street
 

1392

 

8-21-1989



Collinsville Road, Old
 
Frontage Road
 

851

 

3-6-1978



Dartmouth Drive
 
DeSoto Drive
 

1020

 

7-19-1982



Deer Creek, West
 
Fairwood Hills
 

1866

 

9-16-1996



Donna Drive
 
Indian Creek
 

1859,



1866,



2018

 

7-15-1996,



9-16-1996,



12-21-1998



Fifth Street
 
Cherry Street
 

287

 

10-6-1947



Oak Street
 

287

 

10-6-1947



Fourth Street, East
 
Park Street
 

1583

 

4-19-1993



Illini Drive
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 

2037

 

4-19-1999



Juniper Drive
 
Persimmon Drive
 

1177

 

12-2-1985



Lincoln Drive, North
 
Wesley Drive
 

1128

 

1-7-1985



Long Drive
 
Delmar Avenue
 

1213,



1979

 

10-6-1986,



4-7-1998



Meadowbrook Drive
 
Powell Drive
 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Mylaun Drive
 
Powell Drive
 

1201

 

6-30-1986



Oak Street
 
State Street
 

-

 

- -



Pepperwood Court
 
Third Street
 

3035

 

12-18-2000



Pierce Boulevard
 
Walnut Street
 

3012

 

8-21-2000



Porter Road
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 

3088

 

12-17-2001



Saint Nicholas Drive
 
Shadow Ridge Crossing
 

1583

 

12-7-1992



Simmons Road
 
Fairwood Hills Road
 

3088

 

12-17-2001



Kyle Road
 

2069

 

11-15-1999



Smiley Street, North
 
Deer Creek
 

1866

 

9-16-1996



Jefferson Street
 

1222

 

12-1-1986



Reiss Road
 

1128

 

1-7-1985



State Street, East
 
Smiley Street
 

621

 

9-15-1969



Stoneybrook
 
Dogwood
 

1392

 

8-21-1989



Third Street, East
 
Edna Drive
 

736

 

6-18-1973



Victoria
 
Thornbury Place
 

3326

 

4-4-2005



Washington Street, East
 
Vine Street, North
 

879

 

8-7-1978



Washington Street, West
 
Cherry Street
 

1177

 

12-2-1985



Wesley Street, East
 
Smiley Street, North
 

890

 

11-6-1978



Westminster Drive
 
Whitehall Drive
 

1167

 

9-31-1985





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Schd. IV)



SCHEDULE V. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   Traffic shall only move in the direction indicated upon the following
streets and alleys, which are designated one-way streets and alleys:



 


One-Way Streets and Alleys




Street

 

Location

 

Direction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Alley
 
South of Fourth Street between Lincoln Street and Vine Street
 

Easterly

 

492

 

7-20-1964



Between Apple Street and Park Street
 

East to West

 

691

 

11-4-1971



Between South Lincoln and Vine Street
 

West to East

 

1294

 

2-1-1988



Elisabeth Drive
 
From Henrietta Drive to Mary Lu Drive
 

Northbound

 

2070

 

11-29-1999



From Wayne Court to Henrietta Drive
 

Southbound

 

2070

 

11-29-1999



First Street
 
Between Cherry Street and Oak Street
 

Westbound

 

3722

 

8-1-2011



First Street, East
 
From North Lincoln to Vine Street
 

Easterly

 

1894

 

12-30-1996



Peoria Lane
 
South of the property line for Lot 30
 



 

3548

 

10-19-2007



North of the property line for Lot 62
 



 

3548

 

10-19-2007





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Schd. V)



SCHEDULE VI.  PREFERRED TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   In order to establish a preferred truck route system within
the city, the following streets shall be designated, by proper sign approved
by the Illinois Department of Transportation to allow the same rights and
privileges as non-designated state highways regarding weight, width, and
length as is set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5 §§ 15-102, 15-107, and
15-111, commonly referred to as the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (B)   The streets to be designated as city preferred truck routes
are:



 


PREFERRED TRUCK ROUTES




Street

 

Location





Betty Lane
 
 


First Street, East
 
East of South Smiley Street


Lincoln Avenue, South
 
From Highway 50 to Second Street


Oak Street, South
 
From West Third Street to West Second Street


Old Vincennes Trail
 
 


Second Street, West
 
 


Seven Hills Road, South
 
 


Smiley Street, South
 
From East State Street to East First Street


Smiley Street, North
 
From East State Street to East Adams Street


State Street, East
 
 


State Street, West
 
 


Third Street, West
 
From Old U.S. 50 to South Lincoln Avenue




 



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Sch. VI)  (Ord. 1665, passed 1-3-1994; Ord. 1675, passed
2-7-1994; Ord. 3935, passed 6-6-2016)



SCHEDULE VII. TURN RESTRICTIONS.



   It is unlawful for any motorist traveling in the northbound lane of the
700 block of North Smiley Street to make a left turn from North Smiley Street
onto the premises of Estelle Kampmeyer school.



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Schd. VII)  (Ord. 3272, passed 8-2-2004)



SCHEDULE VIII. CLOSED STREETS.



   The following streets are closed to traffic at the designated locations:



 

Closed Street
 
Location
 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Jaclyn Drive
 
Intersection with Hartman Lane
 

3431

 

4-17-2006



Long Drive
 
The drive accessing Central School on the west side of Long Drive south of
Famous Drive (except for emergency vehicles)
 

3596

 

11-17-08




 



(1999 Code, Ch. 77, Schd. VIII)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 78:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   No-parking zones



      II.   Limited parking



      III.   Angle parking



      IV.   Snow routes



SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.



   No person shall park a vehicle at any time at any of the following
places designated no-parking zones.



 


No Parking Zones




Street

 

Side

 

Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Adams Street
 

South

 
206 W. Adams Street
 

3497

 

12-18-2006



Agnes
 

North and South

 
Eastbound to the intersection of Weber
 

1859

 

7-15-1996



Apple Street
 

West

 
From Fourth to Fifth Street
 

1078

 

9-19-1983



Cambridge Boulevard
 


 
Entire length
 

2089

 

2-7-2000



Central Park Drive
 

Both

 
 
 

1973

 

2-17-1998



Cherry Street
 

East

 
From West Jackson and Cherry to Wesley Drive
 

871

 

6-5-1978



Cherry Street, North
 

West

 
50 feet north and south of the intersection with White Oak Drive
 

1475

 

4-1-1991



City parking lot
 


 
Adjacent to First Street between Vine and Park Streets - no parking of
commercial vehicles except when the interests of the city are best served and
then only by temporary permit
 

3461

 

7-3-2006



Collinsville Road, North
 

West and East

 
Starting at the south boundary of John’s Welding and Repair Shop, thence
north 142 feet
 

730

 

5-7-1973



Collinsville Road, Old
 

Both

 
From West Highway 50 to the CSX RR
 

2057

 

11-3-1999




West

 
From a point 1,288 feet south of intersection of the west R.O.W. line of Old
Collinsville Road and the south R.O.W. line of Lincoln Highway, to a point
1,688 feet south of the intersection of the west R.O.W. line of Old
Collinsville Road and the south R.O.W. line of Lincoln Highway
 

990

 

9-21-1981



County Highway 16 Extension (Hartman Lane)
 

West

 
Between Atlantic Avenue and Lincoln Highway (Old Route 50), and the east side
of County Highway 16 Extension (Hartman Lane) from Lincoln Highway (Old Route
50) for a distance of .82 miles south
 

1045

 

2-7-1983



Delmar Avenue
 
—
 
Weekdays from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
 

4047

 

7-2-2018



Eagle Drive
 

Both

 
From Lincoln Highway to Talon Drive
 

1277

 

11-2-1987



Eagle Drive, entrance opposite
 

Both

 
From edge of pavement of Lincoln Highway southerly for 100 feet
 

1277

 

11-2-1987



Eighth Street (FAU Route 9166)
 

—

 
From 300 feet west of Lincoln Street to 200 feet east of South Smiley Street
 

867

 

4-17-1978



Fifth Street
 

North and South

 
Within 50 feet of Smiley Street
 

715

 

9-17-1972




North

 
From Hilgard to Park
 

1078

 

9-19-1983




North

 
From Parkview to Vine
 

1774

 

7-31-1995




South

 
From Hilgard to loading zone, approximately 40 feet east of the Legion Hut
 

1078

 

9-19-1983



Fourth Street
 

North and South

 
Within 50 feet of Smiley Street
 

715

 

9-17-1972



Greenmount Road, North
 

Both

 
From Thouvenot Lane to West Highway 50
 

3037

 

1-2-2001



Hartman Lane
 

—

 
From Easton Avenue/Park Plaza Drive to Meadowbrook Drive
 

2012

 

11-30-1998




—

 
From Famous Avenue to West Highway 50
 

1927

 

6-30-1997




East and West

 
From Highway 50 to Atlantic
 

1408

 

11-20-1989



Hilgard Street
 

West

 
From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
 

822

 

8-1-1977



Hilgard Street, South
 

West

 
30 feet north of north edge of West Fifth Street
 

1671

 

1-31-1994




West

 
25 feet south of south edge of West Fifth Street
 

1671

 

1-31-1994




West

 
25 feet north of north edge of West Seventh Street
 

1671

 

1-31-1994




West

 
30 feet south of south edge of West Seventh Street
 

1671

 

1-31-1994



Hilltop Lane
 

—

 
—
 

3911

 

12-7-2015



Illini Drive
 

Both

 
From Kyle Road to a point 1,140 feet south of Kyle Road
 

2030

 

3-1-1999



Jaclyn Drive
 

—

 
—
 

3329

 

4-18-2005



Lincoln, North
 

East

 
From the alley between State and Washington to Jefferson
 

1325

 

8-15-1990



Lincoln Avenue, South
 

—

 
At any place between the point where said street crosses the tracks of the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad and the intersection of said Lincoln Avenue with
Third Street
 

306

 

2-6-1950



Lincoln Highway (FAU Route 9166)
 

Both

 
From Main Street east to 300 feet east of Eagle Drive
 

1277

 

11-2-1987




Both

 
From Old Collinsville Road east to Hartmen Lane
 

1094

 

3-19-1984



Lincoln Street
 

—

 
From Federal Aid Urban (F.A.U.) Route 9166 (Eighth Street) north to Seventh
Street
 

867

 

4-17-1978



Main Street
 

—

 
For a distance of 500 feet south of U.S. Highway 50
 

1324

 

8-1-1988




Both

 
From Harding to Highway 50
 

1474

 

4-1-1991




Both

 
From Lincoln Highway to Talon Drive
 

1277

 

11-2-1987



Mari Drive
 

West

 
From a point at the intersection of Mari Drive and the south side of Old
Highway 50 for a distance back 150 feet from the corner
 

909

 

4-2-1979



Moye School Road
 

Both

 
East of Victoria adjacent to Moye Elementary School
 

3513

 

5-7-2007



New Car Drive
 

Both

 
The entire length of the street
 

2058

 

11-3-1999



Oak Street
 

East

 
Commencing at Third Street for a distance of 40 feet north
 

1576

 

10-19-1992




East

 
First 50 feet between Second Street and Third Street
 

3600,



3610

 

12-1-2008,



2-2-2009



Oak Street, South
 

East

 
60 feet south of the south edge of West Third Street
 

752

 

7-15-1974



Obernuefemann Road
 

Both

 
From Porter Road to the intersection of Obernuefemann and State Street;
excluding the on-street parking specifically provided on the east side of
Obernuefemann between Madison and Nixon
 

3730

 

10-17-2011



Old Collinsville Road
 

Both

 
From the I-64 Frontage Road to Milburn School Road
 

3636

 

9-8-2009



Park Plaza Drive
 

Both

 
 
 

1973

 

2-17-1998



Pierce Boulevard
 


 
From Greenmount Road to a point 1650 feet east
 

2089

 

2-7-2000



Planters Crossing Drive
 

West

 
Between Keck Ridge Drive and Nottinghill Drive
 

3449, 3764

 

6-5-2006, 6-4-2012



Porter Road
 

Both

 
From Venita Drive to Obernuefemann Road
 

3730

 

10-17-2011



Regency Park Drive
 

Both

 
Entire length
 

2047

 

8-2-1999



Route 50
 

Both

 
From Homestead Street to Old Collinsville Road
 

734

 

4-19-1973




Both

 
From the eastern city limits to the western city limits of the city
 

1214

 

10-6-1986



Route 50, Old (FAU Route 9166)
 

Both

 
From Smiley Street to 585 feet east of Timber Creek Lane
 

1423

 

3-19-1990



Route 50, West (FAU Route 9166)
 

Both

 
From 500 feet east of Schwaegal Road easterly to Ann Drive
 

1687

 

4-4-1994



School Street
 

East

 
Central Elementary School
 

3584

 

7-21-2008



Second Street
 

North

 
Between Lincoln Street and Cherry Street
 

538

 

1-3-1967



Seven Hills Road
 

Both

 
From State Street/Old Vincennes Trail to Betty Lane
 

2030

 

3-1-1999




West

 
From Betty Lane to East Highway 50
 

2030

 

3-1-1999



Seven Hills Road, North
 

—

 
From Old Vincennes Trail to Wildwood Lane
 

2084

 

1-18-2000



Seventh Street
 

North

 
From Lincoln west 50 feet
 

1441

 

7-2-1990



Seventh Street, East
 

North

 
25 feet from the corner of Lincoln Street
 

640

 

5-4-1970




South

 
In front of the apartment buildings
 

640

 

5-4-1970




North and South

 
Within 50 feet of Smiley Street
 

715

 

9-17-1972



Sixth Street
 

North and South

 
Within 50 feet of Smiley Street
 

715

 

9-17-1972



Sixth Street, East
 

South

 
Between South Augusta and South Smiley Streets
 

715

 

9-17-1972



Smiley Street
 

East and West

 
From State Street to a point 50 feet south of the railroad tracks
 

988

 

9-9-1981




East

 
From a point at the south entrance to the high school extending south along
South Smiley Street a distance of 65 feet
 

1256

 

5-18-1987




East and West

 
For 250 feet north of FAU Route 9166 (Eighth Street)
 

1140

 

3-18-1985



State Street
 

Both

 
From Carson Drive east to the corporate limits
 

1639

 

8-30-1993




North

 
From a point at the intersection of West State Street and the east side of
North Oak Street for a distance back 100 feet from the corner
 

488

 

10-16-1961



State Street, East
 

South

 
From Penn Street to Carson Drive
 

846

 

2-15-1978



State Street, West
 

South

 
From Willow Street to Oak Street
 

846

 

2-15-1978



Third Street
 

North

 
From Smiley Street to Cherry Street
 

775

 

10-20-1975



Third Street
 
North and South
 
From Highway 50 to Walnut Street
 

4010

 
10-16-2017


Third Street
 
North
 
From Walnut Street to Cherry Street
 

4010

 
10-16-2017


Venita Drive
 

Both

 
From the CSX Railroad crossing to Porter Road
 

3730

 

10-17-2011



Vine, South
 

East and North

 
From Fifth Street to Parkview Drive
 

822

 

8-1-1977



Walnut Street
 

East

 
150 feet south of Highway 50 to Pierce Boulevard except where said street is
44 feet wide
 

1318

 

6-20-1988




East and West

 
From Highway 50 to a point 100 feet south of Highway 50
 

1301

 

3-7-1988



Weber
 

East

 
Northbound from Agnes to Third Street
 

1859

 

7-15-1996



Weber Drive
 

East

 
From Highway 50 to a point north at the north driveway
 

1809

 

12-18-1995



Weber Road
 

West

 
From the stop sign at East Highway 50 to 100 ft. north of the intersection of
Weber Road and East Highway 50. Also included shall be the first 10 ft. on
either side of the first parking lot entrance located just north of the
intersection of Weber Road and East Highway 50
 

2075

 

12-6-1999



Wildwood
 

North

 
From Smiley to Seven Hills Road
 

1344

 

11-21-1988



Willow
 

Both

 
250 feet south of Washington to State Street
 

1261

 

4-6-1987





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 78, Schd. I)



SCHEDULE II. LIMITED PARKING.



   No person shall park a vehicle at any of the following places, except
as hereby designated:



 


Limited Parking




Street

 

Location

 

Limitations

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Agnes Street
 
On either side
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session
 

1564

 

8-17-1992



All property alongside and adjacent to any and all schools, except the high
school
 
 
 
No parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. during school terms,
except on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays
 

402,



988

 

3-3-1958,



9-9-1981



August Street
 
From Seventh Street to Eighth Street
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session, except as hereinafter stated2
 

1006

 

3-1-1982



From Fourth Street to Seventh Street
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session, except as hereinafter stated1
 

988

 

9-9-1981



Cherry Street
 
On the east side for the first 50 feet north of West Fifth Street
 
Two hour parking
 

3574

 

5-5-2008



Dartmouth
 
On the north side from Lincoln to DeSoto
 
No parking from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
 

1386

 

7-31-1989



Fifth Street
 
On the south side between Oak and Cherry
 
No parking between 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on
school days
 

1880

 

11-18-1996



Fifth Street, West
 
On the north side for the first 50 feet east of Cherry Street
 
Two-hour parking
 

3574

 

5-5-2008



First Street, East
 
Between South Vine Street and South Apple Street
 
Resident only parking
 

4072

 

12-17-2018



Fourth Street, Fifth Street, Sixth Street and Seventh Street
 
From South Smiley to Hilgard
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session, except as hereinafter stated1
 

988

 

9-9-1981



Hilgard Street
 
On the east side from Fourth Street to Seventh Street
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session, except as hereinafter stated1
 

988

 

9-9-1981



On the east side from Seventh Street to Eighth Street
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session except as hereinafter stated2
 

1006

 

3-1-1982



Jamestown Road
 
On both sides, between Highway 50 and Holliday Drive
 
During the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 while the high school is in session
 

3983

 

4-17-2017



Lincoln Avenue, North
 
On the west side from the alley south to Washington Street; and from
Washington Street to State Street
 
Two hour parking only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.
 

1155, 3230

 

7-1-1985,



1-20-2004



Lincoln Avenue, South
 
From Third Street south to Seventh Street; on the east side from First Street
to Third Street
 
Two hour parking only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Mondays
through Saturdays
 

908, 3230

 

4-16-1979, 1-20-2004



Oak Street
 
On the east side commencing at a point 40 feet north of Third Street to the
alley
 
No parking from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days
 

1576

 

10-19-1992



The first 75 feet on the east and west sides, south of Third Street
 
No parking on school days
 

3610

 

2-2-2009



Seventh Street
 
On the south side for a distance of 150 feet west of Lincoln Street
 
One-hour parking
 

1573

 

9-21-1992



Seventh Street, East
 
Between Vine Street and Parkview Drive
 
 
 

932

 

9-17-1979



Between Lincoln Street and Vine Street
 
Parking limit one hour, except in front of apartment buildings
 

962

 

7-21-1980



Seventh Street, West
 
On the south side for the first 50 feet west of Lincoln
 
One hour parking
 

3536

 

9-4-2007



Smiley Street, North
 
On the east side from East Wesley Drive to 200 feet north
 
No parking from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
 

4083

 

2-19-2019



Smiley Street, North
 
On the east side from Emily to East Wesley Street
 
No parking from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
 

1404

 

11-6-1989



Smiley Street, South
 
On the east side from the north premises of the high school property to a
point 50 feet south of the railroad tracks
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session, except as hereinafter stated1
 

988

 

9-9-1981



On the west side from Eighth Street north to a point 50 feet south of the
railroad tracks
 
No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. while the high school
is in session, except as hereinafter stated1
 

988

 

9-9-1981



On the east side from Highway 50 to the south property line of 402 South
Smiley
 
No parking from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. weekdays
 

1910

 

4-7-1997



State Street, East
 
Between Vine and 122 feet west of the west line of Pen Street
 
Two-hour parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
 

1357

 

1-30-1989



Washington Street, East
 
On the north side commencing at a point 20 feet east of Lincoln Street for a
distance of 40 feet, and also commencing from a point 20 feet west of Vine
Street for a distance of 75 feet
 
Two-hour parking only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.
 

1032

 

10-18-1982



On the south side, from the intersection of Smiley Street and East Washington
Street and extending west on the south side of East Washington Street for a
distance of 100 feet
 
Reserved for parking for vehicles bearing registration plates or decals
issued to a person with disabilities as defined by § 70.001 of the code of
ordinances of the city, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616,
11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 3-609
 

2079

 

12-20-1999



NOTES TO TABLE:


1   The Clerk shall issue permits to residents residing on the above
streets permitting the residents to park on said streets during the school
sessions between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. The cost of said permit
to be borne by the resident. (Ord. 988, passed 9-9-1981)



2   The Clerk shall issue permits to the residents residing on the above
streets permitting the residents to park on said streets during the school
session between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. The cost of said permit
to be borne by the resident. (Ord. 1006, passed 3-1-1982)





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 78, Schd. II)



SCHEDULE III. ANGLE PARKING.



   Angle parking for motor vehicles is required on the following city
streets:



 

Street
 
Description
 

Sides

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



East First Street
 
From Lincoln Street to Vine Street where striping exists
 

North and South

 

3087

 

12-17-2001



West Adams
 
West for the first 150 feet from the intersection with N. Cherry
 

North

 

3690

 

10-4-2010



West First Street

 
 
From Lincoln Street to Cherry Street where striping exists
 

North and South

 

3087

 

12-17-2001



From Oak Street to Cherry Street where striping exists
 

North

 

3087

 

12-17-2001




 



(1999 Code, Ch. 78, Schd. III)



SCHEDULE IV. SNOW ROUTES.



   The following streets are designated as snow routes:



 


Snow Routes



Street
 
Location
 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Ambrose Drive
 
Milburn School Road to Fairway Wood Drive
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Arbor Green Trail
 
Simmons Road to Ashfield Glen Court
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Ashfield Glen Court
 
Arbor Green Trail to Moorfield Park Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Auto Court Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Bethel Ridge Farms Boulevard
 
Bethel Road to Hidden Wagon Way
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Bethel Road
 
North Lincoln to Bellhaven Drive
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Berringer Drive
 
Entrance of Crown Pointe Subdivision to Lancaster Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Cambridge Boulevard
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Central Avenue
 
School Street to Long Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Central Park Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Cherry Street
 
Highway 50 to Third Street
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Chesapeake Junction Lane
 
Old Collinsville Road to Norfolk Way
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Civic Plaza
 
All
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Cobble Ridge Drive
 
Weil Road to Shadow Rock Court
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Colleen Drive
 
From Walnut Street to Nancy Drive
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Collinsville Road, Old
 
From Old Route 50 to R.R.
 

1139

 

3-4-1985



Country Oaks Lane
 
Oak Meadow Drive to Highway 50
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Dartmouth Drive
 
From Lincoln to DeSoto
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From South Lincoln to Princeton
 

996

 

11-16-1981



Dartmouth Drive, Matthew Drive, Dartmouth Drive, Timber Creek Lane
 
Beginning at the intersection of Princeton Drive and proceeding eastward to
DeSoto Drive and to include city streets immediately adjacent to school
property on the west side of the school to permit on-loading and discharge of
students
 

831

 

11-7-1977



Deer Creek Road
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Delmar Avenue
 
Long Drive to Hartman Lane
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



DeSoto Drive
 
From Dartmouth Drive to Matthew
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From Dartmouth Drive north to Matthew Drive thence easterly on Matthew Drive
to Dartmouth Drive thence east on Dartmouth Drive to Timber Creek Lane thence
northerly on Timber Creek Lane to east Highway 50
 

1600

 

4-5-1993



Eastgate Drive
 
All
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Edgewood Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005



Timber Creek to Hawthorne
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Emerald Green Drive
 
Hillock Lane to Terrace Green Lane
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Entrance of Crown Pointe Subdivision
 
O’Fallon-Troy Road to Berringer Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Erics Run
 
Nottinghill Drive to Keck Ridge
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Fairway Wood Drive
 
Ambrose Drive to Green Jacket Way
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Fairwood Hills Drive
 
From Elizabeth Drive east to North Lincoln Street
 

1600

 

4-5-1993



Fairwood Hills Road
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Fifth Street
 
Oak Street to South Lincoln Avenue
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



First Street
 
South Lincoln to Vine
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Gambier Terrace Court
 
Moorfield Park Drive to Arbor Green Trail
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Green Jacket Way
 
Fairway Wood Drive to Old Collinsville Road
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Greystone Place
 
South on Nottinghill Drive to Planters Crossing
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



From Thornbury Place to Nottinghill Drive
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Hartman Lane
 
From Highway 50 to Terrace Green Lane
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From Old Route 50 to Meadowbrook Drive
 

1139

 

3-4-1985



From Meadowbrook Drive to Terrace Green Lane
 

3310,



3395

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005



Three Rivers Drive to Terrace Green Lane
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Hawthorne Place
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Hearthstone Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Highway 50
 
Hartman Lane to Lakepointe Centre
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Highway 50, West
 
From Old Collinsville Road east to Hartman Lane
 

1600,



3560

 

4-5-1993,



1-22-2008



Hillock Lane
 
Jade Drive to Emerald Green Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Hollander Court
 
Longfellow Drive to Thoreau Drive
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Illini Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Jade Drive
 
Terrace Green Lane to Hillock Lane
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Jamestown Road
 
Monterey Drive to Highway 50
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Juniper Drive
 
From the intersection of Persimmon Drive east to and terminating at Willow
Drive
 

831

 

11-7-1977



From Willow to Persimmon
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Keck Ridge Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Kyle Road
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Lakepointe Centre Drive
 
Highway 50 to Oak Meadow Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Lancaster Drive
 
Berringer Drive to Regal Court
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Larkway Drive
 
River Birch Drive to Pausch Road
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Lincoln Avenue, North
 
From Indian Springs Road to 300 feet north of Fairwood Hills Drive
 

1139

 

3-4-1985



Robert Lane to Summerlin Ridge
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Lincoln Avenue, South
 
Highway 50 to Pierce Boulevard
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Lincoln Farm Road
 
All
 

3310,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



1-22-2008



Lincoln Street
 
From Highway 50 to Robert
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From Robert Street on North Lincoln south to Highway 50 on South Lincoln
 

831

 

11-7-1977



Long Drive
 
Highway 50 to Delmar Avenue
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Longfellow Drive
 
From Merriam Parkway to Hawthorne Place Drive
 

3395

 

11-21-2005



From Merriam Parkway to Hightower Drive
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Longfellow Drive
 
Merriam Parkway to Hollander Court
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Madison Street
 
Hesse Park Entrance to Persimmon Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Madison, West
 
Beginning at Oberhueffemann Road and proceeding eastward to Persimmon Drive
 

831,



3560

 

11-7-1977,



1-22-2008



Matthew
 
From Dartmouth Drive to Princeton
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Merriam Parkway
 
All
 

3395

 

11-21-2005



From Milburn School Road to Longfellow Drive
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Milburn Estates Drive
 
Milburn School Road to Portsmouth Place Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Milburn School Road
 
Portions contained by or adjacent to the city boundary
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Simmons Road to Pausch Road
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



Old Collinsville Road to Simmons Road
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Moorfield Park Drive
 
Ashfield Glen Court to Gambier Terrace Court
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Moye School Road
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Nancy Drive
 
From Colleen Drive to Ruth Drive
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Natalyns Trace
 
All
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Natalyns Trace
 
Shadow Rock Court to Torchlight Lane
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



New Car Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Norfolk Way
 
Chesapeake Junction Lane to Sturbridge Trail
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



North Green Mount Road
 
Regency Park to West Highway 50
 

4071

 
12-17-2018


Nottinghill Drive
 
From Greystone to Erics Run
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Oak Meadow Drive
 
Lakepointe Centre Drive to County Oaks Lane
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Oak Street
 
Highway 50 to Third Street
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Obernuefemann
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Ogle Road
 
Obernuefemann Road to Madison Street
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Old Collinsville Road
 
From Highway 50 north to the city boundary
 

3395

 

11-21-2005



Portions contained by or adjacent to city boundary, excluding the portion
from Chesapeake Junction Road to Kildea Road
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Frontage Road to Rowe Lane
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Old Vincennes Trail
 
From Seven Hills Road to Scott Troy Road
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



State Street to Seven Hills Road
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Park Plaza Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Pausch Road
 
From Milburn School Road to Larkway
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Persimmon Drive
 
From Milburn School Road to Larkway
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From Juniper Drive to Madison Street
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From West Madison Street south to and terminating at Juniper Drive
 

831

 

11-7-1977



Pierce Boulevard
 
All
 

1139,



3310,



3395,



3560

 

3-4-1985,



12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Planters Crossing
 
From Nottinghill Drive to Keck Ridge Drive
 

3310,



3395

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005



Porter Road
 
All
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Princeton Drive
 
From Vanderbilt Place to Dartmouth Drive
 

831,



3395,



3560

 

11-7-1977,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Red Hawk Ridge Lane
 
Milburn School Road to Wolfpass Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Regal Court
 
Lancaster Drive to Lancaster Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Regency Park Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Richland Park Drive
 
Three Rivers Drive to Stone Hill Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Ridge Pointe Drive
 
Sturbridge Trail to Stone Briar Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



River Birch Drive
 
Wiegerstown Drive to Larkway Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Ruth Drive
 
From Nancy Drive to South Lincoln Avenue
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Rutherford Ridge
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Savannah Hills Boulevard
 
Old Collinsville Road to Milburn School Road
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Savoy
 
From Terracotta Place to Ingleside
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



School Street
 
Delmar Avenue to Central Avenue
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Schwaegel Road
 
From the Old Illinois Terminal Railroad Crossing north to State Street
 

1600

 

4-5-1993



Schwaegel Road (N. Greenmount)
 
From Highway 50 (at North Greenmount) to State Street
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Second
 
South Lincoln to Vine
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Second Street, East

Vine Street, South
 
From South Lincoln Street east to South Vine Street then north on South Vine
Street to East State Street
 

1600

 

4-5-1993



Seven Hills Road
 
From Highway 50 to Willard Drive
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



From New Public Safety Building to north of Timber Oak Road
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



From Wildwood Lane to Seven Hills water tower
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



Wildwood Lane to Timber Oak Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Dustin Lane to Betty Lane
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



From Wildwood Lane north to Thornbury Place
 

1600

 

4-5-1993



Portions contained by or adjacent to the city boundary
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Shadow Ridge Crossing
 
From Saint Nicholas Drive to Wildwood Lane
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



From Wildwood Lane to Wesley
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From Wildwood Lane to Wheatfield Road
 

3395

 

11-21-2005



Shadow Rock Court
 
Cobble Ridge Drive to Natalyns Trace
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Simmons Road
 
Kyle Road to Fairwood Hills Road
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



Portions contained by or adjacent to the city boundary
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Milburn School Road to Porter Road
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Smiley Street
 
From State to Wildwood Drive
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Highway 50 to State Street
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Wildwood Lane to Deer Creek Road
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Smiley Street, North
 
From Wesley Drive East south to Highway 50 on South Smiley Street
 

831

 

11-7-1977



From Wesley Drive to 200 feet north of Shallowbrook Drive
 

1139

 

3-4-1985



Southview Drive
 
All
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From Highway 50 to the intersection of Vanderbilt Drive and Princeton Drive
 

831

 

11-7-1977



St. Ellen Mine Road
 
Highway 50 to end of St. Ellen Mine Park
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



St. Nicholas
 
All
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



State Street
 
From Highway 50 to Seven Hills Road
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



State Street, West
 
From West Highway 50 east to East State Street at the intersection of Carson
Drive
 

831

 

11-7-1977



Stone Briar Drive
 
Ridge Pointe Drive to Old Collinsville Road
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Stone Hill Drive
 
Richland Park Drive to Three Rivers Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Sturbridge Trail
 
Norfolk Way to Ridge Pointe Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Summerlin Ridge
 
From North Lincoln Avenue to Lincoln Farm Road
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Taylor Road
 
All
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Terrace Green Lane
 
Hartman Lane to Jade Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Terracotta
 
All
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Third Street
 
All
 

831,



1139,



1600,



3310,



3395,



3560

 

11-7-1977,



3-4-1985,



4-5-1993,



12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Thoreau Drive
 
Hollander Court to Vandunn Drive
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Thornbury Place
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Three Rivers Drive
 
Hartman Lane to Richland Park Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Timber Creek
 
All
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Timber Ridge Trace Drive
 
All
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Torchlight Lane
 
All
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Treybrooke
 
From Scott Troy Road to Terracotta
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Vandunn Drive
 
Longfellow Drive to Thoreau Drive
 

4071

 

12-17-2018



Venita Drive
 
All
 

3310,



3395,



3560

 

12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Victoria
 
From Moye School Road to Thornbury
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Vine Street
 
From State Street to Second Street
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Vine Street, North
 
From East Washington Street to East State Street
 

1139

 

3-4-1985



Walnut Street
 
All
 

1139,



1600,



3310,



3395,



3560

 

3-4-1985,



4-5-1993,



12-20-2004,



11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Washington Street, East
 
From North Lincoln Avenue to North Vine Street
 

1139

 

3-4-1985



Weber Drive
 
From Highway 50 to Third Street
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From East Third Street to Old Route 50
 

1139

 

3-4-1985



Weil Road
 
Portions contained by or adjacent to the city boundary
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Wesley Drive
 
From the intersection of North Lincoln east to the intersection of North
Smiley Street
 

831

 

11-7-1977



From Lincoln to end east of Seven Hills
 

3395

 

11-21-2005



From Lincoln to Seven Hills Road
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



From Seven Hills Road to end of Wesley Drive
 

3310

 

12-20-2004



Westminster Drive
 
From South Lincoln Avenue to Princeton Drive
 

3395,



3560

 

11-21-2005,



1-22-2008



Wiegerstown Drive
 
Pausch Road to River Birch Drive
 

3725

 

8-15-2011



Wildwood Lane
 
From North Smiley Street northeast to Seven Hills Road
 

1600

 

4-5-1993



From Seven Hills Road to Scott Troy Road
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Willow Drive
 
From Juniper Drive south to Karl Street and then east eastward to State Street
 

831

 

11-7-1977



From State Street to Juniper Drive
 

3560

 

1-22-2008



Wolfpass Drive
 
Red Hawk Ridge Lane to Naturescape Court
 

3725

 

8-15-2011





 



(1999 Code, Ch. 78, Schd. IV)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



      92.   CEMETERY



      93.   LIBRARY



      94.   NUISANCES



      95.   PARKS



      96.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      97.   FIRE PREVENTION



      98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      99.   TREES AND SHRUBS



      100.   OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS



      101.   OUTDOOR LODGING



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Cruelty to animals prohibited



   90.03   Dangerous dogs prohibited



   90.04   Noisy animals



   90.05   Killing dangerous animals



   90.06   Diseased animals



   90.07   Certain animals restricted to Agricultural and Rural
Residential Districts



   90.08   Wild animals



   90.09   Non-traditional pets



   90.10   Defecation control



   90.11   Identification tags




Rabies Control




   90.25   Inoculation requirement



   90.26   Veterinarian to inoculate; certificates; rabies tags



   90.27   Frequency of inoculations



   90.28   Exhibition of certificate upon request




Impoundment




   90.40   City pound



   90.41   Animals at large



   90.42   Animals that have bitten persons



   90.43   Nuisance animals




Administration and Enforcement




   90.55   Director of Public Safety



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AT LARGE. Any dog, cat or other domesticated animal running AT LARGE
means an animal which is not on a leash controlled by the owner or his or her
agent, or restrained or confined to or within a building, fence, car, or
other physical enclosure of sufficient design and construction to reasonably
ensure the confinement of the particular animal to an area occupied by the
owner. Invisible/electronic/hidden fences are not an enclosure of sufficient
design and construction to reasonably ensure the confinement of the
particular animal to an area occupied by the owner.



   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. The Department of Agriculture of the state.
DOG. Includes a female, as well as a male.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. The following are considered to be DOMESTIC ANIMALS:



      (1)   Dogs (not including hybrids of dogs);



      (2)   Cats (not including hybrids of cats);



      (3)   Domestic rodents (guinea pigs, hamsters, white rats,
white mice);



      (4)   Farm animals (any member of the swine, ovine, caprine,
bovine or equine families, poultry or rabbits);



      (5)   Non-life-threatening non-poisonous reptiles or
amphibians;



      (6)   Non-poisonous, non-life-threatening fish; and



      (7)   All birds, except those protected as wild birds by state
or federal statutes.



   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise,
as approved by the Department of Agriculture of the state, of canine
anti-rabid vaccine, approved by the Department of Agriculture.



   INVISIBLE/ELECTRONIC/HIDDEN FENCE. Any electronic system designed to
keep a pet or other domestic animal within a set of predefined boundaries
without the use of a physical barrier.



   LEASH. A cord, rope, strap, or chain, which shall be securely fastened
to the collar or harness of a dog, cat or other animal and shall be of
sufficient strength to keep such dog, cat or other animal under control.
LEASHES shall be of a reasonable length to maintain control of the animal and
to not impede the use and enjoyment of the parks for other patrons.



   OWNER. A person having a right of property in a dog, cat, or other
domesticated animal, or who keeps or harbors such an animal, or who knowingly
has in his or her care, or who acts as its custodian, or knowingly permits
such domesticated animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by the
person.



   UNDER CONTROL/RESTRAINT. A dog is UNDER CONTROL OR RESTRAINT within the
meaning of this chapter if it is; within a vehicle being driven or parked on
the streets or parking lots, unable to climb out of an opening in the
vehicle; or within the property limits of its owner or keeper; or controlled
by a leash. Animals must be kept on a leash, at all times when not on the
personal property of the animal’s owner. At no time shall any domesticated
animal be off leash in City of O’Fallon parks, streets, sidewalks, and any
other city owned property, except where posted.



(1999 Code, § 90.01)  (Ord. 770, passed 9-15-1975; Ord. 4066, passed
11-19-2018)



§ 90.02  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way; any
person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.



(1999 Code, § 90.02)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  DANGEROUS DOGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain or
have in the person’s possession or control within the corporate limits of
the city any dangerous dog.



   (B)   DANGEROUS DOG means:



      (1)   Any dog which has inflicted severe injury on a human
being without provocation on public or private property;



      (2)   Any dog which has killed a domestic animal without
provocation while off the owner’s property; or



      (3)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the
purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.



(1999 Code, § 90.03)  (Ord. 1321, passed 7-5-1988)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  NOISY ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the
peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.



(1999 Code, § 90.04)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   The members of the Police Department or any other persons in the city
are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when necessary for
the protection of any person or property.



(1999 Code, § 90.05)



§ 90.06  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an
infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any
public place whereby the health of humans or beasts may be affected; nor
shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner thereof, except under the supervision of the Health Officer.



   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of the Police Chief to secure such
disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as
to prevent the communication and spread of contagion or infection, except in
cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act.



(1999 Code, § 90.06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  CERTAIN ANIMALS RESTRICTED TO AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   It shall be unlawful to keep any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats or
more than six bee hives in the city, unless within a zoned Agricultural
District or Rural Residential District, in accordance with § 158.037.



(1999 Code, § 90.07)  (Ord. 875, passed 8-7-1978; Ord. 3817, passed
2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  WILD ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or maintain in the
city any small farm or place where animals that are ferae naturae, not
domestic, are kept or raised without having first secured a permit therefore.
Applications for such permits shall be made in compliance with the provisions
of this code of ordinances, and the annual fee therefor shall be $100.



   (B)   Any premises so used shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, with adequate fences to restrain such animals within the place and
to prevent children from coming into contact with any such animal. All such
places shall be cleaned at least twice a week and more often as may be
necessary to prevent the accumulation of refuse, decaying matter or any other
offensive substance thereon; and such places shall be kept free from rodents.



(1999 Code, § 90.08)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  NON-TRADITIONAL PETS.



   The keeping of other animals or pets is permitted; provided that:



   (A)   There shall be no more than one animal per household or per
acre;



   (B)   Such animals shall be confined within a suitably fenced area;
and



   (C)   Their keeping does not constitute a nuisance or hazard to the
peace, health and welfare of the community in general and neighbors in
particular.



(1999 Code, § 90.09)  (Ord. 1531, passed 3-19-1992)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  DEFECATION CONTROL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog
to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such
person unless such person has in his or her immediate possession a device for
the removal of excrement and a depository for the transmission of excrement
to a receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in control of, causing or
permitting any dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or
possessed by such person to fail to remove excrement left by such dog to a
proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person.



(1999 Code, § 90.10)  (Ord. 1554, passed 7-6-1992)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.11  IDENTIFICATION TAGS.



   Every owner or keeper of a dog or cat, regardless of age, shall cause
the dog or cat to wear a collar or harness and shall affix the address and
phone number, if any, of the owner or keeper of the dog or cat.



(1999 Code, § 90.11)  (Ord. 770, passed 9-15-1975)  Penalty, see § 90.99



RABIES CONTROL



§ 90.25  INOCULATION REQUIREMENT.



   Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog
or cat shall cause such dog or cat to be inoculated against rabies. Such
owner or keeper of such a dog or cat shall cause a serially numbered tag
evidencing such inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the
dog or cat.



(1999 Code, § 90.20)  (Ord. 770, passed 9-15-1975)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.26  VETERINARIAN TO INOCULATE; CERTIFICATES; RABIES TAGS.



   (A)   The inoculation of dogs or cats required by § 90.25 of this
chapter shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice his or
her profession in this state. Upon performing such inoculation, such
veterinarian shall issue to the owner or keeper a certificate showing such
fact and shall also deliver to the owner or keeper a metallic or other
suitable tag to be attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat, which
tag shall also certify to the fact of inoculation against rabies.



   (B)   The tag issued for dogs under the provisions of division (A)
above shall be in such form as shall be determined by the Department of
Agriculture.



(1999 Code, § 90.21)  (Ord. 770, passed 9-15-1975)



§ 90.27  FREQUENCY OF INOCULATIONS.



   The inoculation performed under the provisions of § 90.26 of this
chapter shall be effective until the expiration of the calendar year in which
the vaccination was performed or the expiration of such period of time as may
be promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.



(1999 Code, § 90.22)



§ 90.28  EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE UPON REQUEST.



   At any reasonable time, upon request of any member of the Police
Department, the owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall exhibit the
certificate issued under the provisions of § 90.26 of this chapter showing
the inoculation against rabies of any dog or cat owned or controlled by the
person.



(1999 Code, § 90.23)  Penalty, see § 90.99



IMPOUNDMENT



§ 90.40  CITY POUND.



   The city hereby designates the County Animal Services as the animal
impoundment facility for the impoundment of dogs, cats or other domesticated
animals. All rules, policies, procedures and fees relative to the impoundment
of these animals shall be as instituted by County Animal Services.



(1999 Code, § 90.35)  (Ord. 770, passed 9-15-1975)



§ 90.41  ANIMALS AT LARGE.



   (A)   The owner or keeper of a dog, cat or domesticated animal shall
keep the dog, cat or domesticated animal under restraint at all times and
shall not permit such dog, cat or domesticated animal to be at large, off the
premises of the property of the owner or keeper, unless the dog, cat or
domesticated animal is under complete control, as defined in § 90.01 of this
chapter.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of such employees and officers of the
Police Department as shall be designated for that purpose by the Director of
Public Safety to take up and impound, in such place as may be designated and
set apart for that purpose, any dog, cat or domesticated animal found running
at large contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or other code of
the city.



   (C)   When dogs, cats or domesticated animals are found running at
large, and their ownership is known to the designated employees, such dogs,
cats or domesticated animals may be impounded at the discretion of such
employees, but the employees shall cite the owner of such dog, cat or
domesticated animal to answer charges of violation of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 90.36)  (Ord. 655, passed 7-20-1970; Ord. 1682, passed
3-7-1994)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.42  ANIMALS THAT HAVE BITTEN PERSONS.



   (A)   Any dog, cat or other domesticated animals which have bitten
or otherwise injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall
be immediately taken, impounded and kept separated from other dogs, cats or
other domesticated animals for ten days. If, during that period, such dog,
cat or other domesticated animal develops symptoms of illness, a veterinarian
shall be called to diagnose its condition. If the symptoms disclosed are such
as to indicate the presence of rabies, such dog, cat or other domesticated
animal shall be destroyed, in such a manner, however, as to preserve intact
the head, which shall thereupon be detached and immediately sent to the
diagnostic laboratory of the Department of Agriculture. In case such dog, cat
or other domesticated animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded, it may
be shot, care being taken to preserve the head intact which shall thereupon
be immediately detached and be delivered to the diagnostic laboratory of the
Department of Agriculture.



   (B)   If, at the expiration of the period of ten days, no symptoms
of rabies have been developed in such dog, cat or other domesticated animal
so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the
redemption fees and charges specified under § 90.40 of this chapter;
provided, however, that, in case any dog, cat or other domesticated animal so
impounded for biting a person shall have previously bitten any person, such
dog, cat or other domesticated animal shall be humanely destroyed by the
poundkeeper. After having been notified that his or her dog, cat or other
domesticated animal has bitten or otherwise injured any person, the owner or
keeper thereof shall not, under any circumstances, permit such animal to be
at large unless securely muzzled.



(1999 Code, § 90.37)  (Ord. 770, passed 9-15-1975)



§ 90.43  NUISANCE ANIMALS.



   Any dog, cat or other domesticated animal which may, in any manner,
continually disturb the quiet of any person or neighborhood, or shall destroy
or in any manner injure any animal, plant, shrub or other property not on the
premises of its owner or keeper is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such
dog, cat or other domesticated animal shall be taken up and impounded and may
be redeemed, or disposed of in the manner provided for under § 90.40.



(1999 Code, § 90.38)  (Ord. 770, passed 9-15-1975)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 90.55  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.



   Except as to the regulations concerning inoculation against rabies, the
Director of Public Safety is charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of §§ 90.11, 90.25 through 90.28 and 90.40 through 90.43 of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 90.50)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates any requirements set forth in § 90.03
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 10.99
of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 90.03)  (Ord. 1321, passed 7-5-1988)



CHAPTER 91:  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Abandonment



   91.03   Duty of non-owner to report possession of abandoned, stolen
and other vehicles



   91.04   Towing; responsibility for costs



   91.05   Towing records



   91.06   Identification of owner; notice



   91.07   Redemption



   91.08   Sale of newer vehicles; notice



   91.09   Sale and disposal of older vehicles; no notice required



   91.10   Sale and disposal records



   91.11   Sale and disposal proceeds



   91.12   Liability of city and others



Cross-reference:



   Drive-in restaurants; vehicles left at drive-in restaurants, see §
131.05



   Towing companies; operating regulations, see Ch. 122



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicles, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 4-201 et seq.



   Inoperable motor vehicle, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE. All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of
disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition;
or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for
seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years of age or
older.



   HIGHWAY. Any street, alley or public way within the city.



(1999 Code, § 91.01)



§ 91.02  ABANDONMENT.



   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or part thereof on
any highway in the municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties as set
forth herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicles or any
part thereof on private or public property, other than a highway, in view of
the general public, anywhere in this municipality is unlawful, except on
property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or
other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be
authorized for removal by or upon the order of the Chief of the Police
Department of the municipality, after a waiting period of seven days or more
has expired.



(1999 Code, § 91.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  DUTY OF NON-OWNER TO REPORT POSSESSION OF ABANDONED, STOLEN AND
OTHER VEHICLES.



   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this
state, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the
City Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the
municipality. Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of the Police
Department shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of
the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The
towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain
a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other
person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as
provided in this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 91.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.04  TOWING; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.



   (A)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a
highway in the municipality ten hours or more, its removal by a towing
service may be authorized by orders of the Chief of the Police Department of
the municipality.



   (B)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard
because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance
is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by
a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of the Police
Department of the municipality.



   (C)   When removal of a vehicle from either public or private
property is authorized by order of the Chief of the Police Department of the
municipality, the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing
costs.



(1999 Code, § 91.04)



§ 91.05  TOWING RECORDS.



   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away,
the Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing by color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name,
manufacture’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, the location towed from, the location towed
to, the reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.



(1999 Code, § 91.05)



§ 91.06  IDENTIFICATION OF OWNER; NOTICE.



   (A)   When the municipality Police Department does not know the
identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person, it will
cause the motor vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a
directed communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining
the required ownership information.



   (B)   The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle
files of the State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the
State Police for stolen or wanted information of the vehicle. When the State
Police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the
State Police. The information determined from these record searches will be
used by the Police Department in sending a notification by certified mail to
the owner or legally entitled person, advising where the vehicle is held,
requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.



   (C)   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from
the registration files of the state or from the registration files of a
foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the State
Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle’s owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained
by the State Police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement
agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of owner.



(1999 Code, § 91.06)



§ 91.07  REDEMPTION.



   Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale
or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled
to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police
Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this
section until all towing and storage charges have been paid, including a
storage charge of $5 for each 24 hours or part thereof, to the city for any
vehicle stored on property owned by the city.



(1999 Code, § 91.07)  (Ord. 747, passed 5-20-1974)



§ 91.08  SALE OF NEWER VEHICLES; NOTICE.



   (A)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle
or other vehicle, seven years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the
registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to its
possession for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided
herein, the Police Department or towing service having possession of the
vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to a person licensed as an
automotive parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor under the State
Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 5-101 et seq.). Notice of the time
and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten
days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded.
At least ten days prior to the sale, such Department or service shall cause a
notice of the time and place to be sent by certified mail to the registered
owner, lienholder or other person known by the Police Department or towing
service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice
shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.



   (B)   In those instances where the certified notification specified
herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department
or towing service due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the
address obtained from the registration records of the state, the sending of a
second certified notice will not be required.



(1999 Code, § 91.08)



§ 91.09  SALE AND DISPOSAL OF OLDER VEHICLES; NO NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   When the identity of the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle
of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for
in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in
the manner authorized by this chapter, without notice to the registered owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.



   (B)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is
impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting
of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a
determination of disposition, an examination of the State Police stolen motor
vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the
ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received
from the registered owner, the Chief of Police will authorize the disposal of
the vehicle as junk only.



   (C)   A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique
vehicle is excluded from this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 91.09)



§ 91.10  SALE AND DISPOSAL RECORDS.



   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police
Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of
as provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained
by the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale
or disposal.



(1999 Code, § 91.10)



§ 91.11  SALE AND DISPOSAL PROCEEDS.



   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the municipality
is authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set
forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after
the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in
the municipal treasury.



(1999 Code, § 91.11)



§ 91.12  LIABILITY OF CITY AND OTHERS.



   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall
not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner, or his or her legal
representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a
motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or
disposed of as provided by this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 91.12)  (Ord. 654, passed 7-20-1970)



CHAPTER 92:  CEMETERY



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Cemetery system established



   92.02   Curfew



   92.03   Animals



   92.04   Fees and charges




Administration and Enforcement




   92.15   Director of Parks and Recreation



   92.16   Treasurer



   92.17   Clerk



   92.18   Powers of Director



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  CEMETERY SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.



   A cemetery system for the city is hereby created and shall hereafter be
maintained and operated as hereinafter set forth.



(1999 Code, § 92.01)  (Ord. 906, passed 4-2-1979; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 92.02  CURFEW.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to be on, in
or about properties, commonly designated as the O’Fallon City Cemetery,
between the hours of sunset and sunrise of each day.



(1999 Code, § 92.02)  (Ord. 906, passed 4-2-1979; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  ANIMALS.



   Domestic animals are hereby banned from the cemetery, except for guide
dogs.



(1999 Code, § 92.03)  (Ord. 1339, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.04  FEES AND CHARGES.



   The following charges for services by the city in the city cemetery are
hereby established:



 

Interment Fees


Day
 

Adult

 

Infant 0-2

 

Cremation






   Weekdays

 

$800

 

$300

 

$250




   Weekends

 

$1,000

 

$350

 

$300




   Holidays

 

$1,000

 

$350

 

$300



Cost of Graves



   Infant grave

 
Free to city residents

$250 non-residents to be divided: $125 for grave fee, $125 for perpetual care



   Adult grave

 
$600, to be divided: $300 for grave fee and $300 for perpetual care


Transfer Fee
 
Transfer fee of $25 will be charged per transaction, sold or transferred. No
additional charge will be assessed for perpetual care fee when a grave lot is
sold or transferred


Foundation costs
 
Foundation cost of $7 per cubic foot will remain the same




 



(1999 Code, § 92.04)  (Ord. 1481, passed 4-15-1991; Ord. 1852, passed
7-1-1996; Ord. 2003, passed 7-20-1998; Ord. 2078, passed 12-20-1999; Ord.
3654, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 92.15  DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the control,
supervision and direction of the city’s cemetery.



(1999 Code, § 92.15)  (Ord. 3200, passed 8-4-2003; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 92.16  TREASURER.



   The Director of Finance shall function as the Treasurer and shall have
custody of all money and property received in trust and shall pay all bills
in accordance with city policy. The Treasurer shall keep permanent books of
records of all such trust funds and of all receipts and disbursements
thereof. An annual report shall be prepared and audited of Cemetery Special
Revenue Funds. All other receipts and disbursements will be managed under the
City General Fund.



(1999 Code, § 92.18)  (Ord. 3200, passed 8-4-2003; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 92.17  CLERK.



   The City Clerk, in a book provided for such purpose, shall keep a
permanent record of those interred, lot ownership and lots sold. The Clerk
will work with the Director of Parks and Recreation from time to time as to
the policies to be pursued and laws necessary for the efficient operation of
the City Cemetery.



(1999 Code, § 92.19)  (Ord. 3200, passed 8-4-2003; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 92.18  POWERS OF DIRECTOR.



   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the powers vested by
the Cemetery Care Act (ILCS Ch. 760, Act 100, § 1 et seq.), and such other
powers and duties as may be delegated from time to time by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 92.20)  (Ord. 3200, passed 8-4-2003; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



CHAPTER 93:  LIBRARY



Section




General Provisions




   93.01   Library established




Administration




   93.15   Board of Directors; appointment



   93.16   Term of office; removal



   93.17   Vacancies; compensation



   93.18   Powers



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a public library and reading room for the
use and benefit of the inhabitants of the city.



(1999 Code, § 93.01)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 93.15  BOARD OF DIRECTORS; APPOINTMENT.



   The Mayor shall, with the approval of the City Council, proceed to
appoint a Board of nine Directors for the public library, chosen from the
citizens at large. One member of the City Council shall act as a liaison
between the Directors and the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 93.10)



§ 93.16  TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL.



   The Directors shall hold office one-third for one year, one-third for
two years and one-third for three years, from July 1 following their
appointment, and at their first regular meeting shall cast lots for the
respective terms; and annually thereafter the Mayor shall, before July 1 of
each year appoint as before three Directors, to take the place of the
retiring Directors, who shall hold office for three years, and until their
successors are appointed. The Mayor may, by and with the consent of the City
Council, remove any Director for misconduct or neglect of duty.



(1999 Code, § 93.11)



§ 93.17  VACANCIES; COMPENSATION.



   The vacancies in the Board of Directors, occasioned by removals,
resignations or otherwise, shall be reported to the City Council, and be
filled in like manner as original appointments, and no Director shall receive
compensation, as such.



(1999 Code, § 93.12)



§ 93.18  POWERS.



   The Directors shall have the powers as provided by the statutes of the
state.



(1999 Code, § 93.13)  (Ord. 839, passed 12-5-1977)



CHAPTER 94:  NUISANCES



Section



   94.01   Nuisances enumerated



   94.02   Abatement



   94.03   Uncut weeds and the like; abatement; costs



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Garbage and rubbish, see Ch. 50



   Offenses against public health and safety, see Ch. 136



§ 94.01  NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person within the limits of
the city:



   (A)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any
place, to the prejudice of others;



   (B)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or
the carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well
or common sewer, street or public highway;



   (C)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure any water source;



   (D)   To obstruct or encroach upon public sidewalks, highways,
private ways, streets and alleys;



   (E)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the
exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public;



   (F)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the
same on, or affixing them to, fences or other private property, or on rocks
or other natural objects without the consent of the owner or, if in a highway
or other public place, without permission of the proper authorities;



   (G)   To permit any well drilled for oil, gas, salt water disposal
or any other purpose in connection with the production of oil and gas to
remain unplugged after such well is no longer used for the purpose for which
it was drilled;



   (H)   To construct or operate any salt water pit or oil field refuse
pit, commonly called a “burn out pit”, so that salt water, brine or oil
field refuse or other waste liquids may escape therefrom in any manner except
by the evaporation of such salt water or brine or by the burning of such oil
field waste or refuse;



   (I)   To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery and materials to
remain around any oil or gas well, or to fail to fill any holes, cellars,
slush pits and other excavations made in connection with any such well or to
restore the surface of the lands surrounding any such well to its condition
before the drilling of the well, upon abandonment of the oil or gas well;



   (J)   To permit any salt water, oil, gas or other wastes from any
well drilled for oil, gas or exploratory purposes to escape to the surface,
or into a mine or coal seam, or into any underground fresh water supply, or
from one underground stratum to another;



   (K)   To establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or
unwholesome business within the city limits, or within one mile of the limits;



   (L)   To keep or suffer to be kept in a foul, offensive, nauseous or
filthy condition, any chicken coop, cow barn, stable, cellar, vault, drain,
privy, sewer or sink upon any premises belonging to or occupied by the
person, or any railroad car, building, yard, grounds and premises belonging
to or occupied by the person;



   (M)   To own or possess any swine, goats, horses or chickens within
the city, unless within a zoned Agricultural District or Rural Residential
District, in accordance with § 158.037;



   (N)   To commit any offense which is a nuisance according to the
common law of the land or made such by statute of the state;



   (O)   To so negligently conduct any business or use any premises as
to create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and render it
unwholesome or disagreeable in the neighborhood;



   (P)   To throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited, any
refuse, garbage or other offensive matter, or the carcass or any part thereof
of any animal, in any watercourse, pond, spring or well;



   (Q)   To cause or suffer grass, leaves, underbrush or other
combustible matter to be collected, deposited or to remain on the person’s
premises in such quantities and in such condition as to materially increase
the danger to property of others from forest or other fires;



   (R)   To erect, continue or use any building, or other place, for
the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by occasion of
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to health of individuals or of the public;



   (S)   (1)   To obstruct any watercourse, ravine or gutter so as
to cause water to stagnate therein, or to permit foul or stagnate water to
stand upon any premises to the prejudice of others;



      (2)   To cause pipes conducting water from the roofs of a
building to be so constructed as to discharge water from gutters, pipes or
other structures within ten feet of any public sidewalk, street or street
curb or street gutter, causing runoff to be concentrated over and onto that
public sidewalk, street, street curb or street gutter whereby the water will
stagnate or freeze on the sidewalk, street or street curb or street gutter;



      (3)   To discharge any water or other fluids originating from
sumps, sump pits, sump pumps or other pumps, or any reservoir serving as a
water drain or receptacle for water, from pipes or other structures to an
area within ten feet of the property line or beyond or within ten feet of any
public sidewalk, street or street curb or street gutter, unless conveyed by a
naturally occurring swale or a drainage swale approved by the Engineering
Department or unless the method of drainage is otherwise approved by the
Engineering Department, taking into considering the elevation, slope and
topography of the premises and adjoining premises; and



      (4)   To discharge any water or other fluids originated from
sumps, sump pits, other pumps or other mechanical means, any reservoir
serving as a water drain or receptacle for water, from pipes or other
structures, swimming pools or their drains or from roof gutter drains into or
onto any adjoining property in such a manner as to create a nuisance as
described below:



         (a)   Ponding or stagnating of water;



         (b)   Causing soil erosion;



         (c)   Creating conditions that would deny adjoining
property owners reasonable use of their property; or



         (d)   Accumulation of water that freezes, creates
mildew/mold or produces offensive odors.



   (T)   To permit the growth upon any premises of any noxious weeds
such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles, cockleburs and the like;



   (U)   To commit any offense which is a nuisance according to the
common law of the land, or made such by the statutes of the state;



   (V)   To allow or permit any dense smoke to come or be emitted from
any fires, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency within the limits of
the city; such condition may be summarily abated by the Mayor, or by any one
whom he or she may authorize for such purposes, and such abatement may be in
addition to the fine provided for violation of this division (V);



   (W)   To conduct any building operations between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; to operate any steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, steam or
electric hoists or other apparatus, the use of which is attended with loud or
unusual noise audible to residential structures within the city, without the
express consent of the Mayor or his or her designate;



   (X)   For a person owning or in possession, charge or control of any
building or premises to use the same, or permit the use of the same, or rent
the same to be used for any business or employment, or for any purpose of
pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, from its noise or boisterous
nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which such
building or premises are situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to health;



   (Y)   To permit or maintain an unsightly yard or premises where
there is an accumulation or deposit of any vehicle, equipment, junk, wrecked
or disabled automobile, truck, material of any nature, waste or earth;



   (Z)   To cause or suffer debris or junk to be collected, deposited
or to remain on the person’s premises in such quantities and in such
condition as to increase breeding and refuse for rodents, vermin or any
undesirable nuisance;



   (AA)   To leave or scatter wastepaper, paper containers for
foodstuffs, bills, posters, lithographs, advertising matter, refuse,
sweepings or material of like substance in or upon the streets, sidewalks,
alleys or public grounds of the city;



   (BB)   To operate or play or cause to be operated or played any
phonograph, gramophone, radio set, wireless set, loudspeaker or other device
or instrument whereby sound is amplified, during the hours from 10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m. of the next following day, in such manner or with such volume that
the sound caused thereby is audible to human beings beyond a distance of 400
feet from such phonograph, gramophone, radio set, wireless set or other
device or instrument or beyond the premises whereon the same is operated or
played;



   (CC)   To place any leaves, grass or any other yard waste or debris
in city streets, street gutters or public right-of-way; and



   (DD)   To keep or harbor more than a total of three dogs and/or cats
over the age of four months on any premises that is not a lawfully operated
kennel or veterinary clinic.



(1999 Code, § 94.01)  (Ord. 3148, passed 12-16-2002; Ord. 3154, passed
2-3-2003; Ord. 3565, passed 3-3-2008; Ord. 3640, passed 10-19-2009; Ord.
3817, passed 2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Cross-reference:



   Discharges to natural outlets restricted, see § 51.004



§ 94.02  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice to abate. Whenever the Mayor or other authorized
municipal officer finds that a  nuisance or other condition listed in §
94.01 of this chapter exists, that officer shall cause to be served upon the
property owner or occupant a written notice to abate the nuisance within a
reasonable time after notice.



   (B)   Contents of notice. The notice to abate shall contain:



      (1)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance or other
condition;



      (2)   The location of the nuisance or condition;



      (3)   A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement; and



      (4)   A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not
abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the city will abate it and assess the costs against such person.



   (C)   Hearing; appeal.



      (1)   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may
have a hearing with the officer ordering the abatement as to whether a
nuisance or prohibited condition exists. A request for a hearing must be made
in writing and delivered to the officer ordering the abatement within the
time stated in the notice or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
or prohibited condition exists and it must be abated as ordered.



      (2)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer
shall render a decision as to whether a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists. If the Hearing Officer finds that a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists, he or she must order it abated within an additional time which must
be reasonable under the circumstances.



   (D)   Emergency situations. If it is determined that an emergency
exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition,
the city may perform any action which may be required under this chapter
without prior notice.



   (E)   Abatement by city. If the person notified to abate a nuisance
or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the city may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense
incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the City Clerk who
shall pay such expenses on behalf of the municipality.



   (F)   Costs assessed. The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total
expense incurred to the property owner or occupant who has failed to abide by
the notice to abate.



(1999 Code, § 94.02)  (Ord. 1119, passed 9-17-1984)



§ 94.03  UNCUT WEEDS AND THE LIKE; ABATEMENT; COSTS.



   (A)   Uncut weeds and the like. All weeds, high grass or shrubbery
growing on or standing uncut or otherwise uncontrolled on any premises in the
city is hereby declared a nuisance.



   (B)   Obstruction of view; eyesores. No owner or tenant of any
property within the city shall allow weeds, grass or shrubbery to grow on his
or her property where such weeds, grass or shrubbery obstructs the vision of
users of any street, road, highway, driveway or alley within the city or
where such weeds, grass or shrubbery tends to detract from the beauty or
esthetics of the surrounding properties.



   (C)   Maintenance of the public right-of-way. The owner or tenant of
any property within the city abutting a public street or alley shall maintain
the vegetation in the abutting public right-of-way or parkway in the same
manner as is required for the owner’s or tenant’s property by the
city’s Property Maintenance Code including but not limited to weeds, high
grasses and rubbish.



      (1)   Exemptions. The following are generally exempted from
the provisions of this section:



         (a)   Lands zoned Agriculture as designated in Title XV,
Chapter 158, Article 2 of this code and shown on the official zoning map of
the city unless used for nonagricultural purpose (for example, church school,
house). For purposes of this division, AGRICULTURAL USE shall be construed to
mean vacant land or the production of products such as field crops,
livestock, fowl and other conventional agricultural pursuits;



         (b)   The right-of-way is inaccessible, including but
not limited to interstate right-of-way;



         (c)   The depth or slope of the roadway ditch makes
maintenance hazardous, generally any slopes steeper than three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical (3:1);



         (d)   In a floodplain area designated on the FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Maps;



         (e)   Within a natural drainage way or riparian zones,
generally saturated or filled with water.



      (2)   Appeal and clarification. A written request of an appeal
to a notice to abate must be submitted to the City Administrator within five
days of the owner of the property receiving the notice. The owner must
provide a hardship claim based on the list of exemption provisions of
division (C) above. The appeal must be reviewed and approved by the Director
of Community Development or his or her designee. Affected property owners may
seek clarification for specific properties through the Community Development
Department.



   (D)   Notice to abate. In the event weeds, grass or shrubbery is
permitted to grow and to obstruct the vision of users of any street, road,
highway, driveway or alley within the city or to detract from the beauty or
aesthetics of the surrounding properties, it shall be the duty of the Code
Enforcement Officer to give the owner and/or tenant of such property a
written notice to abate the nuisance. The notice shall designate the property
and describe the nuisance and shall direct the owner and/or tenant to abate
the nuisance within ten days from the date of delivery of the notice. The
notice shall be delivered to the owner of the property by certified mail at
the address  of the property if the owner occupies the property or, if it is
determined the owner does not occupy the property, notice shall be sent by
certified mail to the owner’s reasonably ascertainable address, or if none,
to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the
property as then shown on the records of the Treasurer of the county. Notice
shall be sent to the tenant by certified mail at the address of the property
if occupied by the tenant, otherwise, to the reasonably ascertainable address
of the tenant. If the address of the owner or tenant cannot be reasonably
ascertained, notice may be posted upon the property.



   (E)   Abatement by city. In the event the owner and/or tenant fails
to abate the nuisance within ten days from the date of service of the notice
to abate, the Code Enforcement Officer or other person acting under his or
her direction may enter upon the property to abate the nuisance by causing
all weeds, grass or uncontrolled shrubbery to be cut, sprayed or otherwise
removed or abated.



   (F)   Lien for costs.



      (1)   The reasonable cost of cutting or spraying of the weeds,
grass or uncontrolled shrubbery or otherwise abating the nuisance shall be a
lien upon the owner’s premises superior to all other liens and encumbrances
except tax liens; provided, within 60 days after such cost and expenses are
incurred by the city or the person or entity performing the service by
authority of the city, the city files a notice of lien in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of the county, with said notice to consist of a sworn
statement setting out:



         (a)   A description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof;



         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and
expense incurred or payable by the city; and



         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was
incurred by the city.



      (2)   The cost of abating the nuisance shall, however, not be
a lien on the property unless a written notice is personally served on, or
sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the
general taxes on the property for the last preceding year. The notice shall
state the substance of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7, and of this section,
and further shall identify the property by common description and the
location of the nuisance abated.



      (3)    Further, the lien of the city shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent
to the nuisance abatement and prior to the filing of such notice, and the
lien of the city shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or
other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the
filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of
or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed,
the lien shall be released by the city and the release may be filed of record
as in the case of the filing of the notice of lien.



   (G)   Violations. In addition to the enforcement provisions of
division (F) above, any owner or tenant of the premises who fails to abate
any nuisance in the notice to abate within the time prescribed in the second
notice shall be subject to a fine upon conviction of violating this section
as provided in § 94.99.



(1999 Code, § 94.03)  (Ord. 798, passed 9-20-1976; Ord. 1972, passed
2-2-1998; Ord. 3879, passed 5-18-2015)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Weed destruction and cutting, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-20-6 and
11-20-7



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever causes, erects or continues any nuisance under §
94.01 of this chapter shall, for the first offense, be guilty of a petty
offense and fined not exceeding $100, and for a subsequent offense, shall be
guilty of an offense. Every such nuisance, when a conviction therefor is had,
may, by order of the court before which the conviction therefor is had, be
abated by the Police Chief or other designated officer at the expense of the
defendant, and it shall be no defense to any proceeding under this chapter
that the nuisance is erected or continued by virtue or permission of any law
of the state.



   (B)   Any owner or tenant of a premises who fails to abate any
nuisance in the notice to abate as described in § 94.03 of this chapter
within the time prescribed in the second notice shall be subject to a fine
upon conviction of violating § 94.03 of this chapter in the sum of $100 for
each violation. Each day a violation continues after notification constitutes
a separate offense.



(1999 Code, § 94.99)  (Ord. 1972, passed 2-2-1998)



CHAPTER 95:  PARKS



Section




General Provisions




   95.01   Playground and recreation system established



   95.02   Funding




Prohibitions and Restrictions




   95.15   Prohibited acts



   95.16   Glass containers



   95.17   Motor vehicles



   95.18   Curfew



   95.19   Animals



   95.20   Cutting trees or wood; fires; hunting and trapping




Administration




   95.35   Creation of office; qualifications



 



   95.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  PLAYGROUND AND RECREATION SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.



   A parks and recreation system for the city is hereby created and shall
hereafter be maintained and operated as hereinafter set forth.



(1999 Code, § 95.01)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 95.02  FUNDING.



   The parks and recreation system shall be maintained by appropriation by
the corporate authorities of the city, from funds accumulated through the
levy of a tax for this purpose, which additional tax has heretofore been
authorized by a special election held in the city, and by such other funds as
may be lawfully appropriated or acquired for that purpose.



(1999 Code, § 95.02)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS



§ 95.15  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   Damage to or destruction of city park property, grounds and
resources is prohibited.



   (B)   No person shall practice golf or hit any golf balls in any
city park.



(1999 Code, § 95.15)  (Ord. 1120, passed 9-17-1984; Ord. 1370, passed
5-1-1989; Ord. 3050, passed 4-30-2001; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012) 
Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.16  GLASS CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry into or possess while in
the city parks any glass bottle or glass container.



(1999 Code, § 95.16)  (Ord. 934, passed 10-15-1979; Ord. 3050, passed
4-30-2001; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.17  MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall park or operate any motor vehicle in any place
within the public parks other than in those places designated by the city.



   (B)   No person shall travel on the streets within the city parks
when said streets are so posted and barricaded by the city.



(1999 Code, § 95.17)  (Ord. 777, passed 12-1-1975; Ord. 3050, passed
4-30-2001; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.18  CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be on, in or about the
city parks from dusk until dawn from November 1 through March 31 unless such
person is attending a permitted function authorized by the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be on, in or about Rock
Springs Park, Thoman Park and Ogle’s Creek Park from dusk until dawn from
April 1 through October 31 unless such person is attending a permitted
function authorized by the city.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be on, in or about
Community Park, Hesse Park and the Sport Park between 11:00 p.m. and dawn
from April 1 through October 31 unless such person is attending a permitted
function authorized by the city.



(1999 Code, § 95.18)  (Ord. 709, passed 7-3-1972; Ord. 1299, passed
2-29-1988; Ord. 3050, passed 4-30-2001; Ord. 3606, passed 2-2-2009; Ord.
3784, passed 12-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.19  ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or have any
animal in any city park at any time, except as permitted by divisions (B),
(C), (D) and (E) below.



   (B)   Dogs and cats must only be on leash and on paved perimeter
walking trails of the city parks, with the exception of Rock Springs Rotary
Park, where when on leash they may use all trails;



   (C)   Dogs and cats may be off leash only in the fenced in dog park
area of Rock Springs Rotary Park so long as their owner or keeper is in the
dog park area;



   (D)   Animals shall be allowed beyond the paved perimeter walking
trails in the city parks for the purpose of events where their access has
been duly authorized by the city; and



   (E)   When accompanied by its master, a registered service animal
for a disabled person shall be allowed in city parks.



(1999 Code, § 95.19)  (Ord. 697, passed 5-17-1971; Ord. 1242, passed
2-16-1987; Ord. 3050, passed 4-30-2001; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord.
4067, passed 11-19-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.20  CUTTING TREES OR WOOD; FIRES; HUNTING AND TRAPPING.



   Cutting of trees or firewood, open fires, burning, hunting or trapping
is prohibited in the city parks, except when permitted and where so
designated by the city.



(1999 Code, § 95.20)  (Ord. 1299, passed 2-29-1988; Ord. 3050, passed
4-30-2001; Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012) Penalty, see § 95.99



ADMINISTRATION



§ 95.35  CREATION OF OFFICE; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Creation of office. There is hereby created the office of the
Director of Parks and Recreation who shall report to the City Administrator
and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for high- level
administrative, technical and professional work in directing and supervising
the administration of the Parks and Recreation Department.



   (B)   Duties and qualifications. The Director exercises supervision
over all Parks Department employees either directly or through subordinate
supervisors. Minimum qualifications include:



      (1)   Bachelor’s degree in Parks and Recreation Management
or related field;



      (2)   At least five years of progressively more responsible
related work experience; and



      (3)   At least three supervisory experience.



   (C)   Enforcement of rules and regulations.



      (1)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or other
authorized personnel designated by the Director and the City Police
Department, shall, in connection with their duties, diligently enforce all
provisions of this section



      (2)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or other
authorized personnel designated by the Director and the Police Department,
shall have the authority to eject from areas or facilities any person acting
in violation of this section.



(1999 Code, § 95.30)  (Ord. 1981, passed 4-6-1998; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or group violating any provision of this chapter or the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided for
in § 10.99 of this code.



(Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012)



CHAPTER 96:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   False alarms restricted; connections to 911 restricted



   96.03   Service fees for false alarms



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FALSE ALARM. Any and all detonations of burglar alarms or fire alarms
(when, in fact, no burglar, thief, interloper or person breaching the peace
is on the premises or there is no smoke or fire on the premises) if the
detonation was caused by human error or equipment malfunction at the physical
premises on which the alarm is installed, but not if the detonation was
caused by a malfunction in telephone lines or equipment not located at the
physical premises on which the alarm is installed.



   FIRE ALARM. Any alarm system designed to detect and signal the presence
of smoke or fire at any premise in the city or any part of the surrounding
Rural Fire Protection District served by the Fire Department which is
monitored by a commercial alarm company.



   PERSON, BUSINESS or CORPORATION. Any person owning, operating, in
control of or managing the premises from which transmission of a false alarm
occurred.



(1999 Code, § 96.01)  (Ord. 1422, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 3639, passed
10-5-2009)



§ 96.02  FALSE ALARMS RESTRICTED; CONNECTIONS TO 911 RESTRICTED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or corporation
residing or doing business in the area served by the Fire Department or
having on the person’s or its premises a burglar alarm or fire alarm to
permit or allow the transmission of a false alarm if the burglar alarm or
fire alarm in question has transmitted two or more false alarms within the
immediately preceding 30 days.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or corporation
residing or doing business in the area served by the Fire Department to cause
to be connected any device which electronically or mechanically dials the 911
emergency response number which will communicate directly with the 911
operator at the time the call is placed.



(1999 Code, § 96.02)  (Ord. 1422, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1485, passed
5-20-1991; Ord. 3639, passed 10-5-2009)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  SERVICE FEES FOR FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   Any person, business or corporation residing or doing business
in the city or, in the area served by the Fire Department, or having on the
person’s or its premises a burglar alarm or fire alarm which transmits two
false alarms within a 30-day period shall, upon the third transmission of a
false alarm, be charged a service fee of $100 for each transmission of a
false alarm thereafter for that 30-day period. The Director of Public Safety
shall notify the person, business or corporation of the service fee in
writing, setting forth the service fee owed for that 30-day period. The
person, business or corporation receiving such notification shall within 15
days of receipt thereof pay to the city the service fee owed. Any person,
business or corporation failing to timely pay the service fee owed shall be
deemed in violation of this section and shall be penalized as provided in §
96.99 of this chapter.



   (B)   Hold-up or robbery alarms originating from banks and financial
institutions are exempt from this section and shall be reviewed periodically
by the Director of Public Safety. All other alarms originating from banks and
financial institutions are subject to the restrictions outlined in this
section.



(1999 Code, § 96.03)  (Ord. 1422, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1468, passed
2-19-1991; Ord. 1720, passed 10-17-1994; Ord. 1772, passed 7-19-1995; Ord.
3639, passed 10-5-2009)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall be penalized as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, business or corporation falling to timely pay the
service fee owed, as provided in § 96.03 of this chapter, shall be deemed in
violation of that section and shall be penalized as provided in § 10.99 of
this code and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each time a
false alarm is transmitted to the city in which the Police or Fire Department
responds, regardless of the number of false alarms transmitted.



(1999 Code, § 96.99)



CHAPTER 97:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




General Provisions




   97.01   Fire prevention provisions adopted



   97.02   Fire limits established




Regulations




   97.15   Bonfires



   97.16   Incinerators




Lock Boxes




   97.30   Structures requiring lock boxes



   97.31   Type required



   97.32   Contents; master keys



   97.33   Effect of provisions on existing buildings



   97.34   Effect of provisions on new construction



   97.35   Effective date



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  FIRE PREVENTION PROVISIONS ADOPTED.



   The current adopted edition of the International Code Council (ICC)
Code as approved and amended by the Office of the State Fire Marshall, is
hereby adopted by the city as fully as if set out at length herein. The
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits and the
area of jurisdiction of the city.



(1999 Code, § 97.01)



§ 97.02  FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.



   All territory lying within the zoned districts of “B-1”, “B-2”
and “I” shall be known as the fire limits districts of the city.



(1999 Code, § 97.02)



REGULATIONS



§ 97.15  BONFIRES.



   It shall be unlawful to make or permit to be made a bonfire within the
fire limits districts as described in § 97.02 of this chapter without the
written consent of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 97.10)  Penalty, § 97.99



§ 97.16  INCINERATORS.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or to maintain any outdoor incinerator of
any kind within the fire limits districts.



(1999 Code, § 97.11)  Penalty, § 97.99



LOCK BOXES



§ 97.30  STRUCTURES REQUIRING LOCK BOXES.



   The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or
near the main entrance to the structure or such other location as determined
by the Chief of the Fire Department:



   (A)   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic
alarm system or automatic suppression system;



   (B)   Multi-family residential structures which have restricted
access through locked doors to a common corridor serving as access to the
living units;



   (C)   Governmental structures, unless exempted by statute,
regulation or ordinance; and



   (D)   Nursing care facilities.



(1999 Code, § 97.25)  (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998)  Penalty, § 97.99



§ 97.31  TYPE REQUIRED.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall designate the type of key lock
box system to be installed by the owner of the structure on the qualified
structure.



(1999 Code, § 97.26)  (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998)



§ 97.32  CONTENTS; MASTER KEYS.



   The owner of a structure required to have a key lock box shall, at all
times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow the unlocking of a door to
the interior of the structure. The Chief of the Fire Department and the
Police Department Shift Commander, shall each retain a master key to all lock
box systems and the key shall be of such design whereby it is
non-reproducible.



(1999 Code, § 97.27)  (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998; Ord. 3888, passed
6-15-2015)



§ 97.33  EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON EXISTING BUILDINGS.



   This subchapter shall apply to all existing structures as defined
herein. At the time this subchapter (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998) becomes
effective, the owners of those structures required to have lock boxes shall
be permitted a period of 12 months from the effective date of this subchapter
to install a lock box as required herein.



(1999 Code, § 97.28)  (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998)  Penalty, § 97.99



§ 97.34  EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON NEW CONSTRUCTION.



   All types of structures as defined herein which are constructed after
the effective date of this subchapter (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998) shall
install the required lock box prior to being issued an occupancy permit.



(1999 Code, § 97.29)  (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998)



§ 97.35  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998) shall be in full force
and effect 90 days after its passage and approval and its publication in
pamphlet form as required by law.



(1999 Code, § 97.30)  (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall be penalized as provided
in § 10.99.



   (B)   The owner of a structure subject to the provisions of §§
97.30 through 97.35 of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of $100 per
day for each day a violation continues.



(1999 Code, § 97.99)  (Ord. 1971, passed 1-20-1998)



CHAPTER 98:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   98.01   Undermining prohibited



   98.02   Vaults



   98.03   Open doors and vaults



   98.04   Stairways



   98.05   Street closings and the like



   98.06   Signs over streets



   98.07   Posts, awnings and the like



   98.08   Culverts



   98.09   Fires



   98.10   Roof drains and subsurface drains



   98.11   Signs on poles; defacing poles



   98.12   Trees



   98.13   Obstructions



   98.14   Lights and barriers




Excavations




   98.25   Sidewalk excavations; permits; reimbursement for costs



   98.26   Street excavations; permits; bonds



   98.27   Interference with street work and the like prohibited



   98.28   Violations



Cross-reference:



   Encroachment regulations, see § 71.107



   Sidewalk dining, see Ch. 123



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.01  UNDERMINING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall undermine in any manner any street or any other ground
or real estate situated in the city.



(1999 Code, § 98.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.02  VAULTS.



   (A)   No person shall dig or cause to be dug in any street or
sidewalk any vault without covering the opening thereof in such a manner as
to prevent persons, animals and vehicles from falling into the excavation.



   (B)   Such vault shall be in conformance with other code provisions.



(1999 Code, § 98.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.03  OPEN DOORS AND VAULTS.



   No person shall open, or allow to remain open, any door or the grating
of any vault belonging to the premises occupied by the person on any street,
alley or sidewalk in the city for any purpose, except the taking in and
removing goods; and any person allowing such grating to remain open shall
warn passers-by of the danger.



(1999 Code, § 98.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.04  STAIRWAYS.



   Steps or stairways leading into any building shall not extend from the
wall of such building onto any pavement or sidewalk without a permit from the
Building Inspector of the city and, in such case, the person making or
causing to be made such passage shall erect a railing on the side of the
stairs toward the street to prevent persons from falling into the street.



(1999 Code, § 98.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.05  STREET CLOSINGS AND THE LIKE.



   Whenever public safety or the improvement or repair of any street,
alley or public place requires it, the Mayor may order any street, alley or
public place temporarily closed to traffic and the placing of signs
indicating that the street, alley or public place is closed by order of the
Mayor. Whenever such signs are so placed, no person shall ride or drive upon,
or cross such street, alley or public place, or in any manner destroy, deface
or remove any such sign.



(1999 Code, § 98.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.06  SIGNS OVER STREETS.



   No person shall place any sign, advertisement or banner over any or
across any street or alley in the city, unless the person has written
approval of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 98.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.07  POSTS, AWNINGS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall, in the city, without written consent from the City
Council, set up or cause to be set up any awning or other posts, on any
street, alley or sidewalk, or any sign, sign box or fixture, which shall
extend over or upon any sidewalk, or suspend any merchandise or other
articles in front of any house more than two feet from the wall thereof, and
so that any part of the same shall be less than eight feet above the ground
or pavement.



(1999 Code, § 98.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.08  CULVERTS.



   The city will replace driveway culverts that are deteriorated or not
allowing for proper drainage. If a resident would like their culvert replaced
due to driveway maintenance or replacement, they shall incur the cost of the
pipe and installation. Culverts shall not be installed within city
right-of-way without having obtained an infrastructure permit from the city.
Any culverts installed without a permit shall be removed by the city.



(1999 Code, § 98.09)  (Ord. 4006, passed 9-18-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.09  FIRES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to any papers, weeds,
brush, grass, leaves or other combustible material on any paved street,
alley, paved parking place, gutter or boulevard in the city.



(1999 Code, § 98.10)  (Ord. 1464, passed 1-22-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Burning leaves, see § 131.08



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 97



§ 98.10  ROOF DRAINS AND SUBSURFACE DRAINS.



   (A)   Roof drains. No person or entity owning, constructing or
occupying any building shall cause pipes or drains conducting water from the
roof of the building to be so constructed as to discharge water from gutters,
pipes or other structures within ten feet of any public sidewalk, causing
runoff to be concentrated over that public sidewalk.



   (B)   Subsurface drains. No person or entity shall discharge any
water or other fluids originating from sumps, sump pits, sump pumps or other
pumps, or any reservoir serving as a water drain or receptacle for water,
from pipes or other structures to an area within ten feet of the property
line or beyond or within ten feet of any public sidewalk, street, street curb
or street gutter, unless conveyed by a naturally occurring swale or a
drainage swale approved by the Engineering Department or unless the method of
drainage is otherwise approved by the Engineering Department taking into
consideration the elevation, slope and topography of the premises and
adjoining premises.



   (C)   Piping underground. The water as described in divisions (A)
and (B) above shall not be piped underground into available underground
public storm water conveyances, unless prior written approval from the city
is obtained. The property owner shall bear all costs and shall accept all
risks for such underground connection to the public storm water conveyance.
Approval from the city shall be contingent upon the property owner
indemnifying the city for any cost or risk associated with such connection.



   (D)   Discharging prohibitions. No person shall discharge any water
or other fluids originated from sumps, sump pits, other pumps or other
mechanical means, any reservoir serving as a water drain or receptacle for
water, from pipes or other structures, swimming pools or their drains or from
roof gutter drains into or onto any adjoining property in such a manner as to
create a nuisance as described below:



      (1)   Ponding or stagnating of water;



      (2)   Causing soil erosion;



      (3)   Creating conditions that would deny adjoining property
owners reasonable use of their property; or



      (4)   Accumulation of water that freezes, creates mildew/mold
or produces offensive odors.



(1999 Code, § 98.11)  (Ord. 3155, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 3641, passed
10-19-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.11  SIGNS ON POLES; DEFACING POLES.



   No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint or fasten or cause to be
nailed, tacked, painted or fastened any sign or any other foreign substance
or material onto any telephone, telegraph, electric light, police and fire
alarm pole or post, or any street or traffic sign located on any sidewalk,
street, alley or public grounds or injure or deface any such pole or post.



(1999 Code, § 98.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.12  TREES.



   (A)   Planting. Trees placed along any street within the city shall
be planted on a line at least seven feet inside the property line abutting
the street or alley. Any person who plants any tree upon any street contrary
to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provided
for violation of this code and for each tree so planted. Such tree may be cut
down and removed by the direction of the Director of Public Works in
consultation with the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee
at the expense of the person.



   (B)   Injuring. No person, telephone company or electric company
shall cut, fell, injure or remove, or cause to be cut, any limb or limbs of
any tree on any street, sidewalk or public grounds of the city, except by the
authority of the Director of Public Works in consultation with the Director
of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee.



   (C)   Trimming. Trees along any street of the city shall have the
branches thereof cut and trimmed up to at least ten feet above the ground, so
that the same shall not inconvenience the passage of persons or vehicles
along any street or sidewalk, or obstruct the light of street lamps.



   (D)   Interference with wires. If a tree is permitted by the owner
or occupant of any premises in the city to grow in such a manner as to
interfere with any electric or telephone main feed wires, the Director of
Public Works in consultation with the Director of Parks and Recreation or his
or her designee shall order such owner to trim such trees specified and in
such a manner as to remove the obstruction or interference. If any person so
notified fails to comply with such notice, that person shall be subject to
the penalty provided for violation of this code, and the Superintendent of
Streets shall cause such trees to be trimmed, and the costs thereof may be
recovered by suit against such person.



   (E)   Decayed trees. Any person owning a parcel of land whereon is
situated a decayed or dead tree which extends over any sidewalk or street
shall remove such dead or decayed tree or parts thereof in such a manner that
danger to the public is eliminated within ten days upon official notification
by the Director of Public Works.



(1999 Code, § 98.13)  (Ord. 258, passed 5-1-1944; Ord. 3784, passed
12-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.13  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   General prohibition.



      (1)   No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected
on any public ground, or in any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city
any debris, materials or obstruction, except as may be permitted by this
chapter.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the police to exercise a
vigilant supervision over such places and to notify any person found making
such deposit, or responsible for the same, to remove the offending matter at
once.



   (B)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Roll-off containers may be temporarily placed in the
street or public right of way provided such roll-off container:



         (a)   Shall be used exclusively for garbage or refuse
operations. For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



            GARBAGE. Has the same meaning as provided under ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-123.7.



            REFUSE. Has the same meaning as provided under ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169.5.



         (b)   Shall not be placed on the street public right of
way for more than 14 days. Requests for an extension will be given full
consideration and may be approved up to 14 days;



         (c)   Shall not exceed eight feet six inches in width;



         (d)   Shall be placed parallel to and within 12 inches
of the curb, or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand
shoulder;



         (e)   Can only be placed in an area on the public right
of way that would normally be used for parking;



         (f)   Shall not be placed on the roadway at any place
where official signs prohibit parking, unless expressly authorized by permit;



         (g)   Shall not be placed within 30 feet of any
intersection or within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



         (h)   Shall have reflective barricades placed one at the
front corner closest to the traffic lane side and two at the rear, being one
at each corner, of the roll-off container and shall remain in place until the
roll-off container is removed.



         (i)   Shall not block any sidewalk;



         (j)   Shall only be placed in front of and not over any
property line of the property it is being used on/at.



      (2)   The company or resident that places or causes to be
placed the roll-off container shall be responsible for any damage from its
placement to the street, curb, drainage structures or any public
infrastructure.



      (3)   A permit issued by the city will be required prior to
the placement of the roll-off container, at no cost.



   (C)   Cargo containers cannot be placed in public right-of-way,
unless there are circumstances that would prohibit placement on private
property as outlined in Chapter 158, § 158.038 (Y) and only then, when
approved by the city by permit. If that approval and permit are obtained,
then the placement must comply with the provisions outlined in Chapter 98, §
98.13(B)(1)(b) through (j).



   (D)   Removal of obstructions; notice; building materials in street.
The Director of Public Works or his or her designee may move any obstruction
on any street or sidewalk of the city; but, before doing so, he or she shall
notify the person responsible therefor to remove such obstruction within a
reasonable time after being notified. Any person engaged in erecting a
building or fence or improving any lot on such street may deposit materials
thereon and contiguous to the street for such length of time as may be
necessary for the work. The obstruction shall not extend to more than
one-half of the width of the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to such
improvement and the gutter shall always be left free and unobstructed. Such
person shall, at night, keep a red or yellow light on such material.



(1999 Code, § 98.14)  (Ord. 3784, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 3847, passed
11-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.14  LIGHTS AND BARRIERS.



   (A)   Every obstruction standing within a street, alley or public
place within the city shall be marked by traffic-control devices to protect
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



   (B)   Whoever digs or causes to be dug a ditch or excavation in or
adjoining any street, sidewalk or other public place shall erect a suitable
barrier and traffic-control devices about such excavation.



   (C)   These barriers and traffic-control devices shall be in
accordance with the standard details and procedures as adopted by the State
Department of Transportation.



   (D)   No person shall remove or interfere with any traffic-control
device, barrier or warning sign placed in any street or about any excavation
for the protection of the public.



(1999 Code, § 98.15) Penalty, see § 10.99



EXCAVATIONS



§ 98.25  SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS; PERMITS; REIMBURSEMENT FOR COSTS.



   Any property owner desiring to repair sidewalks or replace existing
sidewalks shall submit to the City Engineer a plan setting forth the location
of the sidewalk, the legal description of the property adjacent to the
sidewalk, the width and length of the proposed sidewalk. The City Engineer
shall upon approval of the construction order the City Clerk to issue a
permit for the construction of the sidewalk. Upon completion of the
construction of the sidewalk, the property owner shall file with the City
Engineer a verified statement showing the completion of the sidewalk and
shall attach to the statement an itemized statement of costs of construction
of the sidewalk. The City Engineer will review and approve the itemized
statement of costs as reasonable with standards of the industry. Upon receipt
of the statement of completion by the owner of the property and upon
inspection and approval by the City Engineer, the Council may allow and order
to be reimbursed to such owner half of the documented costs shown in the
approved itemized statement.



(1999 Code, § 98.25)  (Ord. 1410, passed 12-4-1989)



§ 98.26  STREET EXCAVATIONS; PERMITS; BONDS.



   (A)   Application for permit. Any person desiring to lay, lower,
change, repair or remove any pipes, or to make connections therewith, or to
make any change, improvement, fill, excavation or alterations within or upon
any street, sidewalk, public square or alley, shall apply to the City
Engineer for a permit to do so. The applicant shall describe the portion of
the street, sidewalk, public square or alley where such work is to be done,
and the nature and character of the work to be done.



   (B)   Bond. The applicant shall also give bond, conditioned that the
applicant will suitably guard and protect any excavation or obstruction, and
defend, save, keep harmless and indemnify the city of and from all actions,
suits, costs, damages and expenses including attorneys’ fees which shall or
may come to it for or on account of any injuries or damages received or
sustained by any person by or from acts or omissions of the applicant or his
or her employees in doing such work; and that the applicant will restore such
street, sidewalk, public square or alley to its former condition, and
complete such work as speedily as possible, and when completed, notify the
City Engineer of such fact so that the an inspection can be made to assure
that the same has been promptly and properly restored to its former
condition; and guaranteeing that such reconstruction, refilling and
restoration is done in a good and workmanlike manner, and with good and
proper material, and that the same shall not deteriorate, cave in, or require
repair or reconstruction for a period of at least two years from the time of
such work; and further, to reimburse to the city any and all costs and
expenses to which the city may have been put, paid, or become liable for in
refilling, repairing, and replacing the work in the surface or pavement of
such street, sidewalk, public square or alley, if the work shall be done by
the city, or it becomes necessary for the city to do so, the cost in all the
cases to be certified by the City Engineer. Such bond, with sureties, shall
be approved by the City Council.



   (C)   Fitness of applicant. No permit shall be granted to any person
who is in any respect delinquent in the payment of the moneys herein provided
for, or who, in the judgment of the City Council, is unfit or unqualified to
engage in the class of work herein provided for.



   (D)   Issuance of permit. Upon application being made and the filing
of such bond, the City Engineer, after having been directed by the City
Council to do so, shall issue a permit to the applicant, stating therein all
the privileges thereby granted.



   (E)   Bond for restoration of road surface. Every applicant,
including public utility companies, may be required by the City Engineer of
the city to post a bond in the sum determined by the City Engineer, wherein
the applicant shall be liable unto the city for the payment of such sum the
condition of the bond being that if the applicant repairs and restores the
surface of the public street to the same condition as it was prior to the
time the excavation, tunnel or ditch was made, then the bond shall be void,
otherwise to remain in full force and effect. The City Engineer shall
determine whether or not such bond is required from the several applicants,
based upon division (C) above.



(1999 Code, § 98.26)



§ 98.27  INTERFERENCE WITH STREET WORK AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.



   Whenever any street, alley or public place is being improved under any
contract with the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to destroy,
injure, carry away, remove or interfere with any of the material or
appliances used in or about the work, or impede, obstruct or interfere with
the execution of the work, or destroy or damage any of the work or materials
which may have been placed by the contractor.



(1999 Code, § 98.27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.28  VIOLATIONS.



   If any person violates any provisions of this chapter, and any person
or property in consequence thereof is injured or damaged, the person so
guilty of such violation shall be liable to the city in relation thereto, and
no prosecution or other proceeding by the city of such person for any penalty
imposed for a violation shall constitute a bar to such action by the city for
such damages.



(1999 Code, § 98.28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 99:  TREES AND SHRUBS



Section




General Provisions




   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Public tree care



   99.03   Tree topping of public trees restricted



   99.04   Tree removal on private property; city authority



   99.05   Interference with Urban Forestry Committee activities
prohibited




Administration and Enforcement




   99.20   Urban Forestry Committee; appointment



   99.21   Term of office



   99.22   Compensation



   99.23   Administrative matters; regulatory authority



   99.24   Powers and duties



   99.25   Appeals to and review by City Council



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city or to
which the public has free access as a park.



   STREET TREES. Shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between the property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the city.



(1999 Code, § 99.01)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.02  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.



   (B)   The Urban Forestry Committee may remove or cause or order to
be removed any tree or part thereof which is on public grounds and which is
affected by an injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not
prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners.



(1999 Code, § 99.02)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.03  TREE TOPPING OF PUBLIC TREES RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public
property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a
degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or
where root structure may damage underground utilities or other obstructions,
where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this
chapter at the determination of the Urban Forestry Committee. Public
utilities should take all deliberate efforts to allow all street trees
growing under utility lines to proceed with normal growth patterns before
engaging in any necessary pruning.



(1999 Code, § 99.03)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.04  TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; CITY AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The city shall have the power to remove or cause removal of
DEAD OR DISEASED TREES on private property within the city.



   (B)   Such trees shall be defined as those that are dead, or harbor
insects or disease, to such an extent that they constitute a threat to other
trees or to the general health or life of persons or property, in which event
the city, through the Urban Forestry Committee or a representative thereof,
shall declare the tree to be a nuisance and follow the abatement procedure of
§ 94.03 of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 99.04)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.05  INTERFERENCE WITH URBAN FORESTRY COMMITTEE ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Urban Forestry Committee or any of its agents while engaging in and about
the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any
street tree, park tree or trees on private grounds as authorized by this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 99.05)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 99.20  URBAN FORESTRY COMMITTEE; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created and established an Urban Forestry Committee for
the city which shall consist of five members, citizens of the city, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 99.15)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.21  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the members to be appointed by the Mayor shall be for five
years. Although reappointment is nor mandatory, it is the policy of the city
to provide continuity in service on the Committee and reappointment will be
given favorable consideration if the member has continued to be active and
made continued contribution to the purposes of the committee.



(1999 Code, § 99.16)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.22  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Urban Forestry Committee shall serve without
compensation.



(1999 Code, § 99.17)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.23  ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS; REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   The Committee shall choose its owner officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. Before becoming effective,
all rules and regulations must be approved by the City Council. Minutes shall
be approved at the next meeting. Upon approval the original minutes shall be
filed with the City Clerk to be retained in the permanent records of the city.



(1999 Code, § 99.18)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.24  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Urban Forestry Committee
to study, investigate, counsel, develop and/or update annually, and
administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets and in other public areas. Such a plan will be presented annually to
the City Council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the
official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The Committee, when
requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report and recommend upon any special matter of questioning coming within the
scope of its work.



   (B)   The Committee shall actively encourage the planting of all
varieties of trees in the city in an effort to improve the environment and
character of the city.



(1999 Code, § 99.19)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



§ 99.25  APPEALS TO AND REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Urban Forestry Committee. Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the Urban Forestry Committee to the City Council, who may
hear the matter and make a final decision.



(1999 Code, § 99.20)  (Ord. 1889, passed 12-16-1996)



CHAPTER 100:  OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS



Section



   100.01   Definitions



   100.02   Regulations



§ 100.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECT LIGHT. Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the
reflector or reflector diffuser, or though the refractor or diffuser lens, of
a luminaire.



   DOWN LIGHTING. For an exterior luminaire, light emitted in the
hemisphere below the horizontal plane.



   FLOOD LIGHT. Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or
a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a
particular direction.



   GLARE. Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough
to reduce a viewer’s ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary
blindness.



   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light emitted by a lighting installation that falls
outside the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.



   LUMINAIRE. The complete lighting unit assembly (fixture), consisting of
a lamp, or lamps and



ballast(s) (when applicable), together with the parts designed to distribute
the light (reflector, lens, diffuser), to position and protect the lamps, and
to connect the lamps to the power supply.



   UPLIGHT. For an exterior luminaire, light emitted in the hemisphere at
or above the horizontal plane.



(1999 Code, § 100.01)  (Ord. 3642, passed 10-19-2009)



§ 100.02  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the lighting controls set forth in §§ 158.135
through 158.146 of this code, off-street, exterior lighting in residential
areas shall be shielded and/or directed in such a manner that it illuminates
only the user’s premises and does not spill over into neighboring
residential areas so as to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of
residential or public properties.



   (B)   The following lighting controls shall apply in all residential
areas.



      (1)   Light level shall be no greater than one foot-candle of
illumination at any property line.



      (2)   Flood lights are only permitted when they are
down-lighted and installed such that the fixture shall be aimed down at least
45 degrees from vertical.



      (3)   The Planning Director may require shields to be
installed on any lights determined to be a nuisance before, during or after
the installation when needed to further reduce glare and lighting trespass.



      (4)   In addition to being in compliance with the above
divisions, no exterior lighting shall be used in any manner that could
interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares.



      (5)   Luminaires used for uplighting for flags, address
markers, trees, architectural features and low landscape lighting must be
located, aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused
exclusively on the object and away from adjoining properties and public
thoroughfares.



(1999 Code, § 100.02)  (Ord. 3642, passed 10-19-2009)



CHAPTER 101:  OUTDOOR LODGING



Section



   101.01   Purpose



   101.02   Definitions



   101.03   Prohibition



   101.04   Enforcement



   101.05   Exceptions



   101.06   Abandoned property



   101.99   Penalty



§ 101.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to make public property readily
accessible and available to the public, to prevent the use of public property
in a manner that interferes with the rights of others to use such areas for
their intended purposes, to maintain public streets and areas within the city
in a clean and accessible condition, and to maintain the public peace,
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 4012, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 101.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LODGING OUT-OF-DOORS. Using public or private property for living
accommodation purposes by the erection, use or occupation of any tent, hut,
lean-to, shack or temporary shelter for sleeping purposes, or the laying down
of bedding, such as a blanket, sleeping bag or similar material, for the
purpose of sleeping.



   LIVING ACCOMMODATION PURPOSES. To remain living, to dwell or to reside
at a place for a period of time for the purpose of using such place as a home
or shelter.



   LODGING OUT-OF-DOORS PARAPHERNALIA. Includes, but is not limited to,
tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, bedrolls, cooking facilities
and similar equipment.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any publicly owned property in the city, including any
of the following: public parks, public streets, public alleyways, public
trails, public access ways, public parking lots, public passageways, public
rights-of-ways, publicly owned landscaped areas or greenbelts, sidewalks,
curbs, public educational institutions or other government-owned or
controlled properties located within the city.



   STORE. To put aside or accumulate, to deposit for safekeeping or to
place or leave in a location an item(s) for retrieval or use at a later time.



(Ord. 4012, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 101.03  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public or
private property in the city for lodging out-of-doors except with the
permission and consent of the property owner. Permission and consent to lodge
out-of-doors on property owned by the city may be given for a specified
period of time by the city.



   (B)   Being in a tent, hut, lean-to, shack or  temporary shelter,
or being asleep atop or covered by materials in a public place or private
place out-of-doors without the permission and consent of the property owner
may be evidence of a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   One or more of the following must also exist before a law
enforcement officer can find probable cause to issue a summons or to make an
arrest:



      (1)   Numerous items of personal belongings are present;



      (2)   The person is engaged in cooking activities:



      (3)   The person has built or is maintaining a fire;



      (4)   The person has engaged in digging or earth-breaking
activities.



(Ord. 4012, passed 11-6-2017)  Penalty, see § 101.99



§ 101.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   Except as provided in § 101.05, whenever a law enforcement officer has
probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, he
or she shall advise the person of the violation and afford the person an
opportunity to be transported by a law enforcement officer to an available
shelter. The law enforcement officer shall advise the person that all of his
or her personal property that is not taken to the shelter, except that of no
apparent utility or in an unsanitary condition, shall be inventoried and
stored by the City Police Department for a maximum of 60 days, until
reclaimed. If the person elects to be transported to an available shelter,
the law enforcement officer shall make available such transportation as may
be available for such purpose, and the person making such election shall not
be charged with a violation of this chapter. If the person refuses to be
transported to an available shelter, then such person may be charged with a
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 4012, passed 11-6-2017)  Penalty, see § 101.99



§ 101.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   Section 101.04 shall not apply to the following;



   (A)   To any person who cannot be properly identified, or is
intoxicated by alcohol or drugs. For the purposes of this division, PROPER
IDENTIFICATION shall include, but not be limited to, a driver's license, a
government or employment identity card with photograph or other form of
identification, which would satisfy a reasonable law enforcement officer as
to the identity of the person.



   (B)   Anyone camping or placing, erecting or maintaining any camp
facilities, or using camp paraphernalia, in a specified camping area
designated by the city. The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution,
establish one or more specified camping area. Such camping areas, if any, may
be located on public property.



   (C)   Anyone using cooking facilities or otherwise preparing food as
permitted in connection with an event or activity authorized by the city.



   (D)   Anyone storing personal property, or camping, placing,
erecting or maintaining any camp facilities, or using camp paraphernalia, if
otherwise permitted in connection with an event or activity authorized or
permitted by the city.



   (E)   The lawful parking of a vehicle on a public street, alleyway
or other public property, or the lawful storage of a bicycle or other similar
human-powered equipment on public property.



   (F)   Anyone momentarily placing personal property on public
property, so long as the personal property does not block vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or rights-of-way.



(Ord. 4012, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 101.06  ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   Any personal property inventoried and stored by the City Police
Department for a person transported to a shelter under the provisions of §
101.04, which has not been reclaimed within 60 days of the date it was
inventoried and stored, shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in a manner
as deemed appropriate by the city.



(Ord. 4012, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 101.99  PENALTY.



   Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $75 for a first offense, or in the alternative to
serve ten hours community service; and shall be fined $100 or serve 20 hours
of community service for each subsequent offense.



(Ord. 4012, passed 11-6-2017)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   BUSINESS REGISTRATION



      111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      112.   FOOD INDUSTRY



      113.   VENDING MACHINES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES; RAFFLES



      114.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



      115.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



      116.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      117.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES



      118.   SPECIAL EVENTS



      119.   REGISTRATION FOR ALL HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGING HOUSES AND
ROOMING HOUSES



      120.   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSES



      121.   VIDEO GAMING



      122.   TOWING COMPANIES



      123.   SIDEWALK DINING



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS REGISTRATION



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Registration required



   110.03   Fee



   110.04   Duration



   110.05   Registration not assignable; unlawful use



   110.06   Application



   110.07   Suspension; revocation and appeal



 



   110.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Business License Commissioner duties of Mayor, see § 31.023



   Garbage and rubbish collection, see §§ 50.01 through 50.11



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS. Any for profit business operated by a sole proprietor,
partnership, corporation or organization within the city.



   CITY. The City of O’Fallon, St. Clair County, Illinois.



   OWNERS. Any sole proprietor, partners, corporation or organization.



(1999 Code, § 110.01)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999)



§ 110.02  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   All businesses domiciled in the city or conducting business from a
location or locations within the city must register said business with the
city.



(1999 Code, § 110.02)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999)



§ 110.03  FEE.



   The annual registration fee is $25 and shall be submitted with the
registration application. This fee is non-refundable and is used solely for
the administration of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 110.03)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999)



§ 110.04  DURATION.



   (A)   Businesses must be registered before operating within the city
limits.



   (B)   Registrations are effective from one year of the  the
anniversary date of approval.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall notify the registered business of the
impending expiration date within 30 days of expiration. However, it is the
obligation of each business to renew its registration and failure to receive
an expiration notification is not a defense for operating without a
registration.



(1999 Code, § 110.04)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 3480, passed
10-16-2006)



§ 110.05  REGISTRATION NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE.



   No registration granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
assigned or transferred. Each registration is only valid for the person and
business named in the registration.



(1999 Code, § 110.05)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.06  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Each registration application shall be made to the City Clerk
in writing on a form provided by the City Clerk, or as otherwise allowed by
the City Clerk.



   (B)   Each application will contain the following information:



      (1)   Registration fee;



      (2)   Type of business;



      (3)   Business address and telephone number;



      (4)   Date business started;



      (5)   Name, mailing address and contact telephone number of
each owner, partner or corporate officer;



      (6)   Corporate address and contact name and telephone number
(if any);



      (7)   An after hour (emergency) contact name and telephone
number;



      (8)   The number of the certificate of license as required
under the Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120), the Service
Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115) and/or the Use Tax Act (ILCS Ch.
35, Act 105), if applicable;



      (9)   Federal income tax number;



      (10)   The numbers of any federal, state or county licenses or
certificates held;



      (11)   Approximate number of full-time and part-time employees;



      (12)   Approximate number of agents; and



      (13)   Type and location of any toxic, flammable or hazardous
materials stored or used at said location.



   (C)   Every application for a food-related business shall provide
evidence of the required health certificates issued by the County Health
Department.



   (D)   Any business required by law to be bonded or insured shall
provide evidence of such bond or insurance.



   (E)   Significant changes to information submitted are to be
reported as soon as possible and shall be done at no charge to the registrant.



(1999 Code, § 110.06)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999)



§ 110.07  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION AND APPEAL.



   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke a business
registration thereby causing the cessation of a business when:



      (1)   The business operation constitutes a clear and present
danger to the public safety, health or general welfare; and/or



      (2)   The registration application  information is
fraudulent, false or deceptive.



   (B)   If a registration is suspended or revoked the business will be
notified immediately either in person by an officer of the city or by phone.
A follow-up written notice will be sent by certified mail. Both notifications
will include the reason or reasons that caused the action. A suspension or
revocation shall remain in place until rescinded by the Mayor or by a
successful appeal to the City Council.



   (C)   An appeal of the suspension must be requested by the
registrant and is allowed at either:



      (1)   The next regular scheduled City Council meeting; or



      (2)   A special meeting if the special meeting meets city
ordinances and the business has been given at least three-days’ notice or
has waived the three-day requirement.



   (D)   The City Attorney shall present the complaint and represent
the city. The registrant is allowed counsel and has the right to submit
evidence and cross-examine witnesses. A simple majority vote of the City
Council is required to rescind the suspension or revocation. In case of a
tie, the Mayor will cast the deciding vote.



   (E)   The city will keep an electronic record of the hearing. If
either party requires a transcript, that party shall pay the cost of the
transcription.



   (F)   Revocation of a business registration shall not preclude
prosecution or imposition of other penalties for the violation of any other
ordinance of the city.



(1999 Code, § 110.07)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any business in violation of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$25, and not more than $750, for each offense.



(1999 Code, § 110.99)  (Ord. 2031, passed 3-15-1999)



CHAPTER 111:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   111.01   Purpose; policy



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   Permit required



   111.04   Application for permits; qualifications



   111.05   Exemptions



   111.06   Issuance of permit



   111.07   Credentials



   111.08   Fee



   111.09   Regulations and prohibitions



   111.10   Notice to solicitors; duty to observe



   111.11   Denial of permit



   111.12   Revocation of permit



   111.13   Appeal of permit denial or revocation



   111.14   Solicitation on streets by charitable organizations



   111.15   Solicitor’s bond



   111.16   Maintenance of registry



   111.17   Maintenance of no contact list



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  PURPOSE; POLICY.



   (A)   General statement of purpose. Residents of the city have an
inalienable interest in their personal safety, well-being and privacy in
their residences, as well as their ability to provide or receive information
regarding matters of personal belief, political or charitable activities and
goods and services lawfully in commerce. The city has a substantial interest
in protecting the well-being, tranquility, personal safety and privacy of its
citizens, which includes the ability to protect citizens from unwanted
intrusions upon residential or commercial property. The city also has a
substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair
consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.



   (B)   General statement of policy. There must be a balance between
these substantial interests of the city and its citizens, and the effect of
the regulations in this chapter on the rights of those who are regulated.
Based on the collective experiences of city officials derived from regulating
business activity, protecting persons and property from criminal conduct,
responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding door-to-door and on street
solicitation and canvassing, the experience of its law enforcement officers
and those affected by door-to-door and on street solicitation and canvassing,
as well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door-to-door and
on street solicitation and canvassing, the city adopts this chapter to
promote the city’s substantial interests in:



      (1)   Respecting  citizens’  decisions regarding  privacy
in  their residences and businesses;



      (2)   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;



      (3)   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against
religious belief, political position or charitable activities; and



      (4)   Permitting truthful and non-misleading door-to-door and
on street solicitation regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or
interstate commerce.



   (C)   Preservation, protection. The city finds that the procedures,
rules and regulations set forth in this chapter are narrowly tailored to
preserve and protect the city interests referred to herein while at the same
time balancing the rights of those regulated.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANVASSER. Any person, firm, corporation or entity including agents and
employees of any firm, corporation or entity whether a resident of the city
or not, who engages in canvassing.



   CANVASSING. Includes the act of any person, whether a resident of the
city or not, traveling by foot, vehicle or other type of conveyance to go
from place to place, from house to house or street to street by:



      (1)   Conducting a poll, survey or petition drive;



      (2)   Sharing, communicating or otherwise conveying ideas,
views or beliefs; or



      (3)   Disseminating oral or written information to a person
willing to directly receive such information, for the political, religious,
charitable purposes or otherwise.



   CHARITABLE. Patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare,
benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or fraternal.



   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. Any place of business within the city or any
structure used by any firm, corporation or entity for the purpose of sale of
any items on a commercial basis.



   HANDBILLS. Include any commercial or non-commercial handbill, pamphlet,
circular, newspaper, paper, newsletter, booklet, poster, leaflet, brochure or
other printed or written materials that have been cast, deposited, placed,
scattered or thrown onto the property of a business or residence in the
absence of a subscription agreement.



   HEARING OFFICER. The person designated or responsible for hearing and
deciding any appeal relating to or regarding the denial or revocation of a
solicitors permit and issuing a decision as required by this chapter.



   PANHANDLER. A person who panhandles.



   PANHANDLING. Any solicitation made in person upon any street, public
place or park in the city in which a person requests an immediate donation of
money, goods or any other form of gratuity from another person. When the
person being solicited receives an item of little or no monetary value in
exchange for a donation under circumstances where a reasonable person would
understand that the transaction is in substance a donation, it is a donation
for the purpose of this section. PANHANDLING shall not include, except as
specifically provided in this section, passively standing or sitting with a
sign or other indication that one is seeking donations, without addressing
any solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry
by that person.



   PEDDLER. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, receiver, trustee,
syndicate or other lawful entity, organization, society or association who or
which engages in peddling.



   PEDDLING. The selling, bartering or exchanging or the offering for
sale, barter or exchange of any tangible personal property upon or along the
streets, highways or public places of the city or from house to house,
whether at one place thereon or from place to place, from any wagon, truck,
pushcart or other vehicle or from movable receptacles of any kind, but shall
not include the delivery routes where the purchaser has previously requested
the seller to stop and exhibit his or her items.



   RESIDENCE. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.



   SOLICITATION. Occurs when a solicitor travels by foot, vehicle or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, house to house or from street
to street while engaging in one or more of the following activities:



      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods,
wares, merchandise, personal property or services of any kind, character or
description for any kind of remuneration or consideration regardless of
advance payment of sought;



      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application
or purchase of insurance of any type;



      (3)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers or clients for
application or purchase of stocks, bonds, mutual funds or other investments;



      (4)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication;



      (5)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money,
clothing or other property of value for the support or benefit, in whole or
in part, of any charitable or non-profit association, organization,
corporation or project;



      (6)   Delivery of handbills;



      (7)   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a
residence or commercial building for the purpose of promoting or facilitating
the receipt of information regarding religious belief, political position or
charitable conduct;



      (8)   Activities falling within the definition of canvassing;
and/or



      (9)   Activities falling within the definition of peddling.



   SOLICITOR. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, receiver,
trustee, syndicate or other lawful entity, organization, society or
association who or which engages in solicitation.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 3858, passed 2-2-2015)



§ 111.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Unless otherwise authorized, permitted or exempted, pursuant to the
terms and provisions of this chapter, being in or upon a private residence or
commercial property or on a public street within the city by a solicitor for
the purpose of solicitation is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in
this chapter.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the act of solicitation, unless such
person obtains a permit from the Director of Public Safety, or his or her
designee.



   (B)   The application for the permit, as provided by the city, shall
contain information about the solicitor, including the following:



      (1)   The applicant’s name, telephone number and home
address and length of residence at such address;



      (2)   Applicant’s home address during the past three years
if other than applicant’s present home address;



      (3)   Applicant’s present local address if other than
applicant’s home address;



      (4)   Applicant’s business address if other than present
home or local address;



      (5)   Applicant’s date of birth;



      (6)   Applicant must provide a photo copy of applicant’s
driver’s license or identification card issued by any state;



      (7)   If employed or acting as an agent, the name, address and
telephone number of the employer or principal who is being represented, as
well as credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the
authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or the principal;



      (8)   The name and address of the applicant’s
employer/principal during the past three years if other than the present
employer/principal;



      (9)   A description sufficient for identification of the
subject matter of the solicitation which the applicant will engage in;



      (10)   The date of the latest previous application for a
permit under this chapter, if any;



      (11)   Whether a permit issued to the applicant under this
chapter has ever been revoked and, if so, when and the reason for the
revocation;



      (12)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
violation of any other provision of the city’s code of ordinances or the
code of any other municipality regulating solicitation;



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any criminal offense under any state law or federal law of the
United States whether felony or misdemeanor, other than traffic violations.
As to any such offense, the applicant must provide the date and place of
conviction, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty imposed;



      (14)   The names of the last cities or villages, not exceeding
three, where applicant has carried on business immediately preceding the date
of application and the address(es) from which the business was conducted in
those municipalities;



      (15)   Two photographs of the applicant will be taken by the
City Police Department personnel at the time application is made;



      (16)   Proof of possession of any license or permit which,
under federal, state or local laws and regulations, the applicant is required
to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such
laws or regulations, would exempt the applicant from the permit requirements
of this chapter. If a charitable solicitation, applicant shall show
compliance with the Solicitation for Charity Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 460, §§
0.01 et seq.;



      (17)   The application shall contain a waiver of liability,
allowing the city to investigate and verify the information contained in the
application; and



      (18)   The application shall be verified, under oath, by the
applicant stating that the information contained therein is true and correct.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following are exempt from obtaining a solicitor’s permit
and from registering with the city:



      (1)   Persons specifically invited to a residence or a
commercial building by a competent individual prior to the time of the
person’s arrival at the residence or commercial building;



      (2)   Person delivering goods to a residence or commercial
building pursuant to a previously made order, or persons providing services
at a residence or commercial building to a previously made request by a
competent individual;



      (3)   Persons advocating or disseminating information for,
against or in conjunction with any religious belief, or political position;



      (4)   Those seeking to obtain from an occupant of any
residence or business, an indication of the occupant’s belief in regard to
any political or religious matter;



      (5)   Those who canvas door to door;



      (6)   Those who distribute handbills;



      (7)   A person of 16 years of age and under, who is
participating in a fund raising program for, or sponsored by, a public or
private elementary, high school or bonafide children’s organization,
including, without limitation, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts or youth sports; and



      (8)   A charitable solicitor other than a charitable
organization soliciting on city streets. (See § 111.14 of this chapter.) The
charitable solicitor, however, shall comply with the Solicitation for Charity
Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 0.01 et seq., if applicable.



   (B)   Those who are exempt from obtaining a solicitor’s permit or
from registering with the city, must comply with §§ 111.09 and 111.10 of
this chapter.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.06  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Director of Public Safety, after consideration of the application
and all information obtained relative thereto, shall issue the permit if the
applicant possesses the qualifications for such permit as herein required and
the issuance of a permit to the applicant would be in accord with the intent
and purposes of this chapter. The permit shall be issued for the calendar
year in which the application is filed. The permit shall be issued within 15
days of the receipt of the application and shall expire on December 31 of the
year for which it was issued. The solicitor shall surrender the permit to the
Director of Public Safety upon its expiration unless renewed by the Director
of Public Safety.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.07  CREDENTIALS.



   Upon approval of the application for a permit, as hereinbefore stated,
the Director of Public Safety shall issue credentials to the applicant which
credentials shall be issued over the name of the Director of Public Safety,
and to which shall be appended a photograph of the applicant. Such
credentials must be worn by the solicitor within the city when soliciting.
The credentials will be worn in such a manner as to be readily visible to all
individuals being solicited.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.08  FEE.



   (A)   A permit applicant must pay a non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $50 payable to the city (money order, in-state business
check, cashier’s check or exact change cash only). In addition, each person
to whom a permit is issued shall pay an annual fee of $50 (money order,
cashier’s check, in-state business check or exact change cash only).



   (B)   Once a permit is issued, the solicitor may annually renew the
permit for the following year, by paying, to the city, a renewal fee of $50
(money order, cashier’s check, in-state business check or exact change cash
only) by no later than December 31 in the year in which the permit is to
expire. In addition, the solicitor shall confirm the information contained
within the initial application and advise the Director of Public Safety of
any changes with regard to the information. Should the solicitor fail to
renew the annual permit, he or she shall be required to reapply for a new
permit.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.09  REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.



   Unless otherwise noted herein, the following shall apply to all
solicitors, including those exempt from obtaining a solicitor’s permit or
from registering with the city.



   (A)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence or
commercial building, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



   (B)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a
nuisance for any person, whether issued a permit under this chapter or not,
to solicit on a public street or to go upon any premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door of a residence or commercial building located
thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other
manner calculated to attract attention of the occupant of such residence or
commercial building for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof, and engage in soliciting as herein defined, at any time less than 30
minutes after sunrise or 30 minutes before sunset. Further, it shall be
unlawful to engage in soliciting at any time Sunday or any state or nation
holiday. This provision shall not apply to solicitation on streets by
charitable organizations, as provided in § 111.14 of this chapter. Further
canvassing may take place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
central time on any day.



   (C)   Except as provided in § 111.14 of this chapter, no solicitor
shall solicit in a city street or highway located within the city.



   (D)   No solicitor shall represent in any manner that the city or
its departments or officers have indorsed the permit holder or the products,
services or causes on behalf of which individuals are being solicited without
the written consent of the Director of Public Safety.



   (E)   No solicitor shall willfully obstruct the movement of any
person on any street, sidewalk or other public place.



   (F)   No solicitor shall solicit any person that has objected by
words or conduct to such soliciting.



   (G)   No solicitor shall refuse to identify the entity on whose
behalf the soliciting is being conducted when requested to do so by any
person contacted by the solicitor or fail to truthfully state the use(s) to
which any solicited item(s) will be put when requested to do so by any person
being solicited.



   (H)   No solicitor shall threaten any injury or damage to any
individual who declines to be subject to any soliciting or who declines to
make a purchase, donation or contribution.



   (I)   No solicitor shall directly or indirectly solicit for any
purpose by misrepresentation of his or her name, occupation, financial
conditions, social condition, physical or mental health or residence and no
person shall make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception or fraud in
connection with any soliciting for any purpose.



   (J)   No more than two solicitors shall solicit at a residence or
commercial building at any one time.



   (K)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, other than the permit
holder, to use any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter.



   (L)   It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling within
the city limits when either the panhandler or the person being solicited is
located at any of the following locations; at a bus stop; in a public
transportation vehicle or public transportation facility; in a sidewalk café.



   (M)   It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling in an
aggressive manner including any of the following actions:



      (1)   Panhandling a person who is standing at an automated
teller machine while located within 20 feet of that person and within one
minute after the person leaves the machine;



      (2)   Panhandling within 20 feet of the entrance to a bank and
within one minute after the person leaves the bank;



      (3)   Repeating a panhandling request when the person
solicited is stationary and has refused an immediately prior request made at
that location;



      (4)   At any time immediately before, during, or after the
panhandling request, touching the solicited person without that person's
consent;



      (5)   Directing profane or abusive language at the person
solicited at any time immediately before, during or after panhandling;



      (6)   Immediately before, during, or after panhandling, making
any statement other than the panhandling request or acting in any other
manner which, in light of the circumstances taken as a whole, would cause a
reasonable person to feel harassed, intimidated, or compelled to contribute;



      (7)   Panhandling a person while such person is standing in
line and waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment;



      (8)   Blocking the path of a person being solicited, or the
entrance to any building or vehicle;



      (9)   Following behind, or alongside or walking ahead of the
person who walks away from the panhandler after being solicited; or



      (10)   Panhandling in a group of two or more persons;



      (11)   Panhandling will be permitted only between one half
hour after sunrise and one half hour before sunset.



      (12)   Each act of panhandling prohibited by this section
shall constitute a public nuisance and a separate violation of this Code.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 3858, passed 2-2-2015)  Penalty, see §
111.99



§ 111.10  NOTICE TO SOLICITORS; DUTY TO OBSERVE.



   (A)   Any occupant of a residence or commercial building may give
notice of a desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a “No Solicitation”
or “No Trespassing” or similar sign which shall be posted on or near the
main entrance door or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading
to the residence or the commercial building. Such sign shall not exceed the
size parameters specified in the city’s land use ordinance regulating to
signs. The display of such sign shall be deemed to constitute notice to any
solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence or commercial building does
not desire to receive and/or does not invite solicitors. It shall be the
responsibility of the solicitor to check such residence or commercial
building for the presence of any such notice.



   (B)   The Department of Public Safety shall maintain a “Do Not
Contact List” which is available on the city’s website and at the office
of the City Clerk. The “Do Not Contact List” shall set forth the address
of the property of the owners/tenants of the property who do not wish to be
solicited or wish to receive solicitors. It is the responsibility of the
solicitor to make himself or herself aware of the list before entering into
the act of soliciting.



   (C)   No solicitor shall solicit at any residence or commercial
building where the owner or occupant has provided notice pursuant to
divisions (A) and/or (B) above.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all solicitors
including those who are exempt from obtaining a solicitor’s permit or
registering with the city.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.11  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The Director of Public Safety, after consideration of the application
and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if
the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such permit as herein
required, and the issuance of a permit to the applicant would not be in
accord with the intent and purposes of this chapter. Endorsement of the
denial shall be made by the Director of Public Safety upon the application.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.12  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Director of Public
Safety for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a permit;



   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the
permitee in the course of conducting solicitation activities;



   (C)   Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the provisions
contained in the permit;



   (D)   Conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude
subsequent to the issuance of a permit;



   (E)   Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to
create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the
health, safety or general welfare of the public; and/or



   (F)   Going upon the premises of a residence or commercial building
in violation of § 111.10 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.13  APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   An applicant whose permit has been denied or a registered
solicitor whose permit has been revoked shall have the right to appeal to the
Hearing Officer the denial of the application for or revocation of the
solicitor’s permit. Upon determining that grounds for a permit denial or
revocation exists as set forth in §§ 111.11 or 111.12 of this chapter, the
Director of Public Safety shall furnish written notice of the denial or
revocation to the applicant or permit holder. Such notice shall summarize the
principal reasons for the denial or revocation; shall state that the
applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision by filing a written
request for a hearing with the Director of Public Safety within ten business
days of the postmarked date of the denial or revocation of the permit. If the
request for hearing is timely made, the city’s Hearing Officer shall
conduct a hearing within 21 calendar days of the filing of such request by
the applicant or permit holder. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall
be given to the applicant or permit holder at least seven calendar days in
advance of the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or
permit holder and the city shall be entitled to present relevant evidence and
call witnesses who shall testify under oath. All notices to the applicant or
permit holder shall be delivered by sending the notice, by certified mail,
postage pre-paid addressed to the applicant or permit holder as the name and
address appears on the application of the applicant or permit holder.



   (B)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
decide whether grounds for denial or revocation of the permit exist and shall
submit a written report to the Director of Public Safety. Such report shall
contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state findings,
conclusions and whether the decision of the Director of Public Safety is
affirmed or reversed. If the Director of Public Safety’s decision is
reversed, a permit shall be issued or reinstated as the case may be,
forthwith. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail,
postage prepaid to the applicant or permit holder within one day after it is
filed with the Director of Public Safety. The decision of the Hearing Officer
shall be final and binding on all parties concerned with said decision being
subject to the State Administrative Review Law, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§
3-101 et seq. The costs of preparing and certifying the record of the
proceedings for filing with the Circuit Court shall be paid to the city by
the appellant prior to the filing of such record with the court.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.14  SOLICITATION ON STREETS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   A charitable organization which is either based in the city or
maintains a business or office in the city shall, through its representatives
and or members, be permitted to solicit at the intersections of the city
streets without obtaining a solicitor’s permit, but shall be required to
register with the City Clerk and provide the following information:



      (1)   Name address and telephone number of the group or
organization;



      (2)   Name address and telephone number a contact person for
the group or organization;



      (3)   The purpose of the solicitations to be conducted in the
city;



      (4)   A list of the names of the persons acting on behalf of
the group or organization; and



      (5)   Provide proof of compliance with the Solicitation for
Charity Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 0.01 et seq, if applicable.



   (B)   Solicitation shall be allowed only under the following
conditions.



      (1)   Solicitations may only be set up at intersections
controlled by stop signs and as designated by the Director of Public Safety.
They are not permitted at intersections controlled by electronic traffic
signals.



      (2)   A construction type barricade shall be placed in the
center of each street where an individual is soliciting. Individuals shall
remain behind the barricade at all times. With advanced coordination, the
barricades may be available from the City Public Works Department. In any
event, the barricade shall be a minimum of 36 inches high and 24 inches wide.



      (3)   Each individual participating in the event shall be at
least 16 years of age and will wear a reflective vest.



      (4)   The charitable organization or corporation shall be
liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation
which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the solicitor;
shall hold the city harmless from any claim of said person(s); shall provide
the city with evidence that the charitable organization is insured for
$1,000,000 through an insurance company licensed to do business in the state
and has named the city as an additional insured.



      (5)   The solicitor shall comply with § 111.09 of this
chapter.



      (6)   Solicitation may be conducted on weekends only. For the
purpose of this section, a WEEKEND shall mean Friday, Saturday and Sunday.



      (7)   The applicant shall be entitled to solicit a total of
two non-consecutive weekends in any calendar year.



      (8)   The solicitation shall take place on no more than two
days of the weekend with the total hours of solicitation, per weekend, not
exceed eight hours. The applicant may divide this time over the two-day
period.



      (9)   Solicitation will not be permitted on the consecutive
weekends whether by the same or different applicant. However should weather
or other unforeseen circumstances prevent the charitable organization from
conducting their scheduled solicitation, the city shall have the discretion
to permit the applicant to conduct a solicitation on another weekend even if
the solicitation would result in a solicitation taking place on consecutive
weekends.



      (10)   Solicitation will be permitted only between one-half
hour after sunrise and one-half hour before sunset.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.15  SOLICITOR’S BOND.



   (A)   Surety bond.



      (1)   The applicant’s employer or principal or if none, the
applicant himself or herself shall, before a permit is issued to the
applicant, file with the city a surety bond in the amount of $10,000 covering
the applicant’s employer or principal, as the case may be, or if none the
applicant himself or herself. If more than one employee or agent of an
employer or principal is issued a permit under this  chapter the bond shall
cover all such employees or agents. The bond shall condition that the
applicant shall comply fully with the ordinances of the city and statutes of
the state regulating the solicitors, and guaranteeing to the residents of the
city that all money paid to the applicant or his or her employer or principal
will be accounted for or applied according to the representations of the
applicant, and further guaranteeing to the residents of the city doing
business with the applicant that the property purchased will be delivered
according to the representations of the applicant. Actions on such bond may
be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit among others the
bond is given.



      (2)   Any person injured by the breach of conditions of such
surety bond may make application to the city to recover legal damages
suffered by reason of such breach; provided that, the aggregate recovery from
such surety bond for all such damages shall, in no event, exceed the sum of
said surety bond. Where the legal damage suffered by an injured person
exceeds the amount recovered by the surety bond, such partial recovery shall,
in no way, prejudice the right of the injured person to proceed directly
against the solicitor for such excess damages.



   (B)   Cash bond. In addition to posting the surety bond, as provided
in division (A) above, the applicant’s employer or principal, or if none
the applicant himself or herself, shall, before a permit is issued to the
applicant, post with the city a cash bond in the amount of $100 to ensure
compliance with the code of ordinances of the city. Should the city issue a
citation against the permit holder for violation of an ordinance of the city,
the bond may, at the city’s discretion, be applied to any fine levied
against the solicitor upon a guilty plea or finding of guilt as to the
citation.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.16  MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.



   The Director of Public Safety shall maintain and make available, for
public inspection and copy, a record of every completed application received
and the permit issued by the city or the denial or revocation of same. The
applicant’s background check shall remain a confidential, protected,
private record not available for public inspection.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.17  MAINTENANCE OF NO CONTACT LIST.



   The Director of Public Safety shall maintain and make available for
public inspection and copy a record of the address of every person or entity
who has requested that he, she or it not be contacted by a solicitor.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall be penalized as provided in §
10.99 of the city’s code of ordinances.



(Ord. 3775, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 3858, passed 2-2-2015)



CHAPTER 112:  FOOD INDUSTRY



Section




Food Establishments




   112.01   Definition



   112.02   License required



   112.03   Application for license; fee; issuance



   112.04   Disposition of fees



   112.05   Revocation of license



   112.06   Sanitary requirements



   112.07   Inspections




Mobile Food Vehicle Vendors




   112.20   Definitions



   112.21   Manner of operation—Mobile food vendor, mobile food
vehicle



   112.22   Manner of operation—Ice cream, sno-cone, shaved ice vendor



   112.23   License required; application; issuance



   112.24   Fee



   112.25   Vehicle appearance and maintenance



 



   112.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Sidewalk dining, see Ch. 123



   Tax on sale of food and beverages prepared for immediate consumption,
see §§ 35.085 through 35.089



Statutory reference:



   Inspection of food, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-3



   Regulation of places of eating and amusement, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§ 11-42-5



FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 112.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any building, room, stand, enclosure, premises,
place or establishment used for the preparation, distribution, selling or
offering or keeping for sale at retail or wholesale any article of food,
confection, condiment or drink used or intended for human consumption, or any
such article which is an ingredient of or is used for or is mixed with or
enters into the composition of any such food, confection, condiment or drink.



(1999 Code, § 112.01)  (Ord. 207, passed 11-19-1937; Ord. 776, passed
3-1-1976)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain or operate any
food establishment without first having obtained a license as hereinafter
required.



(1999 Code, § 112.02)  (Ord. 776, passed 3-1-1976)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE; ISSUANCE.



   The annual fee for such license shall be $25 and shall be for one year,
beginning May 1 of each fiscal year. Application shall be made to the City
Clerk and the City Clerk shall issue such license.



(1999 Code, § 112.03)  (Ord. 776, passed 3-1-1976)



§ 112.04  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   The license fees shall constitute a separate fund to be used to defray
the reasonable expense of inspections hereinafter provided, and for the
enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 112.04)  (Ord. 776, passed 3-1-1976)



§ 112.05  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Any license granted under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked by the Mayor for any violation of § 112.06 of this chapter, and such
revocation shall be in addition to any fine imposed by virtue of this
subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 112.05)  (Ord. 207, passed 11-19-1937; Ord. 776, passed
3-1-1976)



§ 112.06  SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation conducting,
operating or maintaining a food establishment to keep the floors, walls,
pillars, partitions, ceiling, receptacles, refrigerators, implements and
machinery of every such establishment, and all cars, trucks, vehicles and
containers used in the transportation of food products, in a clean and
sanitary condition. For the purposes of the enforcement of this subchapter,
unclean and unsanitary conditions shall be deemed to exist if the food in the
process of preparation, packing, storing, sale, distribution or
transportation is not adequately protected from flies, vermin, dogs, cats,
dust, dirt and from other foreign or injurious contamination; or if refuse,
dirt or waste products subject to decomposition and fermentation are not
removed daily; or if trucks, trays, boxes, buckets or other receptacles or
platforms, racks, tables or shelves, or the knives, saws, cleavers or other
utensils, or the machinery used in handling, cutting, chopping, mixing or
other processes are not clean; or if the clothing of persons employed therein
is unclean; or if no adequate toilet facilities, soap or clean towels are
provided for employees handling foods.



(1999 Code, § 112.06)  (Ord. 776, passed 3-1-1976) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.07  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to cause to be made such inspections
as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 112.07)  (Ord. 776, passed 3-1-1976)



MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE VENDORS



§ 112.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ICE CREAM, SNO-CONE, SHAVED ICE VENDOR. A vehicle or cart that
specialized in selling pre-packaged and other ready-to-eat foods.



   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person who travels within the city, by vehicle
or self- contained enclosed trailer with a valid license plate, selling or
offering for sale any food items, beverages and rendering said items for
immediate consumption.



   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A mobile food unit with a valid license plate in
which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned
for service, sale or distribution.



   RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. As referenced in § 158.016. A use engaged in
the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, excluding alcoholic
beverages. Such uses prepare food for consumption off the premises although
seating may be provided for dining on the premises. Uses include soda
fountains, cafes, dinners, grills, ice cream parlors, pizza parlors, chili
parlors, hamburger shops, sandwich (sub) shops, coffee shops or snack shops,
take-out only establishments and those that include a drive- through.



   RESTAURANT, GENERAL. An establishment or place of business primarily
engaged in the preparation of full course meals served on the premises, with
complete kitchen facilities for preparation of the food sold, and where
alcoholic beverages may be sold in conjunction with meals, or at a bar within
the restaurant, provided that more than 51% of the revenue generated at the
restaurant is related to food sales. Uses include buffets, cafeterias,
cantinas, barbeques, hamburger shops, pizza or chili parlors, diners and
steak houses where more than 51% of the revenue generated is from food sales.



   RESTAURANT, LIMITED. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale
of food and beverages, excluding alcoholic beverages. Uses include soda
fountains, cafes, diners, grills, ice cream parlors, pizza parlors, chili
parlors, hamburger shops, sandwich (sub) shops, coffee shops or snack shops,
take-out only establishments and that do not include restaurants that serve
alcoholic beverages, include a drive-through or that would be included under
the definition of “fast-food” or “drive-in.”



(Ord. 4069, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 112.21  MANNER OF OPERATION—MOBILE FOOD VENDOR, MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE.



   All mobile food trucks, mobile food vendors, or sponsors of an event
including mobile food trucks or mobile food vendors must obtain a special
events permit. Mobile food trucks or mobile food vendors must possess a valid
mobile food truck license.



(1999 Code, § 112.20)  (Ord. 4069, passed 12-3-2018) Penalty, see § 112.99



Cross-reference:



   Special events, see Chapter 118



§ 112.22  MANNER OF OPERATION—ICE CREAM, SNO-CONE, SHAVED ICE VENDOR.



   (A)   Ice cream, sno-cone, shaved ice, etc. trucks and food delivery
vehicles must adhere to mobile food truck regulations.



   (B)   They may operate on public streets not within or immediately
adjacent to city parks without a special event permit from the city.



   (C)   The vehicle may not remain stopped on a public street for more
than ten minutes.



   (D)   They cannot obstruct a public right-of-way, cannot impair
pedestrian or vehicle traffic, cannot stop within 30 feet of an intersection,
and cannot stop within three feet of a curb cut.



   (E)   To operate on streets and public right-of-way in or
immediately adjacent to city parks, they will be required to receive approval
of a special event permit from the city.



   (F)   Sale of liquor prohibited; selling or serving alcohol is
prohibited.



(Ord. 4069, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 112.23  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the mobile
food truck business in the city without having first obtained a special event
license, as well as a mobile food vendor license therefor as provided under
the manner of operation. Applications for license shall be made to the
Community Development Department.



   (B)   A mobile food truck license shall not be issued without the
approval of the office of the City Clerk and the payment of the fee provided
herein. Said license shall be issued to the licensee and should be displayed
in a manner that is clearly visible to patrons. The non- transferable mobile
food truck license covers from May 1 to April 30 of each fiscal year. Each
application will not be complete unless the St. Clair County food
establishment permit is attached. A license will be issued per each vehicle
listed on the application.



(Ord. 4069, passed 12-3-2018)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.24  FEE.



   The annual fee is $125 per mobile food vehicle, as well as $25 for an
annual food license.



(1999 Code, § 112.21)  (Ord. 216, passed 12-5-1938; Ord. 4069, passed
12-3-2018)



§ 112.25  VEHICLE APPEARANCE AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Food trucks must be kept in good mechanical and structural
condition. All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition,
and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used. It shall be
unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter or other waste material to
accumulate in or on such vehicle while it is so used. If unwrapped foodstuffs
are transported in any such vehicle, such good shall be carried in a portion
of the vehicle which is screened and protected against dust and insects.



   (B)   Each driver must possess a valid driver’s license. The
company name must be clearly displayed on the vehicle. The city-issued
license must be clearly displayed and visible to patrons.



   (C)   The city noise ordinances must be followed.



   (D)   Peripheral setup. No tents, tables, chairs shall be placed
outside the designated vending area. Signage shall be limited to the vehicle
and/or a free-standing sandwich sign. Connection to city water and sewer is
prohibited unless proper approval by the city is obtained. Proper sanitary
refuse containers must be visible to patrons and must be removed before the
mobile truck departs.



(1999 Code, § 112.24)  (Ord. 4069, passed 12-3-2018)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any business in violation of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$25, and not more than $750, for each offense.



(Ord. 4069, passed 12-3-2018)



CHAPTER 113:  VENDING MACHINES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES; RAFFLES



Section




Vending Machines and Amusement Devices




   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   License required



   113.03   Application; qualifications



   113.04   Investigation



   113.05   Issuance



   113.06   Fee



   113.07   Display of license; transfer of business location



   113.08   Revocation of license



   113.09   Regulations and prohibitions




Raffles




   113.20   Definitions



   113.21   License required; qualifications



   113.22   Eligibility



   113.23   Application



   113.24   Fee



   113.25   Bond of raffles manager



   113.26   Records and reports



   113.27   Limitations on prizes, chances and the like



   113.28   Conduct of raffles



   113.29   Violation



Cross-reference:



   Video gaming, see Ch. 121



VENDING MACHINES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE. Any automatic vending machine used for the
sale of cigarettes and controlled by the insertion of a coin or currency. It
shall not include machines or devices used solely for the vending of service,
food or confections.



   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any amusement machine or device
operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or currency for the
purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged.
The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated
gaming or amusement features.



   PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION or ASSOCIATION. Includes any person, firm,
corporation or association which owns any cigarette vending machine or
coin-operated amusement device; the person, firm, corporation or association
in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public;
and the person, firm, corporation or association having control over such
machine; provided, however, that, the payment of such fee by any person,
firm, corporation or association enumerated herein shall be deemed a
compliance with this section of this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 113.01)



§ 113.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for public
patronage or keeping for operation any cigarette vending machine or coin-
operated amusement device, as herein defined by § 113.01 of this chapter,
shall be required to obtain a license from the city upon payment of a license
fee. Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk upon a form
to be supplied by the Clerk for that purpose.



(1999 Code, § 113.02)



§ 113.03  APPLICATION; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Application. The application for a license shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant; the applicant’s
age, date and place of birth;



      (2)   All prior convictions of felonies of the applicant, if
any;



      (3)   The address and the name of the business where the
machine or device will be displayed and operated and the nature of the
business conducted at the address and under the name; and



      (4)   The name and address of the owner of the machine, and,
if the machine is serviced and supplied by any person, firm, corporation or
association other than the applicant or the owner of the machine, the name
and address of such person, firm, corporation or association.



   (B)   Qualifications. No license shall be issued to any applicant
unless he or she shall be over 21 years of age.



(1999 Code, § 113.03)



§ 113.04  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The application for a license shall be made out in duplicate,
one copy being retained by the City Clerk and the other copy being referred
to the Director of Public Safety of the city.



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety shall investigate the location
wherein it is proposed to operate such machine and ascertain if the applicant
is a person of good, moral character.



   (C)   If the Director of Public Safety determines that the applicant
is not of good moral character, the Director of Public Safety shall report
such findings to the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 113.04)



§ 113.05  ISSUANCE.



   No license shall be issued until the application therefor has been
approved by the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 113.05)



§ 113.06  FEE.



   (A)   Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay an
annual fee of $20 per machine for the privilege of operating or maintaining
for operation each cigarette vending machine or coin- operated amusement
devices, as defined herein.



   (B)   The license fee shall be paid annually, in advance, on May 1
of each year; excepting that, for the first year, the license shall be
obtained within 30 days after the effective date of these provisions, and if
additional machines or devices are to be installed or displayed from time to
time, the license shall be obtained before display or installation. The
license shall expire on April 30 of each year.



(1999 Code, § 113.06)  (Ord. 3000, passed 5-30-2000)



§ 113.07  DISPLAY OF LICENSE; TRANSFER OF BUSINESS LOCATION.



   The license herein provided for shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained. Not more than one machine shall be
operated on any one license and the applicant or licensee shall be required
to secure a license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him
or her. If the licensee shall move his or her place of business to another
location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location
upon application to the City Clerk, giving the street and number of the new
location. The new location shall be inspected by the Chief of Police in the
same manner as provided in § 113.04 of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 113.07)



§ 113.08  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Every license issued under this subchapter is subject to the right
which is hereby expressly reserved to revoke the same should the licensee
directly or indirectly permit the operation of any cigarette vending machine
or coin-operated device contrary to the provisions of this subchapter, the
code of the city or the laws of the state. The license may be revoked by the
Mayor after written notice to the licensee which notice shall specify the
code or law violation with which the licensee is charged. The licensee shall
be entitled to a hearing on the charge, said hearing to be held before the
City Council. At such hearing, the licensee may appear and with counsel
present evidence in his or her behalf.



(1999 Code, § 113.08)  (Ord. 440, passed 7-3-1961)



§ 113.09  REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.



   No person, firm, corporation or association holding a license under
this subchapter shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to operate
any cigarette vending machine, as herein defined.



(1999 Code, § 113.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



RAFFLES



§ 113.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community.



   CHARITABLE.  An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of public.  The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.



   EDUCATIONAL.  An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in
their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported
schools.



   ENABLING ACT. Illinois Pub. Act No. 81-1365 (1980) (ILCS Ch. 720, Act
5, §§ 28-1 et seq.) entitled an Act to Provide for Licensing and Regulating
Certain Games of Chance and Amending Certain Acts Herein Named.



   FRATERNAL.  An organization of person having a common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for
by the government.



   HARDSHIP.  A nonprofit fundraising organization or an individual or
group of individuals organized for the sole purpose of providing financial
assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering
extreme financial hardship as a result of an illness, disability, accident or
disaster.



   LABOR.  An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit
and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.



   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, license fees as provided herein, and
other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a
raffle.



   NON-PROFIT.  An organization or institution organized and conducted on
a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any as a result of
the operation.



   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
28-2(b), conducted by an organization licensed under the terms of this
subchapter, in which:



      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for
a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be
designated the winning chance; and



      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing
or by some other method based on the element of chance by an act or set of
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except
that, the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.



   RELIGIOUS.  Any church, congregation, society or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.



   VETERANS.  An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veteran or spouses, widow, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare
of its member and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way
as to confer a public benefit.



(1999 Code, § 113.20)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 3965, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 113.21  LICENSE REQUIRED; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided hereafter, no person, firm or corporation
shall conduct raffles or chances within the city without first having
obtained a license therefore as provided in this subchapter; provided,
however, that, such a license hereunder may be issued only to bonafide
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have
been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before
making application for a license and which have had during that entire
five-year period a bonafide membership engaged in carrying out their objects.



   (B)   This qualification shall not apply to a business or hardship.



(1999 Code, § 113.21)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 3965, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 113.22  ELIGIBILITY.



   Notwithstanding any contrary provision herein contained, the following
are ineligible for any license under this subchapter:



   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;



   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter;



   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;



   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions
(A), (B) or (C) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in
which such a person is active or employed;



   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not; and



   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle, as defined in this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 113.22)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981)



§ 113.23  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any firm, person or organization applying for a raffle license
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall file a written
application therefore in the office of the City Clerk on a form provided by
the City Clerk. Such application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant organization.



      (2)   The area or areas within the city in which raffle
chances will be sold or issued;



      (3)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold
or issued;



      (4)   The date, time and location of determination of winning
chances;



      (5)   The location or locations at which winning chances will
be determined; and



      (6)   A sworn statement attesting to the non-for-profit
character of the prospective licensee organization signed by the presiding
officer and the secretary of that organization.



      (7)   Such other information as the City Clerk may require.



   (B)   Any such application for a raffle license filed pursuant
hereto shall be acted upon by the city within 30 days from the date on which
it is filed.



(1999 Code, § 113.23)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 3965, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 113.24  FEE.



   Each application for a raffle license filed pursuant to this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of $10 to be paid at the
time of filing.  The filing fee shall cover all raffles conducted by the
applicant during the calendar year in which the application is filed
regardless of the number of raffles conducted.  The license issued pursuant
to the application shall be valid only during the calendar year in which the
license is issued.



(1999 Code, § 113.24)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 2055, passed
10-18-1999; Ord. 3965, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 113.25  BOND OF RAFFLES MANAGER.



   (A)   All operation of and the conduct of raffles within the city
shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the
organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of $1,000 in
favor of the organization conditioned upon the honesty of such manager in the
performance of his or her duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given in writing to the city by filing the same with the
office of the City Clerk not less than 30 days prior to the cancellation of
such bond. 



   (B)   The City Administrator may waive this bond requirement when,
due to the nature, past experience or competence of the organization
involved, the City Administrator determines that such bond would be
unnecessarily burdensome.  The City Administrator shall give notice of such
waiver to the Mayor and City Council not less than 48 hours before the
license becomes effective. Within such 48 hour period, the Mayor or any
member of the City Council may, through notice to the City Administrator,
cause this waive to be stayed. In such case the matter will be formally
presented to the City Council at their next regular council meeting for
decision on the waiver.



(1999 Code, § 113.25)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 3965, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 113.26  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with  receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.



   (B)   Each organization conducting raffles pursuant to this
subchapter shall have separate records of each raffle conducted pursuant
hereto. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from the operation of raffles on behalf of such organization shall not be the
same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report
monthly to its membership, and to the city, its gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required in this section.



   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.



(1999 Code, § 113.26)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981)



§ 113.27  LIMITATIONS ON PRIZES, CHANCES AND THE LIKE.



   The following limitations shall apply as to prizes, merchandise and
chances in connection with any raffle conducted within the city:



   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
awarded by a licensee in connection with a single raffle shall not exceed
$25,000 unless a greater value is approved by the City Council;



   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee
in a single raffle shall not exceed $15,000 unless a greater value is
approved by the City Council;



   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance
issued or sold shall not exceed $25 unless a greater value is approved by the
City Council;



   (D)   No raffle chance shall be sold or issued more than 120 days
before the determination of the winning raffle chance or chances.



(1999 Code, § 113.27)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 3965, passed
11-21-2016)



§ 113.28  CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.



   The following limitations shall apply in respect to the conduct of
raffles within the city:



   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
game;



   (B)   No person, except a bonafide member of the sponsoring
organization, may participate in the management or operation of the raffle;



   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle;



   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this subchapter;



   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area
specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license;



   (F)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; and



   (G)   Any license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid
for only one raffle, and the same may be suspended or revoked for any
violation of the terms of this subchapter or the Enabling Act.



(1999 Code, § 113.28)  (Ord. 976, passed 3-16-1981)



§ 113.29  VIOLATION.



   Any raffle permit issued under this subchapter shall be revoked or
suspended if the permit holder violates any terms of the license or any other
provisions of this subchapter.  In addition any violation of this subchapter
shall be subject to a fine up to $750.  Each day that a violation hereof
exists shall be considered a separate offense.  Each member of the
sponsoring organization shall be jointly and severally liable with the
organization and with each other for any violation.



(Ord. 3965, passed 11-21-2016)



CHAPTER 114:  CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



Section



   114.01   FCC regulations adopted



   114.02   Cable/video service provider fees and PEG access support
fees on holders of state-issued authorizations



   114.03   Regulations applicable to holders of state-issued
authorizations; local franchisees



   114.04   Cable and Video Customer Protection Law



   114.05   PEG access required



§ 114.01  FCC REGULATIONS ADOPTED.



   The city does hereby adopt the Federal Communications Commission’s
regulations for basic cable service and the city shall follow said
regulations, as amended from time to time, in its regulation of cable service
within the city.



(1999 Code, § 114.01)  (Ord. 1657, passed 12-6-1993)



§ 114.02  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES ON
HOLDERS OF STATE-ISSUED AUTHORIZATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CABLE SERVICE. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



      COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.



      GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature,
including, without limitation,



cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the holder for
the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video
service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within the
city.



         (a)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



            1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



            2.   Even-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges;



            3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable
service or video service equipment;



            4.   Service charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation,
installation and repair charges;



            5.   Administrative charges related to the
provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to,
service order and service termination charges;



            6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient
funds check charges and other charges assessed to recover the costs of
collecting delinquent payments;



            7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by
the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising of for promotion or exhibition of any products or services 
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number
of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in
relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement;



            8.   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or similar channel,
subject to division (a)9. below;



            9.   In the case of a cable service or video
service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services,
capabilities or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue
attributable to the other services, capabilities or applications shall be
included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the
division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept
in the regular course of business; and



            10.   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS
Act 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



         (b)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



            1.   Revenues not actually received, even if
billed, such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(l)(vi);



            2.   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments
that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service;



            3.   Regardless of whether the services are
bundled, packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video
service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service
or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services or the provision of
directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to non- cable service or non-video service in
accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or orders;



            4.   The sale of cable services or video services
for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider
fee from the purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies
in writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b), with respect to the service;



            5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability
imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or
any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



            6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers;
and



            7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home
shopping” or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping
channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.



         (c)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be
included in the calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of
the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect
of evading the payment of the fee permitted  by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



      HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



      PEG. Public, education and governmental.



      PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this section and
ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d), by the holder to the city for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



      SERVICE. The provision of cable service or video service to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



      SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801, by the holder to a city for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.



      VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if
any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming
services, and which is provided through wireless facilities located at least
in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology,
including internet protocol technology, This definition does not include any
video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in
47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail or other services offered over the public internet.



   (B)   Cable/video service provider fee imposed.



      (1)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the city.



      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby
shall be 5% of the holder’s gross revenues.



      (3)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at
least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the city.



      (4)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and
pay the service provider fee to the city. The holder’s liability for the
fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days
after receipt of the ordinance adopting this section (Ord. 3559) by the
holder. The ordinance adopting this section shall be sent by mail, postage
prepaid, to the address listed on the holder’s application notice sent
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6), to the city.



      (5)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee
shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.



      (6)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to
existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing
franchise agreement with the city in which a fee is paid.



      (7)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator
that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant  to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-301(c), with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that
agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator
owes under this division (B).



   (C)   PEG access support fee imposed.



      (1)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby
imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to division (B) above.



      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater,
the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the
city or its designer for PEG access support in the city.



      (3)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee
to the city or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the
date set forth in division (B)(4) above.



      (4)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee
shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.



      (5)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator
that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 21-301(c), shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all
monetary payments for PBG access that would have been due during the
remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that
section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the
previous sentence may be credited against the fees that operator owes under
this division (C).



   (D)   Applicable principles. All determinations and calculations
under this section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting
principles.



   (E)   No impact on other taxes due from holder. Nothing contained in
this section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or
may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is or may later be
required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or
video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement
of the holder with respect to payment of the city’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city’s 911 or
E911 fees, taxes or charges.



   (F)   Audits of cable/video service provider.



      (1)   Audit requirement. The audit requirements contained in
Ordinance No. 1826 are hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set
forth herein. The city will notify the holder of the



requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. Receipt of the ordinance
adopting this section (Ord. 3559) by the holder shall constitute such notice.
The holder shall comply with the same requirements the city imposes on other
cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the
holder’s books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under the requirements of the city. If all local franchises between
the city and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those
adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of
Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq., as codified by the city at
§§ 35.55 through 35.72 of the city’s code of ordinances. No acceptance of
amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are
correct.



      (2)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an
audit shall be paid within 30 days after the city’s submission of an
invoice for the sum.



   (G)   Late fees/payments. All fees due and payments which are past
due shall be subject to penalties set forth by ordinances adopted by the city
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch.
50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq., as codified by the city at §§ 35.55 through
35.72 of the city’s code of ordinances, or any other penalties the city may
be authorized by law to impose on payments which are past due.



(1999 Code, § 114.02)  (Ord. 3559, passed 1-7-2008)



§ 114.03  REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO HOLDERS OF STATE-ISSUED AUTHORIZATIONS;
LOCAL FRANCHISEES.



   (A)   Standards. All holders of a state-issued authorization to
provide cable or video services shall be subject to construction and
technical standards and right-of-way occupancy standards set forth in Ord.
1826 and other city ordinances relating to the use of public rights-of-way,
pole attachments, permit obligations, indemnification, performance bonds,
penalties or liquidated damages as may apply to a provider of cable or video
services operating pursuant to a franchise granted by the city under such
ordinances. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, if the city is
permitted by law to require a holder of a state-issued authorization to seek
a permit to install, construct, operate, maintain or remove its cable
service, video service or telecommunications network within a public
right-of-way, those permits shall be deemed granted within 45 days after
being submitted, if not otherwise acted upon by the city; provided, the
holder complies with the requirements applicable to the holder imposed by the
city.



   (B)   State provisions. All holders of a state-issued authorization
to provide cable or video service that provide such services within the city
shall be subject to the additional provisions set forth in ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 21-1001, as amended.



   (C)   General requirements. In addition to the above requirements,
all holders of a state-issued authorization to provide cable or video
services shall be subject to the following general requirements regarding
placement and location of such a holder’s facilities.



      (1)   No interference with city facilities. No facilities
shall be placed in any location if the City Engineer determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
city’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city’s utility facilities.



      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
rights-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin said rights-of-way.



      (3)   No interference with travel. No facility shall be placed
in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such rights-of-way.



      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
rights-of-way.



      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation of
facilities shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility
owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.



      (6)   Location and screening. A holder of  a state-issued
authorization shall comply with the city’s reasonable requests to place
equipment on public property where possible, and promptly comply with the
city’s direction with respect to the location and screening of equipment
and facilities.



   (D)   Insurance. All holders of a state-issued authorization to
provide cable or video services shall maintain insurance, as provided in Ord.
1826, or provide the city evidence of self-insurance.



   (E)   Enforcement. The requirements of the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007 (codified at ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, Art. 21) shall
apply to all holders of a state-issued authorization to provide cable and
video services under the terms thereof and, to the extent provided by law,
the city may enforce such provisions as a condition of this section,
consistent with ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-1301(a).



   (F)   Emergency alert system. A provider of cable or video services,
whether providing such services pursuant to a state-issued authorization or a
local franchise (“provider”), shall comply with 47 U.S.C. § 544(g) and
all regulations issued pursuant thereto in addition to the supplementary
requirements herein. In addition, consistent with the provisions of ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-701, a provider shall on request of the city provide an
override capability so that city may access the provider’s system with a
audio and visual message on all channels in the event of an emergency or
disaster. A provider will provide the necessary electronic equipment for such
emergency override system. Further, a provider will maintain said equipment
and provide for regularly scheduled testing by the city to ensure that the
equipment is functioning properly. Except as may be otherwise agreed or
required by law, the required telephone or other connection to the emergency
alert system shall be the responsibility of a provider.



   (G)   Application to local franchisees. The requirements of this
section shall also apply to providers of cable service or video service
providing such services pursuant to a local franchise or other authority from
the city to the extent permitted by applicable law; provided such application
does not violate the terms of such local franchise or authority.



(1999 Code, § 114.03)  (Ord. 3559, passed 1-7-2008)



§ 114.04  CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW.



   (A)   Customer service and privacy protection.



      (1)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
22-501, the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to all cable or video providers offering
services within the city’s boundaries. As such regulations are deemed
necessary to the city’s exercise of the police power, the ordinance
adopting this section shall constitute an amendment to Ord. 1826 and the
regulations contained in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501, will supersede any
customer service and privacy protection standards contained in a franchise
granted by the city to a provider of cable or video services.



      (2)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of
this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
city’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
section by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the city.



   (B)   Enforcement. The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its
intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection
standards of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law with respect to
complaints received from residents within the city.



   (C)   Penalties. The city, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any
material breach of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law by cable or
video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The
monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not
exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000
for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.



      (1)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable
or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards
specified in any provision of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law.



      (2)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written
notice of any alleged material breaches of the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of
the notice to remedy the specified material breach.



      (3)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing
penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has
not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in
division (C)(2) above.



   (D)   Customer credits. The city hereby adopts a schedule of
customer credits that shall be paid directly to customers by the cable or
video provider for violations of the requirements adopted by this section.
The schedule of credits shall be the maximum amount as provided for in the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(s), and applied on the statement
issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or
following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is
responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation
to request the credit.



(1999 Code, § 114.04)  (Ord. 3559, passed 1-7-2008)



§ 114.05  PEG ACCESS REQUIRED.



   Holders of a state-issued authorization to provide cable or video
services that are providing such services within the city shall provide
public, education and government (PEG) access in the manner provided in ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-601. Receipt of the ordinance  enacting this section
(Ord. 3559) by a state-authorized provider of cable and video services shall
be considered a request by the city to provide such PEG access.



(1999 Code, § 114.05)  (Ord. 3559, passed 1-7-2008)



CHAPTER 115:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section




Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee




   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Registration of telecommunications providers; duty to update



   115.03   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee



   115.04   Collection, enforcement and administration of
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fees



   115.05   Compliance with other laws



   115.06   Effect of provisions on existing franchises, licenses and
the like



   115.07   Reservation of remedies




Simplified Telecommunications Tax




   115.20   Modification



Statutory reference:



   Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, see
ILCS Ch. 35, Act 635, §§ 1 et seq.




TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE




§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the
act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the
city, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel termination point within the city, charges for the
channel mileage between each channel termination point within the city, and
charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided
within the city. However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a
charge made under:



         (a)   The fee imposed by this section;



         (b)   Additional charges added to the purchaser’s bill
under §§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act (see ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, §§ 9-202, 9-221, 9-222 and 9-222.1);



         (c)   Amounts collected under § 8-11-17 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17);



         (d)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise
Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.);



         (e)   911 surcharges; or



         (f)   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue
Code.



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside the city;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content; such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time- sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are desegregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 9-222.1, of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the city;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;



      (7)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards. If the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made.);



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated
telecommunications devices; or



      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided to the city.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public
right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including
utility easements wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to
locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal city
property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and
shall not include city buildings and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. This or any
like term means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within the state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such
place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in the state.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location,
as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer’s place of primary use as
defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act (ILCS Ch.
35, Act 638, §§ 1 et seq.). For air-to-ground systems, and the like,
SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the customer’s primary use of
the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in the state
where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, TELECOM- MUNICATIONS shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end- to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales
for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or
other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1550 et seq.), as now or
hereafter amended. Beginning 1-1-2001, prepaid telephone calling arrangements
shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS subject to the tax imposed under
this Act. For purpose of this section, PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS
means that term as defined in § 2-27 of the Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.



      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and



      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer
that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-
way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any
form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Every person
engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as
defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the fees hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within the state, who, to the satisfaction of
the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the
fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee
upon all of the gross charges of telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of
business within the city.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless services as defined in § 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Pub. Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. §
332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services and paging services.



(1999 Code, § 115.01)  (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 35, Act 635, § 10



§ 115.02  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS;  DUTY TO UPDATE.



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this
subchapter shall register with the city within 30 days after the effective
date of this subchapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever
is later, on a form to be provided by the city; provided, however, that, any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to § 115.04(C)
of this subchapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
city pursuant to division (A) above has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by § 115.04(C) of
this subchapter, as the case may be, to the city within 30 days from the date
of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the city.



(1999 Code, § 115.02)  (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 115.03  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.



   (A)   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of
all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the city for telecommunications originating or received in
the city.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this
subchapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any
taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as
set forth in § 115.04 of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 115.03)  (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997)



Editor’s note:



   The telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by
this section has been superseded by the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax imposed by § 115.20 of this chapter.



Statutory reference:



   Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax, see ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636,
§§ 5-1 et seq.



§ 115.04  COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the city, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in
which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that, the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the city
infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for
expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the city,
which shall contain such information as the city may reasonably require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this subchapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by
the telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under
division (A) above by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
subchapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.



   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
subchapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due
or to become due under this subchapter from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the city may request, and
the telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for
such credit. However, no claim for such credit  may be made more than three
years after the date of the erroneous payment unless:



      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the city within the applicable statutory period of
limitations; and



      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.



   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts:



      (1)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.);



      (2)   “Gross receipts” for purposes of the municipal
utility tax as prescribed in § 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17);



      (3)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax as prescribed in § 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17); and



      (4)   “Gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual
gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
2-202, the Public Utilities Act.



   (G)   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
subchapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to
the city by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus 5%
of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any
costs incurred by the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.
Said sum shall be paid to the city within 21 days after the date of issuance
of any invoice for same.



   (H)   The city, or its designee, may promulgate such further or
additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
subchapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to
time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to § 115.02 of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 115.04)  (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 115.05  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;



   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within use of or
repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided;



   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and



   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the
right-of-way.



(1999 Code, § 115.05)  (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 115.06  EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON EXISTING FRANCHISES, LICENSES AND THE
LIKE.



   (A)   Generally. Any franchise, license or similar agreements
between telecommunications retailers and the city entered into before the
effective date of this subchapter (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997) regarding
the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according to and for their
stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent
waived.



   (B)   Waiver of franchise fees and the like.



      (1)   The city hereby waives all fees, charges and other
compensation that may accrue after the effective date of the waiver to the
city by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing city
franchise, license or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer
during the time the city imposes the telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this subchapter is subject to
being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by
the telecommunications retailer from the customer.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by
certified mail/return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer
with whom the city has a franchise.



   (C)  Imposition of infrastructure maintenance fee. The city
infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this subchapter shall become
effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than 90 days
after the city provides written notice by certified mail to each
telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing franchise,
license or similar agreement that the city waives all compensation under such
existing franchise, license or similar agreement during such time as the fee
is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and
remitted to the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross
charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding
sentence.



(1999 Code, § 115.06)  (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 115.07  RESERVATION OF REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 115.07)  (Ord. 1968, passed 12-22-1997)




SIMPLIFIED TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX




§ 115.20  MODIFICATION.



   (A)   The rate of the Simplified Municipal Tele- communications Tax
imposed under the provisions of §§ 5-25 and 5-30 of the Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-25-and
5-30) is hereby changed to 5%.



   (B)   The Simplified Municipal Tele- communications Tax Act was for
a period of ten years, beginning on and after 1-1-2006. Remove the phrase
“for a period of ten years”.



(1999 Code, § 115.20)  (Ord. 3366, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 3625, passed
5-18-2009)



CHAPTER 116:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   116.01   Definitions




Licenses




   116.15   Classifications of licenses



   116.16   License required



   116.17   Application for license



   116.18   Fee



   116.19   Bond



   116.20   Fingerprint card and fee



   116.21   State requirements for licensing



   116.22   Issuance of license



   116.23   Nature, duration and transferability of license



   116.24   Renewal of license; nature of renewal privilege



   116.25   Suspension or revocation of license; fines



   116.26   Location of sales under license



   116.27   Display of license



   116.28   Special license for sales in city park



   116.29   Club licenses



   116.30   Records of City Clerk; Clerk’s duties




Regulations and Prohibitions




   116.45   Duties of licensee



   116.46   Sunday and election day hours



   116.47   Illicit dancing and attire



   116.48   Gambling devices



   116.49   Disorderly conduct



   116.50   Sanitary requirements



   116.51   Prohibited sales and transfers; identification requirements



   116.52   Identification card prohibitions



   116.53   Underage drinking



Cross-reference:



   Liquor Commissioner duties of Mayor, see § 31.024



   Sidewalk dining regulations, see § 123.05



   Video gaming establishments, see Ch. 121



Statutory reference:



   Local control of alcoholic liquor, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 4-1 et
seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. The four varieties of liquor herein defined (alcohol,
spirits, wine and beer), and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by a human being.



   BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.



   BREW PUB.   Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where alcoholic beverages
are served and which includes the onsite manufacture, storage and retail sale
of beer for consumption on or off the designated premises.



   BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE or BYOB.  The practice of allowing patrons of a
business inviting public patronage to bring their own alcoholic liquor to be
consumed by the patron and his/her guest on the business premises.



   CATERER or CATERING. A person, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company or other business entity which services alcoholic liquor
for consumption as an incidental part of food and beverage service that
serves meals off site of a licensed premises or a restaurant.



   EVENT SPONSOR.  Any person who presents, sponsors, hosts, or promotes
a tasting event which includes sample tasting of alcoholic liquor whether or
not such person directly offers tasting of alcoholic liquor and its related
sale at the tasting event.



   NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION. A corporation organized or registered under
the laws of and in good standing with the State of Illinois pursuant to the
Illinois General Not-For-Profit Corporation Act of 1986 (ILCS Ch. 805, Act
105, §§ 101.01 et seq.) and which entity was organized for the promotion of
some common object or purpose, other than the sale and consumption of
alcoholic liquors.



   PACKAGE SALES.  The sale of the same alcoholic liquor which is offered
for tasting where such alcoholic liquor is sold in the original container
which bears the brewer's and/or manufacturer's label and which is corked,
capped, or otherwise securely sealed at the place of brewing, manufacture, or
distilling.



   RESTAURANT.  As defined in § 158.016 of the City Code of Ordinances
under RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD, RESTAURANT, GENERAL or RESTAURANT, LIMITED.



   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified,
blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.



   TASTING.  The supervised presentation of samples of one or more
varieties of alcoholic liquor to the public served from the original
package.  Tasting shall be limited to any one individual no more than three
offerings in one day of alcoholic liquor in glasses, cups or other containers
which are capable of holding no more than one fluid ounce in the case of
wine, two fluid ounces in the case of beer, and one-quarter ounce in the case
of spirits.



   TASTING EVENT.  Any event sponsored, hosted or promoted within the
City of O'Fallon primarily for the purpose of offering tasting of alcoholic
liquor.



   TASTING REPRESENTATIVE.  Any person who directly offers tasting of
alcoholic liquor to the public and either holds a valid issued retailer's
license, special event retailer's license, caterer's retail license or
special use permit license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission
or works under the direction of, is supervised by, or is employed by a person
who holds a valid issued retailer's license, special event retailer's
license, caterer's retail license or special use permit license liquor
license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.



   WINE. Any alcohol beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as herein defined.



(1999 Code, § 116.01)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992; Ord. 3824, passed
3-17-2014; Ord. 3827, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 3932, passed 5-16-2016; Ord.
4065, passed 11-5-2018)



LICENSES



§ 116.15  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Class “A” On Premise License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises specified in such
license.



      (2)   Sales may occur at all hours chosen by the licensee,
except between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., when no sales of
alcoholic liquor may be made.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic liquor upon the licensed
premises more than one-half hour after the close of business for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor and before such business reopens as allowed by the
preceding, and the premises shall be vacated within one-half hour of the
close of such business by all persons other than employees of the licensee
then engaged in customary after-hours duties which relate to cleaning and
closing such business.



   (B)   Class “B” On Premise Extended Hours License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises specified in such
license.



      (2)   Sales may occur at all hours chosen by the licensee,
except between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
inclusive, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and
Sunday, when no sales of alcoholic liquor may be made.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic liquor upon the licensed
premises more than one-half hour after close of business for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor and before such business reopens as allowed by the
preceding, and the premises shall be vacated within one-half hour of the
close of such business by all persons other than employees of the licensee
then engaged in customary after-hours duties which relate to cleaning and
closing such business.



   (C)   Class “C-1” Off Premise License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor in the original retail package of the manufacturer on
the premises specified in the license.



      (2)   Sales may occur at all hours chosen by the licensee,
except between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., when no sales of
alcoholic liquor may be made.



      (3)   No alcoholic liquor sold pursuant to a Class “C-1”
license shall be consumed on the premises for which such license is issued.



   (D)   Class “C-2” Off Premise Extended Hours License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor in the original retail package of the manufacturer on
the premises specified in the license.



      (2)   Sales may occur at all hours chosen by the licensee,
except between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
inclusive, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and
Sunday, when no sales of alcoholic liquor may be made.



      (3)   No alcoholic liquor sold pursuant to a Class “C-2”
license shall be consumed on the premises for which such license is issued.



   (E)   Class “D-1” On Premise with Entertainment License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises specified in such
license.



      (2)   Sales may occur at all hours chosen by the holder
thereof, except between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., when no sales
of alcoholic liquor may be made; provided that, a live band, or such other
live entertainment as the Liquor Commissioner deems comparable, performs at
such premises at least five days each week.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic liquor upon the licensed
premises more than one-half hour after the close of business for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor and before such business reopens as allowed by the
preceding, and the premises shall be vacated one-half hour after the close of
such business by all persons other than employees of the licensee then
engaged in customary after-hours duties relating to cleaning and closing such
business.



   (F)   Class “D-2” On Premise with Bowling Alley License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises specified in the
license.



      (2)   Sales may occur at all hours chosen by the holder
thereof, except between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., when no sales
of alcoholic liquor may be made, provided that the holder of such license
operates on such same premises a bowling alley and food is being served at
all such hours on such premises.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee may possess or have, any alcoholic liquor on such premises more than
one-half hour after the close of business for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor and before such business reopens as allowed by the preceding.



   (G)   Class “E” On and Off Premise License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize a holder thereof to make sales
at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises with a seating
capacity for 20 or more patrons and to sell packaged alcoholic liquors for
consumption off the premises.



      (2)   Class "E" licenses shall authorize a holder thereof to
sell, at retail, alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises
specified in such license and to sell packaged alcoholic liquors for
consumption off the premises specified in such license at all hours chosen by
the licensee except between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday
through Friday, inclusive, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
on Saturday and Sunday, when no sales of alcoholic beverages may be made.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed
premises more than one-half hour after the close of business for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverage and before such business opens as allowed by the
preceding, and the premises shall be vacated within one-half hour of the
close of such business by all persons other than employees of the licensee
then engaged in customary after-hour duties which relate to cleaning and
closing of such business.



   (H)   Class “F” Brew Pub License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize a holder thereof to manufacture
beer ("brew pub") and store the brew pub at a designated premises and to make
sales to distributors, importing distributors, as well as the direct sale to
non-licensed consumers for consumption off the designated premises in
containers not larger than 64 ounces or on the designated premise. A licensee
shall not sell, for off premises consumption, more than 50,000 gallons of
beer per year. A Class "F" licensee must have a valid brew pub license from
the State of Illinois.



      (2)   Class "F" licenses shall authorize a holder thereof to
sell, at retail, alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises
specified in such license at all hours chosen by the licensee except between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, inclusive, and
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday, when no
sales of alcoholic beverages may be made.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed
premises more than one-half hour after the close of business for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverage and before such business opens as allowed by the
preceding. The premises shall be vacated within one-half hour of the close of
such business by all persons other than employees of the licensee then
engaged in customary after-hour duties which relate to cleaning and closing
of such business.



      (4)   A Class "F" license shall authorize the licensee to sell
its micro-brewed beer for consumption off premises in containers not larger
than 64 ounces at all hours chosen by the licensee except between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, inclusive, and between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday, when no sales of
alcoholic beverages may be made.



   (I)   Class “G-1" Not-for-Profit License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize a Not-For-Profit Corporation as
holder thereof to sell, at retail, alcoholic liquor for consumption only on
the premises where sold.



      (2)   Alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail for consumption
on the premises at all hours chosen by the holder thereof, except between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. when no sales of alcoholic liquor may be
made.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed
premises more than one-half hour after the close of business for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverage and before such business opens as allowed by the
preceding, and the premises shall be vacated within one-half hour of the
close of such business by all persons other than employees of the licensee
then engaged in customary after-hour duties which relate to cleaning and
closing of such business.



   (J)   Class "G-2" Not-for-Profit Extended Hours License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize a Not-For-Profit Corporation as
holder thereof to sell, at retail, alcoholic liquor for consumption only on
the premises where sold.



      (2)   Alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail for consumption
on the premises at all hours chosen by the holder thereof, except between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. when no sales of alcoholic liquor may be
made; providing that a live band or such other live entertainment, as the
Liquor Commissioner deems comparable, performs at such premises at least five
days each week.



      (3)   No person may consume, and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed
premises more than one-half hour after the close of business for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverage and before such business opens as allowed by the
preceding, and the premises shall be vacated within one-half hour of the
close of such business by all persons other than employees of the licensee
then engaged in customary after-hour duties which relate to cleaning and
closing of such business.



   (K)   Class “H-1" Video Gaming License.



      (1)   Licenses shall be required of each licensee having a
video gaming permit issued to the licensee pursuant to Chapter 121 of this
code and shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail, alcoholic liquor for
consumption, on the premises, specified in the license.



      (2)   Sales may occur at all hours chosen by the licensee
except between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
inclusive, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and
Sunday when no sales of alcoholic liquor may be made; provided that, a
licensee may have a live band, or such other live entertainment as the Liquor
Commissioner deems acceptable.



      (3)   No person may consume and no person other than the
licensee shall possess or have, any alcoholic liquor upon the licensed
premises, more than one half hour after close of business for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor and before such business reopens as allowed by the
preceding, and the premises shall be vacated within one-half hour of the
close of such business by all such persons other than employees of the
licensee then engaged in customary after-hour duties which relate to cleaning
and closing such business.



      (4)   The holder of a Class H-1 license shall not be required
to have any other city liquor license.



   (L)   Class “I-1" BYOB License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize BYOB upon the conditions set
forth hereafter.



         (a)   Consumption of the alcoholic liquor must be in
conjunction with the purchase of goods and services offered by the business
in its normal course of operations.



         (b)   Consumption of the alcoholic liquor shall be
limited to those patrons of the licensee who furnished the alcoholic liquor
and their guests.



         (c)   Every container of wine brought onto the
licensee's premises by a patron may be opened by the personnel of the
licensee and it shall be unlawful for any person to leave the premises with a
partially consumed container of wine unless it is securely sealed and
receipted by the personnel of the licensee prior to removal from the premises
and placed in a transparent, one time use, tamper proof bag in accordance
with the Illinois Liquor Control Act.



         (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the
licensee's premises with a partially consumed container of alcoholic liquor
other than a properly sealed container of wine.



         (e)   The licensee may charge a “corkage fee”.



         (f)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor brought onto the
licensee's premises, by a patron of the licensee, shall be at all hours
chosen by the licensee, except between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
when consumption of alcoholic liquor is strictly prohibited.



         (g)   Video gaming shall be prohibited on the premises
that possess a Class I-1 license.



         (h)   Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor
by any person under age 21 is prohibited.



         (i)   It shall be unlawful for any business, which does
not have either a Class I-1 license or a Class I-2 license, to allow any
person to consume alcoholic liquor on the business premises wherein the
alcoholic liquor is furnished by a patron of the business.



   (M)   Class “I-2" BYOB Restaurant Rider License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize a restaurant that is the holder
of a Class A license, B license, E license, F license, G-l license, G-2
license or H-l license to permit BYOB upon the conditions set forth hereafter.



         (a)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be in
conjunction with the purchase and consumption of a meal.



         (b)   Consumption of the alcoholic liquor shall be
limited to those patrons of the licensee who furnished the alcoholic liquor
and their guests.



         (c)   Every container of wine brought onto the
licensee's premises by a patron may be opened by the personnel of the
licensee and it shall be unlawful for any person to leave the premises with a
partially consumed container of wine unless it is securely sealed and
receipted by the personnel of the licensee prior to removal from the premises
and placed in a transparent, one time use, tamper proof bag in accordance
with the Illinois Liquor Control Act.



         (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the
licensee's premises with a partially consumed container of alcoholic liquor
other than a properly sealed container of wine.



         (e)   The licensee may charge a “corkage fee”.



         (f)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor brought onto the
licensee's premises, by a patron of the licensee, shall be only during the
hours as allowed by the licensee's existing liquor license issued by the City
of O'Fallon for the sale of alcoholic liquor.



         (g)   Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor
by any person under age 21 is prohibited.



         (h)   It shall be unlawful for any business, which does
not have either a Class I-1 license or a Class I-2 license, to allow any
person to consume alcoholic liquor on the business premises wherein the
alcoholic liquor is furnished by a patron of the business.



   (N)   Class “J” Tasting Event License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize a tasting event upon the
conditions set forth hereafter.



         (a)   License shall authorize the holder thereof to
conduct alcoholic liquor tasting and sale of packaged alcoholic liquor
through a tasting representative in conjunction with a sponsored, hosted or
promoted tasting event on days chosen by the licensee (subject to the
restriction hereafter) and at all hours chosen by the licensee between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. only.



         (b)   Any person who applies for a Class J license must
be a holder of a valid State of Illinois issued retailer's license, special
event retailer's license, caterer's retail license or special use permit
license at the time such Class J license application is made and at all limes
during the period of time for which the city license is issued,



         (c)   A Class J license issued for a tasting event,
shall be valid only for and limited to the specific date(s) and hour(s) when
the tasting event will occur. The tasting event shall not exceed five daily
events in a 12 month period of time.



         (d)   Nothing in this division shall be deemed to
relieve any license applicant from the requirement of obtaining a special
event permit issued by the city for those events which require such a permit
as provided by the O'Fallon Code of Ordinances and/or policies governing the
application for and issuance of special event permits.



         (e)   The license holder shall:



            1.   Prohibit consumption of any alcoholic liquor
other than by tasting within the tasting event;



            2.   Refrain from offering or providing a sample
of alcoholic liquor to anyone under the age of 21 years;



            3.   Insure all samples of alcoholic liquor be
immediately consumed on the premises of  the tasting event; and



            4.   Prohibit consumption of any packaged liquor
sold within the tasting event.



         (f)   Nothing in division (N)(1)(e)4. shall be construed
as:



            1.   Prohibiting an event sponsor from charging a
cover charge to enter the event or from selling tickets for the privilege of
participating in the tasting event;



            2.   Prohibiting an event sponsor from charging
any person who purchases any alcoholic liquor product as a package sale; or



            3.   Requiring any event sponsor who offers
tasting at a tasting event to also offer package sales of the offered
alcoholic liquor at the tasting event.



   (O)   Class “K” Catering License.



      (1)   Licenses shall authorize a catering license upon the
conditions set forth hereafter.



         (a)   A CATERER means a person who serves alcoholic
beverages for consumption, either on-site or off-site, whether the location
is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part of food service, holds a
valid caterer retailer license issued by the State of Illinois Liquor
Commission and holds a valid St. Clair County Health Department retail food
establishment permit.



         (b)   A caterer shall allow the holder to serve
alcoholic liquors as an incidental part of a food service that serves
prepared meals either on-site or off-site. A Class K license shall be issued
to the applicant who can demonstrate that they are operating a bona fide
catering business. The Class K license holder must hold a valid liquor
license to be eligible.



         (c)   Authorizes the licensee to sell to the public
alcoholic liquor in original packages only, for consumption at a private
party at a location within city limits when the food for said party is
prepared by the licensee.



         (d)   All food and beverage sales made by the licensee
shall be made at the registered office of licensee, which shall be deemed the
licensed premises. Such sales shall be subject to the applicable municipal
taxes.



         (e)   Proof of dram shop insurance (liquor liability)
for off-site operations must be provided with the application.



         (f)   When the holder of a caterer license is serving
alcohol off-site, such service and consumption shall occur only during the
meal, unless the event is a prearranged private function for a specific
social or business occasion, by invitation only, not advertised or open to
the public, where the guests in attendance are served in a room or rooms
designated and used exclusively for the private function.



         (g)   A holder of a caterer license is authorized to
serve all alcoholic liquors at an off-site location.



(1999 Code, § 116.10)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992; Ord. 3824, passed
3-17-2014; Ord. 3825, passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 3827, passed 4-21-2014; Ord.
3860, passed 2-17-2015; Ord. 3932, passed 5-16-2016; Ord. 4065, passed
11-5-2018)



§ 116.16  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or expose for sale, any
alcoholic liquor, as defined in § 116.01 of this chapter, within the city,
without having a license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter which
authorizes such actions.



(1999 Code, § 116.11)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.17  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Applications for a retail liquor license shall be made to the
city, in writing, on a form to be furnished to the applicant by the city. The
application may be made by an individual or by a duly authorized agent of any
other person, including a corporation, partnership, joint venture,
association or club. If made by a person other than an individual, the
application must be verified by oath or affidavit.



   (B)   Every application shall contain the following information and
statements:



      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case
of an individual and, in the case of a partnership, of the persons entitled
to share in the profits thereof and, in the case of a corporation, whether
for profit or not for profit, the date of incorporation, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors and, if a majority in interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one individual or his or her nominee,
or individuals who are related by blood or marriage or another corporation
whose stock is so held, the name and address of each such individual(s);



      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of
birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization, if
an individual, or of the manager of the retail liquor business of the
applicant if the applicant is not an individual;



      (3)   A statement whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a felony, if the applicant is an individual, or whether the
manager of the retail liquor business of the applicant has ever been so
convicted, if the applicant is not an individual;



      (4)   The location of the proposed place of business and the
name of the person who beneficially owns the premises on which such proposed
place of business is or will be located;



      (5)   If the applicant is not the beneficial owner of the
premises, but has a lease of the premises, the remaining term of the lease
held by the applicant; and



      (6)   Whether or not the applicant, if an individual, or the
manager of the retail liquor business of the applicant, if the applicant is
not an individual, has ever been convicted of a crime opposed to decency or
morality, and whether or not he or she has ever had a liquor license revoked
by the state, or any other political subdivision.



(1999 Code, § 116.12)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.18  FEE.



   (A)   License fees for the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail shall
be payable in advance at the time of making application.



   (B)   In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee paid
with the application shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is
granted, the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of the city
or in any such other fund as shall have been designated or shall hereafter be
designated by the City Council, by a proper action, and no part thereof shall
be refunded under any circumstances.



   (C)   License fees shall be as follows, effective May 1, 2015:



      (1)   Original application or renewal of a Class “A” or
“C-1" license shall be $500 per annum.



      (2)   Original application or renewal of a Class “B” or
“C-2" license shall be $600 per annum.



      (3)   Original application or renewal of a Class “D-l” or
“D-2" license shall be $700 per annum.



      (4)   Original application or renewal of a Class “E”
license shall be $1,100 per annum.



      (5)   Original application or renewal of a Class “F”
license shall be $900 per annum.



      (6)   Original application or renewal of a Class “G-l”
license shall be $400 per annum.



      (7)   Original application or renewal of a Class “G-2"
license shall be $500 per annum.



      (8)   Original application or renewal of a Class “H-l”
license for a for-profit entity shall be $700 per annum.



      (9)   Original application or renewal of a Class “H-l”
license for a not-for-profit entity shall be $400 per annum.



      (10)   Original application or renewal of a Class “I-1"
license shall be $100 per annum.



      (11)   Original application or renewal of a Class “I-2"
license shall be $25 per annum.



      (12)   Original application or renewal of a Class “J”
license shall be $100 per annum.



      (13)   Original application or renewal of a Class “K”
license shall be $100 per annum.



   (D)   In the event the licensee so desires, the annual fee set forth
in division (C) above may be paid in equal quarterly installments, payable in
advance of the quarter to which such payment relates; provided that, the
licensee shall also pay a $10 fee with each such advance quarterly payment.



(1999 Code, § 116.13)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992; Ord. 3828, passed
4-21-2014; Ord. 3862, passed 3-16-2015; Ord. 3932, passed 5-16-2016; Ord.
4065, passed 11-5-2018)



§ 116.19  BOND.



   Every applicant for a license or a renewal thereof shall execute a
penal bond, in a form reasonably satisfactory to the city, which shall be
secured by a licensed bonding company, payable to the city, and conditioned
upon the faithful observance of the provisions of this chapter and the laws
of the state and the United States. Such bond shall be in the amount of $500
and shall, upon the approval of the City Clerk as to its form, be tendered
with the application for the license. An applicant may furnish in lieu of the
bond a certificate of dram shop insurance coverage in the categories and in
minimum amounts equal to the limitations on judgments provided in § 6-21 of
the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (ILCS Ch. 235. Act 5, § 6-21). Any such
certificate of insurance in lieu of bond shall provide that the expiration of
such insurance policy shall not be earlier than the expiration date of the
license sought.



(1999 Code, § 116.14)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.20  FINGERPRINT CARD AND FEE.



   All applications for a retail liquor license must be accompanied by a
fingerprint card of each applicant, if an individual, or the manager of the
retail liquor business of the applicant, if not an individual, taken by the
Police Department, and a $38 state police processing fee made payable to the
city.



(1999 Code, § 116.15)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.21  STATE REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING.



   No retail liquor license shall be issued by the city unless the
requirements of §§ 6-2, 6-11, 6-12, 6-13 and 6-25 of the Liquor Control Act
of 1934 (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 6-2, 6-11, 6-12, 6-13 and 6-25) are met.



(1999 Code, § 116.16)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.22  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Upon the application being prepared and executed by the applicant, the
City Clerk shall submit the application to the Mayor for approval. The Mayor
may withhold action on the application for 60 days to conduct an
investigation of the application file. If, upon such examination, it is found
that the applicant qualifies pursuant to this chapter, the Mayor shall
approve the application. If it is found that the applicant is not qualified
pursuant to this chapter, the Mayor shall deny the application. The City
Clerk shall not issue a license unless the application has been approved by
the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 116.17)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.23  NATURE, DURATION AND TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.



   A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for one year, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter
authorized and provided, and shall not constitute property nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee;
provided that, executors and administrators of any estate of the deceased
licensee, and the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the court having jurisdiction of
such estate and may exercise the privileges of such deceased, insolvent or
bankrupt licensee, after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or
bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.



(1999 Code, § 116.18)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.24  RENEWAL OF LICENSE; NATURE OF RENEWAL PRIVILEGE.



   Any licensee may renew his or her license; provided that, the licensee
would be qualified to receive a license if he or she were to make application
for an original license on the date of such renewal. The renewal privilege
herein provided shall not be construed as a vested right which shall, nor
shall it, in any manner, prevent the City Council from decreasing the number
of licenses to be issued within the jurisdiction of the city, nor increasing
the number of such licenses. A renewal application shall be made at least 15
days before the expiration of any current license.



(1999 Code, § 116.19)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.25  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall be the local Liquor Control
Commissioner and may suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke any license
issued pursuant to this chapter, or impose a fine in an amount not to exceed
that authorized by § 7-5 of the Dram Shop Act of the state (ILCS Ch. 235,
Act 5, § 7-5), as amended from time to time, if the Mayor, as Liquor
Commissioner, determines the licensee has violated the provisions of this
chapter or of the Dram Shop Act of the state (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-3
et seq.) or any valid code of the city, or any applicable rule or regulation
established by the Liquor Control Commission of the state commission which is
not inconsistent with law. In addition to the suspension, the local Liquor
Control Commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The
fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000 for each violation; each day on which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than
$10,000 in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee
during the period of this license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid
into the general corporate fund of the City Treasury.



      (2)   No such suspension, revocation or fine shall be
effective until a public hearing has been conducted by the local Liquor
Control Commission for which hearing the licensee has been given three days
prior notice which affords the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend;
provided, however, that, if the local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason
to believe that the continued operation by the licensee under his or her
license will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, the local
Liquor Control Commissioner may, upon the issuance of a written order stating
the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, suspend such
license and order the licensee to cease the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for a period of not more than seven days; provided, the licensee is afforded
an opportunity to be heard during that period at a hearing conducted by the
local Liquor Control Commission. If a person whose license is suspended or
revoked pursuant to this subsection is also engaged in the operation of
another business or businesses on the premises for which such license had
been issued, such revocation or suspension shall not be applicable to such
other business or businesses.



   (B)   The local Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five days
following any hearing conducted pursuant to division (A) above, make a
written determination that the license should be revoked or suspended or a
fine imposed, or that such revocation, suspension or fine should be denied;
and if the local Liquor Control Commissioner determines, after such hearing,
that the license should be revoked or suspended or a fine should be imposed,
such written determination shall also state the reason or reasons for such
determination. A copy of such written determination shall be served upon the
licensee within five days of the date of which such written determination is
made by delivering such copy to or posting such copy at the premises
described in the license.



   (C)   Upon the entry of an order suspending or revoking a license or
imposing a fine pursuant to division (B) above, the licensee shall have all
rights to appeal such order as are allowed by state law.



   (D)   Any five residents of the city shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Mayor, stating that any licensee under this chapter has
been or is violating the provisions of this chapter, or any amendments
hereto, or any of the statutes of the state enacted with reference to the
control of liquor. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall be signed and
sworn by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular
provisions, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts
in detail upon which such belief is based. If the Mayor is satisfied that the
complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged
there is reasonable cause for such belief, he or she shall set the matter for
hearing to suspend or revoke such license, as the Mayor determines
appropriate, in accordance with divisions (A) through (C) above, and shall
serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of
the particular charges in the complaint.



(1999 Code, § 116.20)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



Statutory reference:



   State requirements and municipal authorization, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act
5, § 7-5



§ 116.26  LOCATION OF SALES UNDER LICENSE.



   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only within the premises described in such license. Such
location may be changed only upon a written amendment to such license issued
by the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 116.21)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.27  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Every holder of a license issued under this chapter shall cause the
license to be framed and displayed in plain view in a conspicuous place on
the premises licensed.



(1999 Code, § 116.22)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.28  SPECIAL LICENSE FOR SALES IN CITY PARK.



   A special license may be obtained for the sale of alcoholic liquors for
a limited duration in a city park. Application therefor must be submitted to
the Mayor with a statement describing the event for which such special
license is sought and the number of nights or days for which the applicant
desires the license to be valid, and there shall accompany the application
the sum of $8 for each day or part thereof that the applicant desires to
operate under the license. The granting of any license shall be in the
absolute discretion of the Mayor, based upon the effect the Mayor determines
the issuance of such license would have on the public safety and morals.



(1999 Code, § 116.23)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.29  CLUB LICENSES.



   (A)   Any organization in the city which is a club, as defined in
the Dram Shop Act (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.24), may, without charge by
the city of any license fee, obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquors to
its own members at the building or premises actually used as the club’s
quarters, upon filing with the Mayor of the city its written application
therefor signed by its then current president or corresponding officer and
its secretary or similar officer together with two copies of a list of names
and residences of all of its members. Any license issued pursuant to this
section shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, but may be
renewed by the filing of a renewal application signed by its then current
president and secretary, or corresponding officers, and attaching two copies
of a list of names and residences of its then members. Any license or renewal
license issued upon compliance herewith shall state upon its face that sales
thereunder of alcoholic liquors are to be made only to members of the
licensee club and that a violation thereof will result in the imposition of a
penalty or in the revocation or suspension of the license, or both. The
license shall be in the form approved by the Mayor, and shall be signed by
the Mayor and attested by the Clerk. The license shall, at all times, be
displayed by the licensee in a conspicuous place in the room where liquors
are to be sold.



   (B)   The Mayor shall have and is hereby given the same right of
revocation and/or suspension of any license issued pursuant to division (A)
above as he or she now has, or hereafter may have, in the matter of other
licenses for the sale of alcoholic liquors issued pursuant to this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 116.24)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.30  RECORDS OF CITY CLERK; CLERK’S DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall convey to the City Clerk, within 24 hours of the
issuance, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, the name and business address of each licensee whose license is so
issued, revoked or suspended pursuant to this chapter, along with the dates
for which such issued license is valid or any such suspension applies, and
the City Clerk shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such
licenses issued, revoked or suspended and shall furnish to the Treasurer of
the city and the Chief of Police a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new
license, or the renewal, suspension or revocation of any active license, the
City Clerk shall give written notice of such action to both the City
Treasurer and the Chief of Police within 48 hours of each such action.



(1999 Code, § 116.25)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS



§ 116.45  DUTIES OF LICENSEE.



   It shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee to ensure
compliance with all state laws and city chapters by all persons occupying the
premises for which a license is issued pursuant hereto, and failure of the
licensee to ensure such compliance shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 116.35)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.46  SUNDAY AND ELECTION DAY HOURS.



   All places which are licensed to sell alcoholic liquors at retail
within the city may sell alcoholic liquor during the hours allowed by §
116.15 of this chapter on all Sundays and election days.



(1999 Code, § 116.36)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)



§ 116.47  ILLICIT DANCING AND ATTIRE.



   A person licensed under this chapter shall not suffer or allow any:



   (A)   Nude, topless or T-bar dancing; and/or



   (B)   Nude, topless or T-bar attire to be worn by employees or
patrons in or upon any premise licensed by him or her under this chapter for
the sale of liquor at retail.



(1999 Code, § 116.37)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.48  GAMBLING DEVICES.



   It is unlawful to keep, place, maintain or operate any gambling device
or instrument, other than a video gaming terminal as provided in Chapter 121
of this code of ordinances, in or upon any premises licensed as a place where
alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail or given away.



(1999 Code, § 116.38)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992; Ord. 3902, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.49  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   A person licensed under this chapter shall not suffer any disorder,
drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games or riotous or disorderly
conduct in or upon any premises licensed by him or her for the sale of liquor
at retail.



(1999 Code, § 116.39)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.50  SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.



   A person licensed under this chapter shall keep the premises licensed
by him or her for the sale of liquor at retail in a wholesome and sanitary
condition and all sidewalks, streets, alleys, gutters and drains adjacent
thereto free from all rubbish or other like matter, materials or waste.



(1999 Code, § 116.40)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.51  PROHIBITED SALES AND TRANSFERS; IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prohibited sales and transfers. No licensee, nor any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall
sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21
years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her to
be under a legal disability or in need of mental treatment. No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years,
except in the performance of a legitimate religious ceremony or service.



   (B)   Identification requirements. If a licensee or his or her
agents or employees believe or have reason to believe that the sale or
delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited under this chapter because of
the age of the prospective recipient, he, she or it shall, before making such
sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification
which contains proof of the recipient’s age and is issued by a public
official in the performance of his or her official duties. If the prospective
recipient cannot produce such identification, or what the licensee reasonably
believes to be such identification, the licensee shall not sell or give
alcoholic liquor to such person.



(1999 Code, § 116.41)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16



§ 116.52  IDENTIFICATION CARD PROHIBITIONS.



   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card issued
by a public official for the purpose of altering, changing or misleading
another person as to the age or identity of the person described thereon; use
the identification card of another person; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.



(1999 Code, § 116.42)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Identification card, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-20



§ 116.53  UNDERAGE DRINKING.



   (A)   General prohibition. No person who is under the age of 21
shall purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor, or have alcoholic liquor
in his or her possession or consume alcoholic liquor, except as specifically
permitted in division (B) below.



   (B)   Exception. The possession, dispensing or consumption by a
person under 21 years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
legitimate religious service or ceremony or under the direct supervision and
approval of a parent or a person standing in loco parentis of such underage
person in the privacy of a private residence shall not be prohibited by this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 116.43)  (Ord. 1534, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 117:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Applicability of provisions



   117.03   Licenses



   117.04   Facilities



   117.05   Operating requirements



   117.06   Inspections



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE THERAPISTS. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever,
engages in the practice of therapeutic massage, as defined in this section,
and who provides proof of the following:



      (1)   Proof of active member status in a professional massage
therapy organization; and



      (2)   Completion and graduation from an approved program for
500-hour massage/bodywork training or a passing score on a recognized
certification exam such as the National Certification exam.



   MASSAGE THERAPY CLINIC. Any place of business having a source of income
or compensation derived from therapeutic massage, where a licensed massage
therapist administers therapeutic massage or from where a massage therapist
is dispatched to administer therapeutic massage. A MASSAGE THERAPY CLINIC
also includes schools and institutions for purposes of this chapter.



   OFF-PREMISES MASSAGE. The activity of providing massage services by a
licensed massage therapist for a fee at a location other than at a massage
therapy clinic.



   PROFESSIONAL MASSAGE THERAPY ORGANIZATION. An organization that
promotes minimum standards for the profession, assists legislatures in
developing laws regarding the profession, requires members to adhere to a
code of ethics, and provides legal assistance, education, insurance, support
and information to its members.



   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE or MASSAGE THERAPY.



      (1)   Scientific health care, health maintenance and
rehabilitation techniques scientifically applied to the client by a trained
professional massage therapist for the purpose of causing increased
circulation throughout the body, ridding the body of waste products and/or
toxins, inducing relaxation, easing mental and physical tension, alleviating
aches and pain, and the breaking up of fatty tissues, adhesions, scar tissue
and muscle spasms and releasing the body’s natural pain killers called
“endorphins” which produce biological effects of analgesia and euphoria.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE does not diagnose or treat classified diseases, practice
spinal manipulation or prescribe medicine or drugs.



      (2)   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE may include, but is not limited to,
joint mobilization techniques, stretches, effleurage (stroking), petrissage
(kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve
strokes and any reasonable method of pressure on the external soft parts of
the body with the hands, elbows or forearms, or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, oils, liniments, hot and cold packs,
antiseptics, powders, creams, lotions, salt glows, ointments or other similar
preparations commonly used in the practice.



(1999 Code, § 117.01)  (Ord. 3343, passed 6-6-2005)



§ 117.02  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   State-licensed medical doctors, doctors of osteopathic
medicine, chiropractors, physical therapists, naprapaths or registered
nurses, where such massage is part of their state practice act;



   (B)   State-licensed practical nurses, hospitals or nursing homes
while administering such massages in the normal course of their medical
duties; and/or



   (C)   Any state-registered athletic trainer who administers such
athletic-related massage in the normal course of training duties, where such
massage is part of the State Athletic Trainers Practice Act (ILCS Ch. 225,
Act 5).



(1999 Code, § 117.02)  (Ord. 3343, passed 6-6-2005)



§ 117.03  LICENSES.



   (A)   Every massage therapist shall be licensed as required by the
state, pursuant to the Massage Licensing Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 57, § 15.



   (B)   Every massage therapist shall conspicuously display the
license required by the state in his or her work area.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the license holder of a
massage therapy clinic to ensure that each person employed as a massage
therapist shall first have obtained a valid massage therapist license as set
forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for such a clinic to allow a
licensed massage therapist to practice other than as defined by this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 117.03)  (Ord. 3343, passed 6-6-2005)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.04  FACILITIES.



   No massage therapy clinic shall be allowed to operate unless the clinic
complies with each of the following minimum requirements.



   (A)   Adequate private dressing and toilet facilities shall be
provided for clients.



   (B)   All walls, ceilings, floors, steam rooms and other physical
facilities in the massage therapy clinic shall be kept in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (C)   Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for
each client receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens
shall be permitted.



   (D)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and
showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with the Building Code of the city.



   (E)   All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath
areas, and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.



   (F)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting
and sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in
administering massages. Those non-disposable instruments and materials shall
be disinfected after use on each patron.



   (G)   Adequate and sanitary storage shall be provided and used for
the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection
with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials
shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or
cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage area.



   (H)   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold
running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule.
Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with
sanitary towels.



(1999 Code, § 117.04)  (Ord. 3343, passed 6-6-2005)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.05  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including
appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.



   (B)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in
the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.



   (C)   Massage therapists shall be clean and wear clean,
non-transparent outer garments. Adequate private dressing and toilet
facilities must be available on the premises. Doors to such dressing rooms
shall open inward and shall be self-closing.



   (D)   All massage therapy clinics shall be provided with clean,
laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered
after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.



   (E)   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by
towels, cloths or undergarments.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage
therapy clinic, to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his
or her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage the genital area of any
other person.



   (G)   No massage therapist, employee or operator shall perform,
offer or agree to perform any act which would require the touching of the
patron’s genital area.



   (H)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam
rooms and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam
or vapor rooms, steam and vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation.
Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When
carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.



   (I)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparation used in
administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.



   (J)   Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted.
Animals, except for service dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work
areas.



   (K)   No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron
exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection or skin disease unless a physician
duly licensed by the state certifies in writing that such person may be
safely massaged, prescribing the conditions thereof.



   (L)   Massage therapists shall wash their hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to
each person.



(1999 Code, § 117.05)  (Ord. 3343, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.06  INSPECTIONS.



   The city has the right to enter the premises at any time to conduct an
inspection of each massage therapy clinic for the purpose of determining that
the provisions of this chapter are met.



(1999 Code, § 117.06)  (Ord. 3343, passed 6-6-2005)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in §
10.99.



(1999 Code, § 117.99)  (Ord. 3343, passed 6-6-2005)



CHAPTER 118:  SPECIAL EVENTS



Section



   118.01   Definition



   118.02   Permit required; procedures; fee



   118.03   Permit approval



§ 118.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SPECIAL EVENT. Any outdoor or seasonal event such as a tent sale,
warehouse sale, sidewalk sale, craft fair, carnival, picnic, contest, game,
sporting event, rodeo, 5K run, produce stand, Christmas tree sales lot,
tropical snow stand or similar promotion event. A SPECIAL EVENT may not
exceed six months in duration per calendar year.



(1999 Code, § 118.01)  (Ord. 1818, passed 1-29-1996; Ord. 1917, passed
6-2-1997; Ord. 3663, passed 4-19-2010)



§ 118.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; PROCEDURES; FEE.



   (A)   Special events as defined in § 118.01 of this chapter require
a special events permit.



   (B)   An application for a special events permit must be filed with
the City Clerk not less than three weeks prior to the first day of the
special event. The City Clerk will coordinate review of the permit with
affected city departments. Cost for permit issuance is $50 for “for
profit” applicants. There will be no permit charge for non-profit
organizations. Proof shall be provided of non-profit status.



   (C)   With each special events permit application, the applicant
must also provide the following related information (if applicable):



      (1)   Traffic and parking plan (parking area; street closing
or one-way restrictions; traffic control points where police assistance may
be needed; overflow parking areas); anticipated crowds; estimated attendance;



      (2)   Contingency plans for rain (relocation or rescheduling
of events; alternative parking areas; method of notifying the public of
changes);



      (3)   Proof of liability insurance; and if the event is held
on city property, the city should be named as an additional insured in the
amount of $1,000,000;



      (4)   Damage bond or cash deposit to protect city facilities
(this would be mainly for out-of-town sponsors) in the amount of $500,000;



      (5)   Health permits for all food concessions;



      (6)   Liquor license information for beer sales (including
hours of sale);



      (7)   Plans for toilet facilities;



      (8)   A list of for-profit vendors and sales tax numbers (to
verify that sales tax is collected and remitted) to be provided prior to
event;



      (9)   A security plan;



      (10)   ADA compliance;



      (11)   The name and phone number for the person in charge of
the event and a secondary contact; and



      (12)   Special consideration requests, i.e., city-provided
assistance requested (Street Department, IDOT) (for street closings,
signalization and detour routes), Parks Department, Police, Fire and EMS
support), being as specific as possible (fees may be charged for these
services).



   (D)   Temporary signs for said special event shall be permitted as
provided for in the sign ordinance of the city or as otherwise approved by
the City Council.



   (E)   Electrical inspections are required for all exterior
electrical connections. The City Electrical Inspector must be contacted a
minimum of 24 hours prior to inspection.



(1999 Code, § 118.02)  (Ord. 1818, passed 1-29-1996; Ord. 1917, passed
6-2-1997; Ord. 3663, passed 4-19-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.03  PERMIT APPROVAL.



   (A)   Approval by Director of Community Development. The Director of
Community Development shall review and may approve certain special events;
provided, they meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The event is requested by an existing licensed business
within the city or by a non-profit organization with approval of an existing
licensed business within the city and is located on its business property or
is held on city property and does not require the closure of public streets;



      (2)   The duration of the event will not exceed three days;



      (3)   The event will not require the issuance of a liquor or
firearms permit;



      (4)   A special event has not or will not be held more than
four previous times during any calendar year at the same location;



      (5)   Event requires no more than an incidental amount of city
services, as determined by the Director; and



      (6)   No off-premises signage or ribbons are requested, other
than temporary non-commercial signs authorized without a permit under §
158.163.



   (B)   Approval by Director of Community Development for reoccurring
special events.  In addition to the requirements of division (A) of this
section, the Director of Community Development shall review and may approve
certain special events provided they meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The event has been requested and approved by the City
Council for at least the two years immediately preceding the request;



      (2)   The request is substantially similar to the previously
approved event;



      (3)   The event has not been objected to by any of the
following: a department head, the City Administrator, the Mayor, or a
positive vote of any committee; and



      (4)   If all of these conditions are not met, the special
event permit request shall be submitted to the City Council for consideration.



   (C)   Approval by City Council. All other requests for special
permits not approved by the Director of Community Development shall go before
the City Council for approval.



(1999 Code, § 118.03)  (Ord. 1818, passed 1-29-1996; Ord. 1917, passed
6-2-1997; Ord. 3663, passed 4-19-2010; Ord. 3807, passed 10-7- 2013; Ord.
3931, passed 5-2-2016)



CHAPTER 119:  REGISTRATION FOR ALL HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGING HOUSES AND
ROOMING HOUSES



Section



   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   Registration for all hotels



   119.03   Exceptions



   119.04   Registration under fictitious name



   119.05   Rates



 



   119.99   Penalty



§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GUEST. A person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in
a hotel by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other
agreement.



   HOTEL. Any public or private space or structure, including but not
limited to, any inn, hostelry, tourist home, motel, lodging house or motel
rooming house offering space for sleeping or overnight accommodations in
exchange for rent and for a period of less than 30 days. HOTEL includes the
parking lot and other common areas of the hotel.



   IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT. A document that contains the name, date of
birth, description and picture of a person, issued by the federal government,
the State of Illinois, another state, a county or municipal government
subdivision or one of their agencies, including but not limited to: a motor
vehicle operator’s license, an identification card, or an identification
card issued to a member of the Armed Forces. IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT also
includes a passport issued by a foreign government or a consular
identification card, issued by a foreign government to any of its citizens
and nationals, which has been approved by the city as valid identification.



   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room in any hotel.



   OPERATOR. The person who is either the proprietor of the hotel or any
other person who has the right to rent rooms within the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, manager, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee,
employee or in any other capacity.



   RECORD. A legible written document of information about a guest or
group of guests. A RECORD may be maintained electronically, in a book, or on
cards.



   RENT or RENTING . The allowing of use for consideration charged,
whether or not received, for the occupancy of a room in a hotel valued in
money, whether received in the form of cash, goods, labor, credits, property,
or services of any kind or nature.



   ROOM. Any portion of a hotel, which is designed or intended for
occupancy by a person for temporary lodging or sleeping purposes.



(Ord. 4089, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 119.02  REGISTRATION FOR ALL HOTELS.



   (A)   Every operator of a hotel shall at all times keep a register
in which shall be ascribed, either in electronic, ink, or typewritten form,
prior to the room being furnished or rented to a guest, the following
information:



      (1)   The full name of the guest paying for the room and the
full name of each guest occupying the room;



      (2)   The home or business telephone number of the guest
paying for the room;



      (3)   The make, type, and license number of each vehicle
belonging to each guest that will be parked on hotel premises;



      (4)   The total number guests (the guest paying for the room
and the guests occupying the room) for each room;



      (5)   The number of the room rented and the day, month, year,
and time such room is rented.



   (B)   Every operator shall require each guest paying for the room to
provide a proper identification document prior to renting a room. The
operator of a hotel shall not rent a room without verifying the
identification of the guest paying for the room. The register shall be signed
by the guest paying for the room. All of the foregoing listed in this
division (B) and division (A) above shall be done before any guest is
permitted to occupy a room.



   (C)   Operators shall keep registers on the hotel premises in the
guest reception or guest check-in area or in an office adjacent to or nearby
that area. The register shall be maintained at that location on the hotel
premises for a period of not less than 90 days from and after the date of the
last entry in the register.



   (D)   Operators shall retain registers for a period of not less than
two years from the date of the last entry in the register or record. Except
as otherwise provided in division (C) above, such records may be retained on-
or off-site the hotel premises, but if maintained off-site, the records must
be readily accessible to permit inspection, review, and audit by officials in
accordance with this chapter.



   (E)   Any police officer of the city or, at his or her direction,
any county, state or federal law enforcement official, may request an
operator to consent to an inspection of the records in the register in order
to determine compliance with this chapter.



   (F)   If the operator objects to such an inspection, the operator
shall then be required to secure the records in the register in the presence
of the officer and in a manner directed by the officer so that no one tampers
with the records until such time as a warrant or court order has been issued
or denied. Upon the operator’s refusal, the officer must then make the
demand of inspection in writing and personally serve it on the operator. The
demand must be signed by the officer making the demand. No particular form of
the demand is required, but the demand must set forth the name of the hotel,
the date and time the demand is served on the hotel, and the name of person
served.



   (G)   If the operator receives a written demand pursuant to this
section and the operator desires to object to the demand, the operator must
make a written objection to the demand, with a copy of the demand attached,
and personally serve it within 48 hours after receiving the demand. Service
of the objection must be made on the officer making the demand or another
officer of the same law enforcement agency as the officer who made the
demand. No particular form of an objection is required, but the objection
must be signed by the operator, and set forth the date and time it is served
on the officer or the agency. Failure to timely make and serve a written
objection to a demand is a waiver of the operator’s right to seek
precompliance judicial review of that demand.



   (H)   An operator that makes and serves an objection pursuant to
division (G) above may challenge the demand for inspection by filing an
action for precompliance judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction
within ten calendar days after the date the objection is served. Failure to
timely file such an action is a waiver of the operator’s right to seek
precompliance judicial review of that demand.



   (I)   An operator that fails to timely make and serve a written
objection, or that makes and serves a timely objection and then fails to
timely file an action for precompliance judicial review, must open the
register for inspection pursuant to division (E) above immediately after the
lapse of the period of time to make and serve a written objection or to file
an action for precompliance judicial review, whichever is applicable.



   (J)   Nothing in this section prohibits an officer from inspecting
any register pursuant to a warrant, an ex parte warrant, or an exception to
the warrant requirement (e.g., consent or exigent circumstances).



   (K)   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface, or erase
any record in the register so as to make the information recorded in it
illegible or unintelligible, or hinder, obstruct, or interfere with any
inspection of the register in accordance with this chapter.



   (L)   An employee of the owner, proprietor, manager or other person
in charge of any hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house or other place
offering lodging accommodations to the general public for compensation must
be vigilant and on duty 24 hours each day, seven days a week, for the purpose
of attending at all times the facility’s registration desk or room. An
attendant need not be physically present at the point of registration at all
times as long as he or she is attending to other required duties. However,
the attendant must be immediately available to register a person(s) wishing
to rent a room at the facility.



(1999 Code, § 119.01)  (Ord. 3528, passed 7-2- 2007;  Ord. 3982, passed
4-17-2017; Ord. 4089, passed 4-1-2019)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   A registration will not be required for private meeting rooms, banquet
facilities, group sales event, wedding or accommodations utilized by
pre-registered corporate or individual guests participating in specific
registration programs sponsored by the hotel, motel, lodging house or rooming
house so long as the establishment has the capacity to positively identify
the guest through available records.



(1999 Code, § 119.02)  (Ord. 3528, passed 7-2- 2007; Ord. 4089, passed
4-1-2019)



§ 119.04  REGISTRATION UNDER FICTITIOUS NAME.



   No person shall write or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be
written, in any register in any hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house or
other place whatsoever where transients are accommodated in the city, any
other or different name or designation than the true name of the person so
registered therein, or the name by which the person is generally known.



(1999 Code, § 119.03)  (Ord. 3528, passed 7-2- 2007; Ord. 4089, passed
4-1-2019)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.05  RATES.



   (A)   A hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house or other place
offering lodging accommodations to the general public for compensation shall
charge its registered guests, at a minimum, its daily or nightly rate. It
shall be unlawful to charge a registered guest an hourly rate or a partial
daily or nightly rate, except to accommodate a late checkout.



   (B)   The rental of a room on a “barter” agreement is strictly
prohibited.



(Ord. 3982, passed 4-17-2017; Ord. 4089, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
offense subject to a fine as set forth herein for each offense.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision this chapter for which another
penalty is not already otherwise provided for by appropriate federal or state
statutory penalty shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine or other
relief as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (C)   Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter by any agent or employee of any person shall be
deemed and held to be in the act of such person, and said person shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
omitted by him or her or it personally; provided, such act or omission was
within the scope of authority of such agent or employee.



(1999 Code, § 119.99)  (Ord. 3528, passed 7-2- 2007; Ord. 4089, passed
4-1-2019)



CHAPTER 120:  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSES



Section



   120.01   Residential rental license required; definitions



   120.02   Residential rental license fee schedule



   120.03   Licensing procedures; standards; inspection



   120.04   Crime-free rental housing program seminar; conditional
license



   120.05   Property manager



   120.06   Reattendance of seminar



   120.07   List of attendees



   120.08   Crime-free lease addendum



   120.09   Nuisance residential rental property



   120.10   Suspension or revocation of license



   120.11   Appeals



   120.12   Eviction or retaliation prohibited



 



   120.99   Penalty



§ 120.01  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE REQUIRED; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   License required. No person shall operate rental housing or
allow rental housing owned by them to be operated on their behalf without a
current, unrevoked, residential rental license issued by the city in the
owner’s name (and jointly in the operator’s name if different from the
owner), specifically licensing such rental housing.



   (B)   Rental housing defined. For purposes of this chapter, RENTAL
HOUSING shall constitute any dwelling unit being made available to an
occupant that does not meet this chapter’s definition of an immediate
family member. RENTAL HOUSING shall also include: (1) lots or pads made
available for placement of mobile homes thereon and (2) properties that
primarily operate as hotels and motels.



   (C)   Exceptions. Rental housing, for the purposes of this chapter,
shall not include the following:



      (1)   Lawfully operating housing for the elderly that meets
the definition of “housing for older persons,” as provided in 42 U.S.C.
§ 3607.



      (2)   Lawfully operating group homes governed by the
Specialized Living Centers Act, ILCS Ch. 405, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq., as
amended, dealing with the developmentally disabled, and also such other
similar non-profit uses governed by state or federal laws, rules or
regulations if provided such similar uses are required to be exempted by law.



      (3)   Owner-occupied single-family dwellings having not more
than one authorized boarder.



      (4)   Any dwelling occupied by an immediate family member
(mother, father, brother sister, child) as verifiable as such by the
Crime-Free Coordinator.



   (D)   Owner. For the purposes of this chapter, OWNER shall mean any
person, partnership, trust, corporate or business entity, or condominium,
townhouse or homeowners’ association that has a fee interest in the rental
housing, including the officers, employees, and agents of the owner; provided
that nothing herein shall require a license of an independent agent for such
matters as may be preempted by state law.



   (E)   Prohibited rental uses. Short term rentals of 30 days or less
are not permitted in residential zoning districts.



(1999 Code, § 120.01)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 120.02  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Annual fees for the following residential rental licenses
shall be at a rate prescribed in the residential rental license fee schedule
as established by a written order or resolution of the City Council:



      (1)   Single-family (single-family residences for rent): 
current fee/unit.



      (2)   Multi-family rental dwellings (individual units for
rent):  current fee/unit.



      (3)   Hotels/motels:  current fee/business address.



   (B)   Multiple dwelling rental complexes and hotels/motels will be
issued one license for each location authorizing a specific number of
identified units. The fee for each license issued will be assessed according
to the schedule defined herein.



   (C)   A group of more than one lot or pad made available for
placement of mobile homes thereon under a common ownership or operation,
commonly known as a mobile home park, shall be deemed to be a multiple
dwelling rental complex for the purposes of this chapter. Otherwise, a single
lot or pad made available for placement of a mobile home that is not within a
mobile home park shall be deemed to be single-family rental dwelling unit.
Fees will not be assessed for vacant lots or pads that are not available for
rent.



   (D)   The full license fee shall be paid at the time of original
application. If renewal fees are not paid within 30 days after the date of
origination, late fees may apply based on the current residential rental
license fee schedule.



   (E)   Failure to pay any renewal fee and/or subsequent late fee may
result in suspension or revocation of the residential rental license and
licensee may be subject to the penalty provisions of § 120.99.



(1999 Code, § 120.02)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.03  LICENSING PROCEDURES; STANDARDS; INSPECTION.



   (A)   Residential rental licenses shall be applied for within 30
days of a property becoming rental property. If a residential rental license
is applied for after 30 days of a property becoming rental property, the
license origination date will be retroactive to the date the property became
rental and residential rental license fees will be calculated from this date
and subject to all applicable penalties as outlined in the current
residential rental license fee schedule.



   (B)   Residential rental licenses shall be issued for a period
comprising one year from the date of license approval. The license shall not
be transferable. A new residential rental license must be obtained by a new
owner in the event of a change in ownership of the rental housing.



   (C)   The city is hereby authorized, upon application, to issue new
residential rental licenses and renewals thereof in the names of owners, or
if operated by a separate person or entity, jointly in the name of both the
operator and owner of the rental housing. No such license shall be issued
unless the rental housing, including common areas, for which the license is
sought is found after inspection to meet all mandatory applicable city Crime
Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) inspection criteria as
established by a written order or resolution of the City Council. The
Director of Public Safety will establish rules, adopt policies and procedures
in order to clarify the application of its provisions and to obtain the
intent and purpose of this chapter. All rental properties shall comply with
the following:



      (1)   All entry doors secured to guard against unlawful entry
and provide ability for renter to identify visitors.



      (2)   All windows secured to guard against unlawful entry.



      (3)   All rental units clearly identified for emergency
personnel.



      (4)   All properties sufficiently lit and provide for safe
pathways for residents.



      (5)   All areas around rental property where crime activities
may occur identified and risks minimized.



      (6)   All common areas maintained in a manner as to not
attract criminal element.



      (7)   All life safety issues observed during an inspection
must be addressed and rectified.



   (D)   On any residential rental license with four  units or more an
annual inspection will be performed on the exterior, including all common
areas. During any property maintenance inspection of the property, city
inspectors are granted the authority to observe and inspect any violations of
the CPTED inspection criteria. Rental housing that changes ownership will be
required to be reinspected before a new residential rental license can be
issued unless otherwise excepted by the Director of Public Safety.
Residential inspection requirements of the residential rental license program
are an independent obligation applicable to rental housing and are in
addition to, not in lieu of, occupancy inspections required by the city’s
Property Maintenance Code.



   (E)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner agrees
in the application to such occupancy inspection as may be required to
determine whether the rental housing in connection with which such license is
sought is in compliance with the applicable provisions of the city’s
Property Maintenance Code and with the applicable rules and regulations
pursuant thereto, as outlined in § 150.05.



   (F)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the completed
application form for each building or group of buildings, identifying the
specific units, is accompanied by payment of the appropriate annual license
fee as established in this chapter. Payments must be made in full prior to
the license being renewed. Failure to pay any balance will serve as grounds
to deny further permits or licenses from being issued by the city.



   (G)   When the city determines after an initial inspection that
additional follow-up inspections are necessary for enforcement of this
chapter, the owner may be assessed a noncompliance inspection service charge
as applicable in the current residential rental license fee schedule.



   (H)   A residential rental license may be issued or renewed for an
owner living more than 50 miles from the city, provided that such owner
designates in writing to the city the name of the owner’s local point-of
contact for the receipt of service or notice of violation of the provisions
of this chapter and for service of process pursuant to this chapter. The
local point-of-contact shall reside within 50 miles of the city.



   (I)   No residential rental license shall be issued or renewed for
an owner unless such applicant has first designated a local point-of contact
for the receipt of service for violations of the provisions of this chapter,
when the owner is absent from the city for 30 consecutive days or more. Such
designation shall be made in writing.



   (J)   Current residential rental license holders will be provided a
notice of renewal one month prior to the expiration of the present license.



   (K)   No residential rental license shall be transferable to another
rental housing. Every owner holding a residential rental license shall give
notice in writing to the city within seven days after having transferred or
otherwise disposed of the legal control of any licensed rental housing. Such
notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such rental housing.



   (L)   Whenever, upon inspection of the licensed rental housing, the
city finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of any applicable rules and regulations
pursuant thereto, the city shall serve the owner with notice of such
violation in the manner hereinafter provided. Such notice shall state that
unless the violations cited are corrected within reasonable time, the
operating license may be suspended and subject to the penalty provisions of
this chapter.



   (M)   At the end of the time the city has allowed for correction of
any violation cited, the city shall reinspect the rental housing and if it
determines that such conditions have not been corrected, the city may suspend
the residential rental license pursuant to § 120.10.



   (N)   Upon request by the city the owner of rental housing shall
provide the city a list of all occupants of a rental housing unit so long as
the request is in response to a bona-fide investigation of a violation of
this chapter or any alleged violation of the law.



(1999 Code, § 120.03)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.04  CRIME-FREE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM SEMINAR; CONDITIONAL LICENSE.



   Any owner of rental housing shall attend and complete a city crime-free
rental housing program seminar. The owner shall attend the seminar prior to
obtaining or being issued a city residential rental license. In the event a
city crime-free rental housing program seminar is not available prior to
obtaining the operating license, a conditional license may be issued subject
to the owner attending the city crime-free rental housing program seminar
within three months of issuance of the license. In the event that a seminar
is made available and is not attended within three months, the license may be
suspended and the licensee subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
After the seminar is attended, the license shall be issued for the balance of
the year. Owners who have attended and successfully completed a crime-free
rental housing program seminar from another jurisdiction approved by the
Director of Public Safety may request a waiver from the training.



(1999 Code, § 120.04)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.05  PROPERTY MANAGER.



   A property manager shall be considered an agent of the owner and may
attend the crime-free rental housing program seminar on behalf of an owner.
If a new manager is hired, the new manager shall have three months after
hiring to attend the city crime-free rental housing program seminar. If the
new manager fails to attend the crime-free rental housing program seminar,
the license may be suspended and subject to the penalty provisions of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 120.05)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.06  REATTENDANCE OF SEMINAR.



   Any owner may be required to reattend the city crime-free rental
housing program seminar after two years if the crime-free rental housing
coordinator recommends reattendance. The city, in determining whether or not
to have the person reattend the crime-free rental housing program seminar
shall consider the following:



   (A)   If the rental housing is at a substantial risk of becoming a
nuisance residential rental property as defined in this chapter; or



   (B)   Criminal activity is occurring on the premises and the owner
has failed to initiate eviction proceedings.



(1999 Code, § 120.06)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 120.07  LIST OF ATTENDEES.



   The crime-free rental housing coordinator, as designated by the
Director of Public Safety, shall provide the city with a list of owners who
have attended the city crime-free rental housing program seminar, with the
date of attendance and verification that the owner has complied with this
chapter and is eligible to obtain, maintain or renew the residential rental
license.



(1999 Code, § 120.07)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 120.08  CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM.



   No owner of rental housing may rent or lease rental housing without
requiring the tenant to sign a crime-free lease addendum as part of any lease
executed after the effective date of this chapter. The clause shall make
criminal activity (not limited to violent criminal activity or drug related
criminal activity engaged by, facilitated by or permitted by the renter,
member of the guest or other party under the control of the renter) a lease
violation authorizing eviction. The owner shall have authority under that
clause to initiate an eviction proceeding as specified in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes Forcible Entry and Detainer Statutes. Proof by a
preponderance of the evidence of criminal violations shall be sufficient for
purposes of eviction. The crime-free lease addendum shall be substantially as
follows:



CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM



In addition to all other terms of the lease, landlord and tenant agree as
follows:



The tenant, any member of the tenant’s household, any guest or any other
person or persons associated with the tenant or his or her household, common
areas or appurtenances:



   1.   Shall not engage in any quasi-criminal or criminal activity as
defined by local, state or federal law while on the licensed property or
constituting a nuisance relating to such property as defined by applicable
law;



   2.   Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate any
quasi-criminal or criminal activity and/or obstruct or resist law enforcement
against criminal activity while on the licensed property or constituting a
nuisance relating to such property as defined by applicable law;



   3.   Shall not permit and/or allow the dwelling unit, common areas
or appurtenances to be used for or facilitate any quasi-criminal or criminal
activity as defined by local, state or federal law.



Should the tenant, any member of the tenant’s household, any guest or any
other person or persons associated with the tenant or his or her household,
common areas or appurtenances violate any provisions stated herein, such a
violation shall constitute material noncompliance with this lease and shall
further constitute grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction.



(1999 Code, § 120.08)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 3909, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018) 
Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.09  NUISANCE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.



   It is hereby declared a nuisance and to be declared against the health,
peace and comfort of the city for any property owner, agent or manager to
allow or permit the following:



   (A)   Rental of rental housing to a tenant who allows any of the
following offenses to occur relating to the tenant, member of the tenant’s
household, guest or other party under control of the tenant to occur: murder,
kidnapping, aggravated kidnapping, prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, pandering, obscenity, child pornography, unlawful distribution
of harmful materials to a minor, sale of obscene publication, criminal
housing management, possession of explosives, unlawful use or possession of
weapons, unlawful sale of firearms, unlawful gambling, unlawful keeping of a
gambling place, concealing a fugitive, violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, violation of the Cannabis Control Act or commission of any
two or more of any other crimes under the State of Illinois or under the
Federal Government not specifically listed above.



   (B)   Rental of rental housing to a tenant who allows any of the
following offenses to occur relating to the tenant, member of the tenant’s
household, guest or other party under control of the tenant to occur:
commission of four or more city ordinance violations related to incidents
occurring in or near the rental unit or that tend to affect the quality of
life of others living in the immediate area in a six-month period or an
unreasonably high number of calls for police service including, but not
limited to, calls that may fall within the descriptions listed above that
when compared to other properties in the city of similar type, reasonably
indicate that the activity at this property is out of character for the area
and is impacting the quality of life of those in the area.



   (C)   Violation by owner, including any agent, employee, or
operator, of any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Failure to maintain rental housing in conditions
consistent with the CPTED inspection criteria.



      (2)   Violations of the Property Maintenance Code.



      (3)   Operating rental housing in a manner in contravention of
the laws protecting the public health and safety.



(1999 Code, § 120.09)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 3909, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018) 
Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.10  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Director of Public Safety may take or require
corrective action up to and including suspension or revocation of any license
issued hereunder if he or she determines from the report of any city officer
or city employee making an inspection, or any other reliable available
information, that the licensee has violated this chapter or permitted a
nuisance as set forth in § 120.09 to occur. Suspension or revocation shall
be limited to specific units involved in violations of this chapter, unless
it is reasonably determined by the city that the revocation of the license
for other or all units is required to protect the public safety or to prevent
continued violations.



   (B)   Any suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed
directly to the to the Hearing Officer of the city for review and
determination under such rules as provided for appeals to the Hearing Officer
under the city Zoning Ordinance, except such appeals shall be filed within 15
days of the Director’s decision. Such suspension or revocation may be
stayed by the Director pending the decision of the Hearing Officer unless the
Director confirms specifically in writing that public safety may be
threatened by such stay.



   (C)   Any owner whose residential rental license has been suspended
may not collect rent for the rental housing or units for which the suspension
or revocation has been issued for the period of time that such suspension or
revocation is in effect under any lease, lease term, or other rental
agreement entered into after the effective date of this ordinance. It shall
be a violation for any tenant to occupy a rental unit where the crime-free
rental housing license has been suspended or revoked.



   (D)   In addition to any penalties or remedies set forth in this
chapter, the city may deny any occupancy permit or other site permit for
rental housing for which the owner is in violation of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 120.10)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 3909, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018) 
Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.11  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any owner may appeal to the Hearing Officer of the city a
suspension, revocation, or denial of a residential rental license by the
Director of Public Safety. Appeal to the Hearing Officer shall be made within
15 days of the suspension, revocation, or denial complained of by filing with
both the Hearing Officer and the Director of Public Safety a written notice
of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.



   (B)   Any such appeal shall be based solely upon and shall state a
claim that: (i) the true intent of this chapter or the rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been incorrectly interpreted, (ii) the
provisions of this chapter do not apply, or (iii) criminal violations
sufficient to allow for evictions under the crime-free lease addendum were
not established with the requisite standard of proof.



   (C)   A non-refundable fee, as prescribed in the residential rental
license fee schedule established by a written order or resolution of the City
Council, shall be paid at the time of filing of any appeal as otherwise
established for appeals to the Hearing Officer.



   (D)   Upon receiving a timely-filed notice of appeal, the Director
of Public Safety shall transmit to the Hearing Officer all papers
constituting the record upon which the suspension, revocation, or denial was
taken.



   (E)   An appeal shall stay any suspension of revocation appealed
from, unless the Director of Public Safety certifies to the Hearing Officer
after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, the stay would, in his or her opinion, cause eminent peril
to life, property, or public safety, in which case the suspension or
revocation shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Hearing Officer or by a Court of Record on application,
or notice to the Director of Public Safety and on due cause shown.



   (F)   The Hearing Officer shall act upon any appeal hereunder within
30 days of receiving a timely-filed notice of appeal by conducting a hearing
upon such appeal, except such hearing may be extended to a later date upon
application to the Hearing Officer for cause. The hearing shall be conducted
according to the following procedures:



      (1)   Hearings conducted by the Hearing Officer shall be open
to the public, held at the call of the Hearing Officer and at such times as
he or she may determine. Any interested person may appear in person or by
duly authorized agent or attorney. All testimony before the Hearing Officer
shall be given under oath. The Hearing Officer shall administer oaths and may
compel attendance of witnesses. The Hearing Officer shall keep minutes of his
or her proceedings and other official actions. The Hearing Officer shall
adopt his or her own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this chapter
or applicable Illinois statutes.



      (2)   The Hearing Officer may reverse or affirm wholly or
partly, or may modify or amend the suspension, revocation, or denial appealed
from to the extent and in the manner that the Hearing Officer determines is
necessary to conform with the intent and requirements of this chapter. Unless
otherwise required by law, no challenge to any decision subject to this
section shall filed in any court until or unless a timely appeal has been
filed and prosecuted to completion by the owner as provided for in this
section so as to establish a final appealable decision.



      (3)   Every decision by the Hearing Officer on an appeal
hereunder shall be accompanied by findings of facts and shall refer to any
exhibits presented at the hearing upon which the Hearing Officer’s decision
is based. Such exhibits shall remain a part of the permanent records of the
Hearing Officer. The findings of facts shall specify the reason or reasons
for Hearing Officer’s decision. The terms of the relief granted shall be
specifically set forth in a conclusion or statement separate from the
findings of fact. Every decision or determination of the Hearing Officer
shall immediately be filed with the Director of Public Safety and the City
Clerk and shall be a public record and thereupon shall be a final decision of
the city.



(1999 Code, § 120.11)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 120.12  EVICTION OR RETALIATION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for an owner to terminate the lease agreement of a
tenant or otherwise retaliate against any tenant because that tenant
complained to an agent of the city about nuisance activities or violations of
law on the owner’s premises. Nothing herein shall preclude an owner from
evicting a tenant or taking other lawful action due to a violation of law or
lease provision by the tenant.



(1999 Code, § 120.12)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter or
shall fail to comply with any lawful order pursuant to any section of this
chapter, upon conviction therefore, shall, in addition to any other remedy
established herein, be subject to punishment in accordance with the general
penalty for violations of ordinances of the city. Each day that such
violation or failure to comply continues after issuance of notice by the code
official shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person whose residential rental license has been suspended
or revoked shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter, and in
addition to any other remedies as may be provided by law, shall be subject to
any of the following:



      (1)   A fine in an amount of not less than $250 and no more
than $ 1,500, per unit for each day the violation exits;



      (2)   Any and all civil remedies available to the city,
including any and all injunctive remedies, that a court of competent
jurisdiction may impose.



   (C)   The city may seek to enforce this chapter by seeking any one
or more remedies authorized under this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 120.99)  (Ord. 3657, passed 3-1- 2010; Ord. 3797, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 4037, passed 5-7-2018)



CHAPTER 121:  VIDEO GAMING



Section



   121.01   Title



   121.02   Definitions



   121.03   Video gaming establishment permit



   121.04   Regulations for operating video gaming terminals



   121.05   Inspection of premises



   121.06   Revocation or suspension of license and permit stickers



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic beverage establishments, see Ch. 116



   Gambling offenses, see Ch. 135



   Vending machines and amusement devices, see §§ 113.01 - 113.09



§ 121.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall constitute and be known and may be cited as “Video
Gaming.”



(Ord. 3859, passed 2-17-2015)



§ 121.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   The phrases VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL, LICENSED RETAIL
ESTABLISHMENT, LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT, LICENSED VETERANS’
ESTABLISHMENT and LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT shall have the meanings
set forth in the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230,  Act 40, § 5) and
each of the aforementioned establishments shall be referred to herein as a
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT whether it be a retail licensed establishment,
licensed fraternal establishment, licensed veterans establishment or licensed
truck establishment as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act.



   (B) PERMIT HOLDER shall mean and include all the establishments defined
in division (A) above.



(Ord. 3859, passed 2-17-2015)



§ 121.03  VIDEO GAMING ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   In order for a licensed establishment to operate a video
gaming terminal in the city, the licensed establishment is required to obtain
an annual video gaming terminal permit for each video gaming terminal from
the city by submitting a written application to the City Clerk, on a form
provided by the City Clerk. The burden is upon each applying licensed
establishment to demonstrate its eligibility and suitability for the permit.
All video gaming terminal permits issued by the city shall expire April 30,
next, after date of issue. Annual nonrefundable permit fees for each video
gaming terminal shall be as follows:



 

Licensed retail establishment
 

$1,000



Licensed fraternal establishment
 

$250



Licensed veterans’ establishment
 

$250



Licensed truck stop establishment
 

$1,000




 



   (B)   The permit fee shall be paid in full at the time the initial
or renewal application is filed with the city. The fee for the initial
application shall be prorated on a monthly basis if paid after April 30. A
permit shall be purely a personal privilege, good until April 30 following
the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided by law, and shall
not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment,
or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered.



(Ord. 3859, passed 2-17-2015)



§ 121.04  REGULATIONS FOR OPERATING VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS.



   The following regulations apply to all licensed establishments
operating a video gaming terminal on the licensed premises.



   (A)   A valid State Gaming Board video gaming license must be
clearly displayed at all times in a conspicuous place.



   (B)   A valid city video gaming terminal permit shall be clearly
displayed at all times on each video gaming terminal whether operational or
not.



   (C)   No more than five video gaming terminals may be located on the
premises of the licensed establishment.



   (D)   Other than having up to five video gaming terminals with a
valid video gaming terminal permit, a licensed establishment is prohibited
from having, anywhere on its premises, an electronic video gaming machine
which may be available to play or simulate the play of poker, line up,
blackjack, roulette, craps, slots, or any other card or dice game or other
game of chance, or that is otherwise similar to the gambling or gaming device
under this code, even if solely for amusement purposes.



   (E)   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area
restricted to persons over 21 years of age. For all licensed video gaming
locations that restrict admittance to patrons 21 years of age or older, a
separate restricted area is not required. Any licensed video gaming location
that allows minors to enter where video gaming terminals are located shall
separate any video gaming terminals from the area accessible by minors. In
those licensed video gaming locations where separation from minors under 21
is required, a physical barrier to the gaming area is required, which may
consist of a short partition, gate or rope. No barrier shall visually obscure
the entrance to the gaming area from an employee of the licensed video gaming
location who is over the age of 21.



   (F)   No licensed establishment may cause, suffer or permit any
person under the age of 21 years to use, play or operate a video gaming
terminal.



   (G)   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal
hours of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the
licensed establishment pursuant to the city Liquor Control Ordinance.



   (H)   The licensed establishment must fully comply with the Illinois
Video Gaming Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq., as amended, and all
rules, regulation and restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board.



   (I)   The licensed establishment must fully comply with all
applicable city ordinances, including the city Liquor Control Ordinance, as
well as any applicable federal and state laws or regulations.



   (J)   Licensed establishments must immediately notify the City
Liquor Control Commissioner in the event the State Gaming Board revokes or
suspends the licensed establishment’s video gaming license.



   (K)   A licensed establishment seeking a video gaming terminal
permit must have maintained, at a minimum, 50% of its total gross revenue
from the sale of food, beverages and alcoholic liquor during the previous 12-
month period prior to the commencement of the date of the period for which
the licensed establishment is applying. In the event the licensed
establishment has not maintained a licensed establishment for the 12-month
period prior to the commencement of the date of the permit of which the
licensed establishment is applying, the determination shall be deferred until
the time of its next application. At the time of application for a video
gaming terminal permit, the applicant shall provide the City Clerk with a
verified report or reports for the required periods, showing its gross
revenue from all sources, including food, beverage and alcoholic liquor sales
and video gaming. This provision shall not apply to any fraternal or veterans
establishment.



   (L)   A licensed establishment applicant for a video gaming terminal
permit shall have maintained an establishment with a liquor license, in good
standing, in the city for a minimum of 24 consecutive months prior to the
commencement date of the permit for which the applicant is applying. This
provision shall not apply to any of the following: a fraternal establishment,
a veterans establishment, a licensed establishment with an existing video
gaming terminal permit issued by the city, an applicant who has acquired an
ongoing licensed establishment and who would otherwise qualify for a video
gaming permit, and a licensed establishment that, prior to the enactment of
this amendment, had pending before the State Gaming Board an application for
a video gaming license.



   (M)   The licensed establishment, for which the applicant is seeking
a video gaming terminal permit, must be in compliance with all local zoning
ordinances at the time of application. This provision shall not apply to any
fraternal or veterans establishment.



(Ord. 3859, passed 2-17-2015; Am. Ord. 3989, passed 6-19-17)



§ 121.05  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   Every licensed establishment where a video gaming terminal is kept
shall be subject to inspection by the City Director of Public Safety or his
or her authorized agents, at any time, to ensure compliance with the Video
Gaming Ordinance. This includes establishments applying for a video gaming
terminal permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, resist,
oppose or attempt to hinder, resist or oppose the City Director of Public
Safety or his or her respective agents in the course of an inspection.



(Ord. 3859, passed 2-17-2015)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.06  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE AND PERMIT STICKERS.



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any video
gaming terminal permit issued hereunder if he or she determines that the
permit holder has violated any of the provisions of the Video Gaming Act,
ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq., and/or 11 Ill. Admin. Code 1800 (Title
11 of the Illinois Administrative Code, subtitle D: Video Gaming, Ch. I:
Illinois Gaming Board, part 1800: Video Gaming (General)), as amended,
incorporated by reference in this chapter, and/or any provision of this
chapter. No such permit shall be revoked or suspended for more than 30 days
and no permit holder shall be fined except after a public hearing by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, with a three-day written notice to the
permit holder, affording the permit holder opportunity to appear and defend.
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may also levy a fine only or a fine in
addition to a suspension or revocation of a permit, not to exceed $1,000 for
a first violation within a 12-month period; $1,500 for second violation
within a 12-month period; $2,500 for a third or subsequent violation within a
12-month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Not more than $15,000 in fines under this section may be
imposed against a permit holder during the permit period. Proceeds of such
fines shall be paid into a general corporate fund of the city.



(Ord. 3859, passed 2-17-2015; Am. Ord. 3989, passed 6-19-17)



CHAPTER 122:  TOWING COMPANIES



Section



   122.01   Definitions



   122.02   Purpose



   122.03   Eligibility



   122.04   Tow rotation list



   122.05   Towing



   122.06   Removal of hazards



   122.07   Storage



   122.08   Rates



   122.09   Release/inspection of vehicles



   122.10   Equipment



   122.11   Cause for suspension or removal from “call out” rotation



   122.12   Complaint procedure — services of towing operator



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see Ch. 91



   Traffic regulations; impoundment of motor vehicle, see §§ 70.080 -
70.087



§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TOW FIRM.  A sole proprietor, partnership, company, corporation or
limited liability company operating a towing business.



   TOW TRUCK.  A motor vehicle that has been altered or designed and
equipped for and exclusively used in the business of towing vehicles by means
of a crane, tow bar, towline or dolly, or otherwise exclusively used to
render assistance to other vehicles.



   TOWING SERVICE.  The provision of tow truck services in response to a
dispatch or request from the Police Department or any other city department.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.02  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to prescribe regulations for the
operation of tow trucks in the removal of motor vehicles illegally parked,
abandoned, involved in accidents, or that constitute obstructions to traffic
or snow removal operations, or that constitute public nuisances. It is the
further purpose of this chapter to provide a fair and impartial means of
distributing city requests for towing services among qualified firms, and to
insure that they are prompt and reasonably priced, and are provided in the
best interest of the public as well as the interest of the efficient removal
of such vehicles. This chapter is not intended to and does not regulate tow
services other than those dispatched or requested by city personnel. The
provisions hereof shall, at all times, be subject to applicable statutory
requirements and the Illinois Commerce Commission and orders pertaining to
commercial towing.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.03  ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   Any towing firm shall become eligible to be listed on the
city's tow rotation list and participate in the assignment of service calls
by the Police Department if it meets the following requirements.



      (1)   Must meet all of the requirements outlined in ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 12-606: Tow-Trucks; Identification; Equipment; Insurance,
except subparagraph (d) of § 12-606 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



      (2)   Must be able to respond, with the necessary equipment,
to the location of a Police Department request for a tow within 30 minutes of
the original request.



      (3)   Must provide an attendant on call, capable of responding
to police requests for towing.



      (4)   Must provide an appropriate 24-hours-a-day telephone
number where the service can be contacted, and where vehicle owners can be
referred.



      (5)   Must respond with the appropriate equipment to the scene
of a call, regardless of whether it is for an accident or an abandon/disabled
vehicle, and should avoid the handling of other business while en route.



      (6)   Must hold a valid authority issued to it by the Illinois
Commerce Commission.



      (7)   Must not employ any driver or vehicle operator that at
any time in the last five years, in any state or territory, has been
convicted of any of the following offenses: homicide, attempted homicide,
crimes involving bodily injury or attempted bodily injury, robbery, theft
crimes, attempted theft, forgery, driving under the influence (DUI) or any
sex crimes.



      (8)   Must annually provide a copy of every driver’s and
each owner’s driver’s license to the Director of Public Safety, or his or
her designee (Operations Captain), so a license check and criminal history
background check can be conducted.



      (9)   Must submit a photocopy of each new employee’s
driver’s license, and a signed consent to conduct criminal background check
form from each new employee, prior to allowing each new employee to operate
police tows.



      (10)   Must insure every person operating a towing or
recovering vehicle on behalf of the towing service has completed a traffic
incident management training program approved by the Illinois Department of
Transportation.



      (11)   Must provide storage facilities within the corporate
limits of the city.  In order to provide the best customer service, all
vehicles towed at the request of the Police Department shall be stored at the
O'Fallon location, unless other arrangements are made with the owner of the
vehicle and/or the Police Department. The facility shall be easily located,
accessible to the public, and open for the release of vehicles during regular
business hours (continuous staffing not necessary).



      (12)   All vehicles must be made available for inspection by
city personnel to ensure compliance with the law and this chapter, to include:



         (a)   Valid vehicle registration;



         (b)   Display of property tow truck registration;



         (c)   Compliance with weight limits;



         (d)   Display of Illinois Commerce Commission and
Federal Department of Transportation numbers.



      (13)   Must possess and maintain the following.



         (a)   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance with
minimum combined single limit coverage of $1,000,000.



         (b)   Commercial general liability insurance with limits
of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence.



         (c)   $100,000 minimum garage keeper’s legal liability
insurance.



         (d)   $100,000 minimum on-hook coverage or cargo
insurance.



         (e)   A worker’s compensation policy covering every
person operating a tow truck on behalf of the towing firm.



      (14)   Shall not transfer the responsibility for an assigned
tow to another firm. If the service originally contacted cannot respond,
police dispatch shall be notified. The Police Department has sole
responsibility for reassigning a tow request. NOTE: If service cannot be
provided due to equipment failure, prior commitment or other circumstances,
police dispatch shall be notified so that the firm can be taken “out of
service” until such time as it is available to respond as required.



      (15)   Must notify the Director of Public Safety, in writing,
of any changes in firm ownership or location.



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety may add additional requirements
based upon the specific needs of the Police Department.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.04  TOW ROTATION LIST.



   (A)   Any towing firm interested in being added to the “call
out” rotation shall submit to Director of Public Safety an application
provided by the Police Department, along with a fee schedule.



   (B)   The “call out” rotation will be based upon a regular
sequence of events (i.e., every call, day of the week, weekly rotation, and
the like), and shall be determined without preference to any service
provider. Qualified firms will be notified in advance of the “call out”
sequence to be utilized.



   (C)   No member of the Department of Public Safety can have a
financial interest in a tow firm included in the “call out” rotation, and
no financial consideration can be afforded a member of the Department.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.05  TOWING.



   If the owner or operator of a disabled vehicle is present at the scene
of the disabled vehicle, is not under arrest, and does not abandon his or her
vehicle, and, in the law enforcement officer’s opinion, the disabled
vehicle is not impeding or obstructing traffic, illegally parked, or posing a
security or safety risk, the law enforcement officer shall allow the owner of
the vehicle to specify a towing service to relocate the disabled vehicle,
provided the tow can be completed in a reasonable amount of time.  If the
owner is not present or has no preference as to which towing service shall be
utilized, the Police Department shall have the vehicle removed by the towing
firm next on the “call out” rotation, and the vehicle shall be taken to
its storage facility for safe keeping.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.06  REMOVAL OF HAZARDS.



   After being dispatched by the Police Department for a tow, the tow
truck operator shall cooperate with the police officer in the removal of
hazards and illegally parked vehicles as requested by the police officer. 
The police officer shall determine when such a vehicle shall be impounded or
moved, and the tow truck operator shall abide by the officer’s decision.
The tow truck operator shall be responsible for removing the vehicle, and all
parts and debris from the vehicle, from the scene, and for clearing the
roadway of debris, glass and fluids. Should the removal of the debris or
fluids from the roadway be beyond the tow operator's capability, other
services may be summoned to assist.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.07  STORAGE.



   (A)   The tow firm will be responsible for protection of the vehicle
and its contents until it is claimed by the owner or disposed of by the
Police Department.



   (B)   Storage yards shall be fenced and secured against theft and
damage, and available for inspection. The fenced area will have a minimum of
1,000 square feet for storage.



   (C)   The storage facility within the city shall meet all zoning
requirements and shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable city
ordinances.



   (D)   The tow firm shall agree to waive storage fees, upon request
by the Police Department, until such time as the firm has been notified that
the vehicle is eligible for release for vehicles:



      (1)   Seized, held or impounded by the Police Department.



      (2)   Being held as evidence in pending court cases.



      (3)   Held under court order.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.08  RATES.



   (A)   On or before January 1 of each year, tow firms must submit to
the Director of Public Safety, on forms provided by the Police Department, a
complete list of rates for services provided. Fees charged to tow customers
shall not include an extra charge for labor.



   (B)   Tow firms must post the rate for services provided at the
storage facility in plain sight for the public, and provide a written copy of
the rates to any motorist who inquires.



   (C)   Tow firms must agree that, if the registered owner or other
person legally entitled to operate the vehicle shall arrive on scene prior to
removal or towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the
tow truck and that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle without
interference, upon payment of a reasonable fee of not more than one-half the
posted rate for the service had the tow been completed.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.09  RELEASE/INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   Tow firms shall make every effort to accommodate the release
of vehicle towed, upon payment for services rendered.



   (B)   Tow firms shall not release any vehicles with “hold”
orders placed on them by the Police Department.  This includes guidelines
under the Impoundment of Motor Vehicle (Administrative Tow Fee), O’Fallon
City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 70, § 70.086.



   (C)   Tow firms shall not release a vehicle unless the claimant can
prove rightful ownership or possession (i.e., title, registration, insurance
card), along with identification of the person claiming the vehicle.  If the
claimant is not the rightful owner, that person must have a notarized letter
from the owner authorizing the claimant to take possession of the vehicle or
personal items.



   (D)   Tow firms must release items of personal property (i.e., child
safety seat, medications) to the lawful owner on request prior to payment of
any charges, provided the property is contained within the vehicle and is not
an essential part of the vehicle.  Any items removed from the vehicle shall
be noted on the pink copy of the tow report provided by the Police
Department.  Any questions regarding ownership of the vehicle or its
contents shall be directed to the Police Department.  The hours of
availability shall be 06:00 to 18:00 hours, Monday through Friday, and 06:00
through 12:00 on Saturdays, except on days the business is closed in
recognition of a holiday or due to a bona fide emergency.



   (E)   Except for vehicles with a police hold for evidence or
seizure, all vehicles stored or impounded as a result of the tow ordered by
the Police Department, shall be made available for release to the owner of
the vehicle, or his or her authorized representative, and shall also be made
available to the owner’s insurance agent, insurance adjuster, or body shop
or car dealer for the purpose of estimating or appraising damages.  The
hours of availability shall be 06:00 to 18:00 hours, Monday through Friday,
and 06:00 through 12:00 on Saturdays, except on days the business is closed
in recognition of a holiday or due to a bona fide emergency situation.



   (F)   Vehicles impounded by a towing firm shall be accessible to the
Police Department personnel at any time requested by the Police Department.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.10  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Emergency lights shall be used at the scene and while towing a
vehicle.



   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the tow firm shall
be conspicuously displayed on both sides of the truck, in letters at least
two inches high.



   (C)   All trucks shall be available for inspection to insure
compliance with the law and this policy.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.11  CAUSE FOR SUSPENSION OR REMOVAL FROM “CALL OUT” ROTATION.



   (A)   Failure to comply with the laws of the State of Illinois or
the requirements outlined in this chapter.



   (B)   Repeated and continual failure to respond promptly when called
for service.



   (C)   Repeated bona fide complaints from Police Department personnel
or the public.



   (D)   Repeated damage to property as a result of poor performance
while towing or storing a vehicle.



   (E)   Any action or actions that obstruct the Police Department or
jeopardize the public confidence in the Police Department.



   (F)   Any criminal wrongdoing.



   (G)   Any conviction in the last five years in any state or
territory of any offenses, including, but not limited to, the following:
homicide, attempted homicide, bodily injury, attempted bodily injury,
robbery, theft crimes, attempted theft, forgery, DUI, or any sex crimes.



   (H)   Bona fide complaints of overcharging.



   (I)   Inept performance as determined by the Director of Public
Safety.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 122.12  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE — SERVICES OF TOWING OPERATOR.



   (A)   All complaints of improper action on the part of the tow firm,
by the public or Police Department personnel, will be investigated and a
report will be sent to the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   If upon investigation the allegations are confirmed, the
Director of Public Safety shall notify the tow firm, in writing, of the
results of the investigation. The firm shall be informed of its right to
request a hearing on the allegations. The request must be made to the
Director of Public Safety, in writing, within ten business days of the date
of the notification. The hearing will be held at the Public Safety Building
before the Director of Public Safety. The hearing will take place within ten
business days of receipt of the request for a hearing.



   (C)   Corrective measures shall range from written warning,
temporary removal from the “call out” rotation, or permanent removal from
the “call out” rotation.



(Ord. 3990, passed 7-3-2017)



CHAPTER 123:  SIDEWALK DINING



Section



   123.01   Title



   123.02   Purpose and intent



   123.03   Definitions



   123.04   Permit required



   123.05   Regulations



   123.06   Indemnification



   123.07   Discontinuation/revocation; notice of violation; appeals



   123.08   Severability



 



   123.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic beverages, see Ch. 116



   Food industry, see Ch. 112



§ 123.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall constitute and be known and may be cited as
“Sidewalk Dining.”



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)



§ 123.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   This chapter is designed to permit sidewalk dining accessory
and incidental to a lawfully existing restaurant in areas where it is
appropriate and to promote and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   Specific purposes of this legislation are:



      (1)   To ensure adequate space for pedestrians on the sidewalk
adjacent to the sidewalk dining areas.



      (2)   To preserve and enhance the character of the
neighborhoods where such sidewalk dining is permitted in the city and to
protect the adjacent areas.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)



§ 123.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECTOR. Director of Community Development.



   PERMITTEE. A person, organization, sole proprietorship, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, company or other similar entity which
has been issued a sidewalk dining permit.



   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement,
dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for, dedicated to and
approved for, the general public for pedestrian walkway purposes which is
directly adjacent to a business establishment of a permittee.



   RESTAURANT. As defined in § 158.016 of this code of ordinances under
“restaurant, fast-food,” “restaurant, general” or “restaurant,
limited.”



   SIDEWALK DINING. The extension of the service of an existing restaurant
preparing and serving foods for consumption within an existing building, to
the extent that food and drink are permitted to be served and consumed at the
tables placed on the public sidewalk adjacent to and within the confines of
the frontage of that portion of the building in which the restaurant is
situated.



   SIDEWALK DINING AREA. The area of the public sidewalk defined by a site
plan, approved by the city, which shows the number and type of tables,
chairs, sidewalk furnishings and decorative items and their location.



   SIDEWALK DINING PERMIT. A permit issued by the city, through the
Director of Community Development, or his or her designee, which authorizes a
restaurant to place tables, chairs and sidewalk furnishings on a public
sidewalk for the purpose of serving food and drink to customers.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)



§ 123.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A valid sidewalk dining permit shall be required for all
sidewalk dining on public sidewalks.



   (B)   Establishments that meet the definition of a restaurant shall
be permitted to apply.



   (C)   The permit is subject to reapplication and renewal on an
annual basis.



   (D)   Permits shall not be transferable from one person or entity to
another person or entity.



   (E)   Permits shall not be transferable from the permitted place of
business to another place of business.



   (F)   The annual fee for such permit shall be $50 and such fee shall
be paid in full at the time of application.



   (G)   All permit fees shall be non-refundable.



   (H)   Other than the applicant’s initial application, all
application for a given calendar year, must be submitted by January 31 of the
applicable calendar year. In the event that an application is submitted later
January 31, a non-refundable late fee of $50, in addition to the annual
application fee, must be paid in order for the application to be considered.



   (I)   Permit application forms shall be available at City Hall and
shall include, but not be limited to, the following information and
documentation:



      (1)   Name, address, and telephone phone number of the
restaurant.



      (2)   Name, address, telephone phone number and email address
of a contact person for the restaurant.



      (3)   Certificate of insurance evidencing no less than
$1,000,000, combined single limit, which said insurance covering all
liability, both public liability and property damage, which may result from
the granting of the sidewalk dining permit, naming the City of O’Fallon as
an additional insured. The insurance coverage must be maintained in full
force and effect so long as a permit is outstanding with written proof of
renewal of the insurance to be provided to the Director at time of renewal.



      (4)   Design plan drawn to scale, as follows:



         (a)   Accurate depiction of property lines and
dimensions, all adjoining public rights of way (including sidewalks), the
location and dimensions of all existing structures (primary and accessory)
and setback dimensions (measured from the curb to the structure).



         (b)   Depict ingress/egress to business and sidewalk
dining area.



         (c)   Depict sidewalk width from face of building to
curb.



         (d)   Depict the designated area to be used for sidewalk
dining purposes, clearly marked with measurements and dimensions.



         (e)   Depict all surface obstacles and obstructions such
as fire hydrants, trees, permanent decorative fixtures, and the like.



         (f)   Depict the number and placement of tables, chairs,
umbrellas, pedestrian barriers, decorative items and other fixtures, with the
dimensions and product information of each piece shown.



      (5)   No application will be accepted without the required
information, proof of insurance and design plan.



      (6)   The application shall be filed with the Director.



   (J)   Upon review for compliance with the standards of this chapter,
a permit shall be issued or denied by the Director within ten business days
of submission of the application. However the Director may defer, within the
aforementioned ten-day timeline, his or her ruling and refer the application
to the City Council for its approval, if the Director believes it would be
appropriate to do so.



   (K)   Proof of sales tax receipts to ensure compliance with the
definition of a restaurant may be requested if deemed necessary by the
Director.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.05  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Time.



      (1)   The sidewalk dining season shall commence on March 1 and
conclude on December 1 of the year.



      (2)   Special permission may be granted by the Director during
the off season in cases of sidewalk festivals or other community events and
activities.



      (3)   Sidewalk dining shall be allowed from 6:00 a.m. to
midnight, but in no instance shall the hours for sidewalk dining exceed the
restaurant’s permitted hours of operation.



      (4)   The Director may, upon written notice, require the
temporary removal of all sidewalk dining area furniture and other related
objects during festivals or other community events and activities.



   (B)   Location.



      (1)   The sidewalk dining area shall be located only within
the area depicted on the applicant’s design plan.



      (2)   The location of all furniture, fixtures and facilities
associated with sidewalk dining shall be such that a continuous pedestrian
access route (PAR) meeting at least the minimum requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) will be maintained.



         (a)   Currently, the PAR is recommended to be five feet
wide, and in any event, shall not be less than three feet wide. Tree grates
and similar semi-open surfaces do not count towards the required PAR width.



         (b)   A vertical ground clearance area of at least seven
feet shall be maintained at all times. Umbrellas and other overhead
obstructions must not encroach into this area.



         (c)   There shall be no “grandfathering” or
non-conforming right to continue previously permitted sidewalk dining
arrangements insofar as minimum PAR standards as concerned. Any permit is
issued only on an annual basis and is subject to mandatory modification to
assure compliance with required PAR standards as they evolve from time to
time.



         (d)   Additional sidewalk clearance shall be required
where pedestrian traffic or other circumstances warrant.



      (3)   Sidewalk dining areas shall not obstruct sight distance
of vehicular traffic, nor block access to any ramp, driveway, fire hydrant,
fire escape, or entrance/exit.



   (C)   Maintenance and materials.



      (1)   The permittee shall keep the sidewalk dining area in a
neat and clean condition, free from nuisance, litter, and trash and shall
provide for the prompt removal of trash and waste therefrom. The restaurant
shall wash down the sidewalk as needed to remove grease and residue.



      (2)   All city and state health requirements must be met at
all times.



      (3)   Only tables, chairs, umbrellas, decorative items and
pedestrian barriers shall be permitted in the public sidewalk.



      (4)   Paint, carpeting, artificial turf, platforms or other
surfaces of any kind, shall not be permitted at any time in the sidewalk
dining area.



      (5)   There shall be no penetration of the public sidewalk
surfaces.



      (6)   All furniture and fixtures located on public sidewalks
shall be entirely portable.



      (7)   Sidewalk tables, chairs, furniture and decorative items
shall be of uniform design.



      (8)   Permitted materials for sidewalk tables and chairs are
limited to cast iron, wrought iron, expanded steel, wire steel, cast
aluminum, and extruded aluminum. The pieces must be of substantial weight and
quality. Glass inserts or glass tables and resin or wood furniture are
prohibited.



      (9)   Umbrellas shall be of stable construction with
flame-retardant, color-fast fabric.



      (10)   With prior approval of the Director, sidewalk dining
may be separated from the public sidewalk by a 30 to 36-inch tall pedestrian
barrier (railing, fence, or planters). Pedestrian barriers must be sturdy and
stable and have sufficient weight so they cannot tip or be blown over.
Pedestrian barriers shall not be anchored to the public sidewalk and shall be
maintained so as not to stain/discolor the sidewalk.



      (11)   Advertising of any kind on umbrellas or other sidewalk
furniture is prohibited.



      (12)   No signs shall be permitted within the sidewalk dining
area except one menu board sign may be displayed within the area of the
sidewalk dining, mounted on an easel or any other easily removable fixture.
The sign shall not exceed six square feet.



      (13)   Sidewalk dining furniture and other related objects
must be stored indoors in the off season.



      (14)   All furniture and fixtures must be kept clean and in
good repair. Broken or damaged pieces shall be safely and securely repaired
or replaced immediately. Repairs shall be sufficient to maintain the current
level of quality, and replacements shall be of the same or similar design,
color, quality and material.



      (15)   The presetting of tables with utensils, glasses,
napkins and condiments and the like, is prohibited.



      (16)   While in use, the dining area must have adequate
illumination from dusk and thereafter.



      (17)   Outdoor heaters shall not be permitted in the sidewalk
dining area.



      (18)   No speakers or sidewalk music shall be permitted on the
sidewalk dining area.



      (19)   Businesses shall follow the regulations of the Smoke
Free Illinois Act.



      (20)   All food preparation must take place inside the
associated restaurant.



      (21)   Restaurant service equipment shall not be permitted on
sidewalks.



      (22)   No dogs, other than service animals, shall be allowed
in the sidewalk dining area. Service animals include, but are not limited to,
guide dogs for people who are blind or have visual impairments, hearing dogs
for people who are deaf or hard of hearing, seizure alert dogs, and dogs who
assist people with mobility impairments.



   (D)   Alcoholic beverages. Restaurants possessing a valid liquor
license for on-site consumption shall be allowed to serve alcoholic beverages
in the designated sidewalk dining area. Removal of alcoholic beverages from
the designated sidewalk dining area, except back into the applicant’s
facility, is prohibited.



   (E)   Inspections. Restaurants with sidewalk dining permits shall be
subject to periodic inspections for compliance with the standards of this
chapter.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.06  INDEMNIFICATION.



   Before a permit is issued to the applicant, the applicant must furnish
the following:



   (A)   An agreement signed by the applicant to repair any damage
caused to the sidewalk in the operation of the sidewalk dining at the expense
of the applicant.



   (B)   An agreement signed by the applicant indemnifying and holding
the city harmless against loss, including costs and expenses resulting from
injury to person(s) or property as a direct or indirect result of the
operation of the sidewalk dining and for injury to person(s) or property
occurring on the premises occupied by the restaurant for sidewalk dining.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)



§ 123.07  DISCONTINUATION/REVOCATION; NOTICE OF VIOLATION; APPEALS.



   (A)   Temporary order of discontinuation. The city reserves the
right and power to temporarily order the discontinuation of the operation of
the sidewalk dining at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or
conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. The situations include, but are
not limited to, festivals, parades, marches, repairs to the street or
sidewalk, or any other emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent
possible, the permitee shall be given prior written notice of the time period
during which the operation of the sidewalk dining will not be permitted by
the city, but failure to give notice shall not affect the right and power of
the city to prohibit sidewalk dining operation at any particular time.



   (B)   Notice of violation; failure to comply. Upon determination by
the Director or his or her designee that a permitee has violated one or more
of the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall give written notice to
the permitee to correct such violation within 24 hours of receipt of such
notice by the permitee. In the event that the permitee fails or refuses to
correct such violation within such period, the permitee will be subject to
the penalty provisions as set forth hereafter.



   (C)   Appeals. Any permitee aggrieved by any action of the Director,
in the denial, suspension or revocation of a sidewalk dining permit, shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Mayor within 30 days of the denial,
suspension or revocation, upon no less than three days’ prior notice
thereof, provided that a hearing is requested by the permitee, in writing,
within five business days of denial, suspension or revocation of a sidewalk
dining permit. A denial, suspension or revocation of a sidewalk dining permit
shall not become effective until a hearing has been conducted and a decision
rendered by the Mayor.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.08  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision,
section, paragraph or part thereof be held invalid, such decision shall not
effect or impair the validity of the remaining provisions, sections,
paragraphs or part thereof of this chapter.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)



§ 123.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any permittee who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, in addition to any other remedies as provided by law, be subject to
any of the following:



      (1)   A fine in the amount of not less than $125 and no more
than $750 for each day the violation exists.



      (2)   Automatic suspension of permit or renewal thereof for
not more than 30 days, if three or more violations occur during the permit
period even if the violations are corrected.



      (3)   Automatic revocation of permit or renewal thereof, if
five or more violations occur during the permit period even if the violations
are corrected.



      (4)   Any and all civil remedies available to the city,
including any and all injunctive remedies that a court of competent
jurisdiction may impose.



   (B)   Each violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate
offense.



(Ord. 3897, passed 8-17-2015)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



      134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES



      136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



      137.   WEAPONS



      138.   EPHEDRINE CONTROL



      139.   UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   130.01   Definitions



   130.02   Intent



   130.03   Knowledge



   130.04   Recklessness



   130.05   Negligence



   130.06   Attempt




Adoption of Offenses




   130.20   Adoption of state offenses



   130.21   Adoption of Cannabis Control Act



 



   130.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 130.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. The taking of action or a failure or omission to take action.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2)



   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3)



   CONDUCT. An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4)



   OFFENSE. A violation of a penal statute of the city or state.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12)



(1999 Code, § 130.01)



§ 130.02  INTENT.



   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense,
when his or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result
or engage in that conduct.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4)  (1999 Code, § 130.02)



§ 130.03  KNOWLEDGE.



   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:



      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her
conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is
consciously aware that his or her conduct is of that nature or that those
circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the
substantial probability that the fact exists; and/or



      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the
section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that that
result is practically certain to be caused by his or her conduct.



   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed
willfully, within the meaning of a statute using the term “willfully”,
unless the section clearly requires another meaning.



   (C)   When the law provides that acting knowingly suffices to
establish an element of an offense, that element also is established if a
person acts intentionally.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5)  (1999 Code, § 130.03)



§ 130.04  RECKLESSNESS.



   (A)   A person is reckless or acts recklessly, when that person
consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
circumstances exist or that a result will follow, described by the section
defining the offense, and this disregard constitutes a gross deviation from
the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise in the situation.



   (B)   An act performed recklessly is performed wantonly, within the
meaning of a section using the term “wantonly”, unless the statute
clearly requires another meaning.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6)  (1999 Code, § 130.04)



§ 130.05  NEGLIGENCE.



   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when that person fails to
be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
a result will follow, described by the statute defining the offense, and that
failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7)  (1999 Code, § 130.05)



§ 130.06  ATTEMPT.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits the offense of
attempt when, with intent to commit a specific offense, he or she does any
act that constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.



   (B)   Impossibility. It is not a defense to a charge of attempt that
because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been
impossible for the accused to commit the offense attempted.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4)  (1999 Code, § 130.06)  Penalty, see §
130.99




ADOPTION OF OFFENSES




§ 130.20  ADOPTION OF STATE OFFENSES.



   (A)   Those portions of the Criminal Code of 1961 as now or
hereafter amended (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.) that are
misdemeanors or petty offenses are hereby adopted by reference as if set out
at length in this code.



   (B)   The following acts of the State General Assembly as now or
hereafter amended are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in this code:



      (1)   An Act Prohibiting the Sale or Use of Certain Compounds
for the Purpose of Inducing in the User an Intoxicated Condition (Laws 1965,
p. 2718, approved and effective 8-6-1965) (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 690, §§ 1 et
seq.); and



      (2)   An Act Regulating Air Rifles (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§
24.8-0.1 to 24.8-6).



   (C)   The provisions adopted by reference in divisions (A) and (B)
above shall be subject to all applicable definitions, defenses and
presumptions provided for by state law; provided, however, that, guilt need
only be established by a preponderance of the evidence.



(1999 Code, § 130.15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.21  ADOPTION OF CANNABIS CONTROL ACT.



   The city does hereby adopt the Cannabis Control Act of the state, ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 through 19.



(1999 Code, § 130.16)  (Ord. 1535, passed 3-30-1992)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined not less
than $25, nor more than $750.



      (2)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed for a
violation of this title, if a person is convicted of or placed on supervision
for knowingly damaging or destroying crops of another, including crops
intended for personal, commercial, research or developmental purposes, the
person is liable in a civil action to the owner of any crops damaged or
destroyed for money damages up to twice the market value of the crops damaged
or destroyed.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1)  (1999 Code, § 130.99)



   (B)   A person convicted of an attempt, per § 130.06 of this
chapter, may be fined or imprisoned or both, not to exceed the maximum
provided for the offense attempted. If such fine exceeds that set forth in
this section, however, the city shall enforce the offense under the
provisions of state law.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4)  (1999 Code, § 130.06)



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions adopted in §
130.20 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in this section.



(1999 Code, § 130.15)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Criminal damage to property



   131.02   Trespass to land



   131.03   Damaging city property



   131.04   Jackrocks



   131.05   Drive-in restaurants



   131.06   Recycling bin scavenging



   131.07   School ground trespassing



   131.08   Burning leaves and other yard waste



   131.09   Hunting



§ 131.01 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   (A)   A person commits criminal damage to property when he or she:



      (1)   Knowingly damages any property of another;



      (2)   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages
property of another;



      (3)   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another;



      (4)   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without
his or her consent;



      (5)   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of
another any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intends
to interfere with the use by another of the land or building;



      (6)   Knowingly damages any property,  other than as
described in subsection (2) of this division (A), with intent to defraud an
insurer;



      (7)   Knowingly shoots a firearm at any portion of a railroad
train;



      (8)   Knowingly, without proper authorization, cuts, injures,
damages, defaces, destroys, or tampers with any fire hydrant or any public or
private fire fighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to fire
fighting equipment; or



      (9)   Intentionally, without proper authorization, opens any
fire hydrant.



   (B)   When the charge of criminal damage to property exceeding a
specified value is brought, the extent of the damage is an element of the
offense to be resolved by the trier of fact as either exceeding or not
exceeding the specified value.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division
(A)(1),(3) or (5) of this section that the owner of the property or land
damaged consented to the damage.



(1999 Code, § 131.01)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.02  TRESPASS TO LAND.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(3) below, whoever
commits any of the following commits a Class B misdemeanor:



         (a)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or
remains within or on a building;



         (b)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving
prior to such entry notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is
forbidden;



         (c)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving
notice from the owner or occupant to depart; or



         (d)   Presents false documents or falsely represent his
or her identity orally to the owner of occupant of the building or land in
order to obtain permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in
the building or on the land.



      (2)   For purposes of this division (A), this section shall
not apply to being in a building which is open to the public while the
building is open to the public during its normal hours of operation, nor
shall this section apply to a person who enters a public building under the
reasonable belief that the building is still open to the public.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (A),
whoever enters upon any of the following areas in or on a motor vehicle
(including an off-road vehicle, motorcycle, moped or any other powered
two-wheel vehicle) after receiving, prior to that entry, notice from the
owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden or remains upon or in the area
after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart commits a Class A
misdemeanor:



         (a)   A field that is used for growing crops or that is
capable of being used for growing crops;



         (b)   An enclosed area containing livestock;



         (c)   An orchard; or



         (d)   A barn or other agricultural building containing
livestock.



   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within
the meaning of division (A) above if the person has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, including a valid court order as defined by ILCS
Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-3(7) granting remedy (2) of ILCS Ch. 725, Act 5, §
112A-14(b), or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the
forbidden part thereof.



   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant
worker or otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of
the owner’s agent having apparent authority to hire workers on the land and
assign them living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon,
nor to anyone living on such land at the request of or by occupancy, leasing,
or other agreement or arrangement with the owner or the owner’s agent, nor
to anyone invited by the migrant worker or other person so living on the land
to visit him or her at the place that person is so living upon the land.



   (D)   (1)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this
section if the person beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and
industrial properties located within any municipality.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (D), UNOCCUPIED AND
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means any real estate:



         (a)   In which the taxes have not been paid for a period
of at least two years; and



         (b)   Which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a
period of at least one year.



      (3)   For the purpose of this division (D), BEAUTIFIES means
to landscape, to clean up litter, to repair dilapidated conditions on or to
board up windows and doors.



   (E)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money
damages to the owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
property which that person beautifies pursuant to division (D) above.



   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a
building or upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of
this division (F), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an
individual is or is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent
danger of serious bodily harm or in which property is or is reasonably
believed to be in imminent danger of damage or destruction.



   (G)   Division (A)(1)(d) above does not apply to a peace officer or
other official of a unit of government who enters a building or land in the
performance of his or her official duties.



   (H)   (1)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money
damages to the owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle
as prohibited under division (A)(3) above. A person may also be liable to the
owner for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees.



         (a)   The measure of damages shall be:



            1.   The actual damages, but not less than $250,
if the vehicle is operated in a nature preserve or registered area as defined
in ILCS Ch. 525, Act 30, §§ 3.11 and 3.14;



            2.   Twice the actual damages if the owner has
previously notified the person to cease trespassing; or



            3.   In any other case, the actual damages, but
not less than $50.



         (b)   If the person operating the vehicle is under the
age of 16, the owner of the vehicle and the parent or legal guardian of the
minor are jointly and severally liable.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (H), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         LAND. Includes but is not limited to, land used for crop
land, fallow land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land,
mine spoil nature preserves and registered areas. LAND does not include
driveways or private roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.



         OWNER. The person who has the right to possession of the
land, including the owner, operator or tenant.



         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as provided under ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 1-217.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3)  (1999 Code, § 131.02)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 131.03  DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:



      (1)   Knowingly damage any city property;



      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage city
property;



      (3)   Knowingly start a fire on city land; or



      (4)   Knowingly deposit on city land or in a city building any
stink bomb or any offensive-smelling compound which thereby tends to
interfere with the use by the city of its land or buildings.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of divisions
(A)(1), (A)(3) or (A)(4) above that the village consented to the damage.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of
value including, but not limited to, real estate, money, commercial
instruments, written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning
anything of value, labor or services, things affixed to or found on land or
part of or affixed to any building, electricity, gas or water.



(1999 Code, § 131.03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Additional prohibitions; felonies, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1



§ 131.04  JACKROCKS.



   (A)   A person who knowingly sells, gives away, manufactures,
purchases or possesses a jackrock or who knowingly places, tosses or throws a
jackrock on public or private property commits a Class A misdemeanor.



   (B)   As used in this section, JACKROCK means a caltrop or other
object manufactured with one or more rounded or sharpened points, which when
placed or thrown present at least one point at such an angle that it is
peculiar to and designed for use in puncturing or damaging vehicle tires. It
does not include a device designed to puncture or damage the tires of a
vehicle driven over it in a particular direction, if a conspicuous and
clearly visible warning is posted at the device’s location, alerting
persons to its presence.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the possession, transfer or use
of jackrocks by any law enforcement officer in the course of his or her
official duties.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1.4)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.05  DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, cold
drinks, beverages, ice cream or other food or drink is served directly to or
is permitted to be consumed by patrons in or upon automobiles, motorcycles or
other vehicles parked on the premises.



   (B)   Declared public places. For the purpose of preserving public
peace, health and safety, the entire premises occupied by a drive-in
restaurant, together with means of ingress or egress, are hereby declared to
be a public place.



   (C)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall
race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or
stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be
made any loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet
and good order of the premises or the neighborhood are disturbed.



      (2)   The following acts or conduct of any persons entering a
drive-in restaurant or premises is hereby declared to be unlawful, and any
person found guilty of any such acts shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:



         (a)   Entering the premises of any drive- in restaurant
with any motor vehicle of any description and parking such vehicle and
leaving the premises (thereby leaving such vehicle parked and unoccupied)
without express consent of the owner or operator of such restaurant, in which
event such motor vehicle shall be subject to a parking citation or may be
impounded subject to the usual impounding charges;



         (b)   Entering the premises in or upon a motor vehicle
and using said premises for cruising, racing, as a shortcut to another street
or to annoy or endanger any person or persons or other vehicle or vehicles
lawfully on said premises;



         (c)   For three or more persons to congregate on the
premises and linger or loiter at any location on the premises of any drive-in
restaurant, other than in the restaurant building or in a legally parked
motor vehicle; and



         (d)   For any person, while on the premises of any
drive-in restaurant, in the presence or hearing of another, to curse or abuse
such person or use any violently abusive language under circumstances
reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace.



   (D)   Posting of sign by restaurant operator. It shall be the duty
of the restaurant operator to post on the premises in a conspicuous location
one or more signs bearing the following legend in letters at least two inches
high and readable:



         CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LOITERING OUTSIDE A MOTOR
VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLES MAY BE LEFT ON THE RESTAURANT
PREMISES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE RESTAURANT OPERATOR.



(1999 Code, § 131.04)  (Ord. 766, passed 6-2-1975)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Redemption of towed vehicles, see § 91.07



   Towing; responsibility for costs, see § 91.04



§ 131.06  RECYCLING BIN SCAVENGING.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Aluminum, tin, steel, plastic, glass and
paper products.



   (B)   Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any
recyclable material from recyclable bins or containers in the city, except by
someone authorized by the owner of the bins or containers.



(1999 Code, § 131.05)  (Ord. 1466, passed 2-4-1991)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.07  SCHOOL GROUND TRESPASSING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, firm or
corporation to enter upon the premises of any elementary, intermediate or
secondary school, whether public, private or parochial.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be found guilty of a petty offense and be
penalized as provided in § 130.99.



(1999 Code, § 131.06)  (Ord. 892, passed 11-20-1978)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 131.08  BURNING LEAVES AND OTHER YARD WASTE.



   The outdoor burning, within the corporate city limits, of leaves,
vines, tree limbs, tree trunks, lawns, grass cuttings, shrubbery and all
materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery and trees
is hereby banned and shall not be permitted at any time, except as follows:
burning shall be allowed year-round on property zoned A-Agriculture, but only
for waste generated on the premises, and as regulated by the current adopted
edition of the International Code Council (ICC) Code , or as otherwise
regulated by the city.



(1999 Code, § 131.07)  (Ord. 1595, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 3193, passed
8-4-2003)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Bonfires, see § 97.15



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 97



   Fires on streets and the like, see § 98.09



§ 131.09  HUNTING.



   Hunting shall be prohibited on all city property with the exception of
the city’s wastewater treatment plant where hunting of nuisance waterfowl
shall be allowed in season as set by the State Department of Natural
Resources. The Mayor will appoint someone to administer the program who shall
ensure compliance with state rules and regulations for taking of game.



(1999 Code, § 131.08)  (Ord. 1591, passed 1-19-1993; Ord. 3542, passed
10-15-2007)  Penalty, see § 130.99



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



Section




General Provisions




   132.01   Disorderly conduct



   132.02   Constructive invasion of privacy




Offenses Related to Minors




   132.15   Curfew



   132.16   Truancy



   132.17   Parental responsibility



 



   132.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 132.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:



   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or
disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace;



   (B)   Enters upon the property of another, and for a lewd or
unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through
any window or other opening in it;



   (C)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the
Collection Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 425, or as an employee of such
collection agency, and while attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a
telephone call to the alleged debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or
intimidate the alleged debtor;



   (D)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, ILCS Ch. 210,
Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq.;



   (E)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any
public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public;



   (F)   Calls the number “911” for the purpose of making or
transmitting a false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at
the time the call or transmission is made, the person knows there is no
reasonable ground for making the call or transmission and further knows that
the call or transmission could result in the emergency response of any public
safety agency;



   (G)   Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance,
gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and
present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or



   (H)   Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of
alcohol, narcotics or any other drug, not therapeutically administered, to
the degree that he or she may endanger himself, herself or other persons or
property or annoy or disturb the peace of persons in his or her vicinity.



(1999 Code, § 132.01)  (Ord. 3800, passed 8-5- 2013)  Penalty, see §
132.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1



§ 132.02  CONSTRUCTIVE INVASION OF PRIVACY.



   (A)   Regardless of whether there is a physical trespass pursuant to
§ 132.01 of this code or criminal trespass to real property pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3, a person is liable for constructive invasion of
property when a person:



      (1)   Knowingly attempts to capture or knowingly captures; in
a manner that is offensive to a reasonable person; any type of visual image,
visual recording, sound recording, or other physical impression; of another
engaging in private, personal, or familial activity; in a place in which that
person has a reasonable expectation of privacy; and that impression could not
have been achieved without a trespass unless the device was used.



      (2)   Knowingly peeks or peers in the door or window of any
inhabited building, whether personally or by means of devices, to include
unmanned aircraft, within that person's control.



      (3)   Knowingly operates or causes to be operated an unmanned
aircraft in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the life or
property of another or constitute an unreasonable interference with enjoyment
of life, quiet, comfort, or outdoor recreation of an individual or
individuals of ordinary sensitivity or habits.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to impair or limit any
otherwise lawful activities of law enforcement personnel or employees of
governmental agencies or other entities, either public or private, who, in
the course and scope of their employment, and supported by an articulable
suspicion, attempt to capture any type of visual image, sound recording, or
other physical impression of a person during an investigation, surveillance,
or monitoring of any conduct to obtain evidence of suspected illegal activity
or other misconduct, the suspected violation of any administrative rule or
regulation, a suspected fraudulent conduct, or any activity involving a
violation of law or business practices or conduct of public officials
adversely affecting the public welfare, health, or safety.



(Ord. 4051, passed 8-6-2018)



Cross-reference:



   Unmanned aircraft systems, see Ch. 139




OFFENSES RELATED TO MINORS




§ 132.15  CURFEW.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at
the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion at least 18 years of age approved by
a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation
which the laws of the state or this code or other ordinances of the city
authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform:



      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;



      (2)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and



      (3)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday inclusive, and
6:00 a.m. on the following day.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person
to knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate
division (A) above.



   (C)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the
child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:



      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian,
sibling, step-brother of sister at least 18 years of age;



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by a parent, guardian,
or custodian;



      (3)   Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as
directed by a parent, guardian, or custodian;



      (4)   Occupying the sidewalk of the place where the minor
resides, or the sidewalk of a place where the minor has permission from his
or her parent or guardian to be, or the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor not
communicating an objection to a police officer; or



      (5)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:



         (a)   Lawful employment;



         (b)   A lawful athletic, educational, entertainment,
religious or social event; or



         (c)   Interstate travel.



      (6)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly.



(1999 Code, § 132.15)  (Ord. 3251, passed 5-3-2004)  Penalty, see § 132.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to impose curfew, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5



§ 132.16  TRUANCY.



   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of 18 enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the corporate
limits of the city to absent himself or herself from attendance at school
without parental permission. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness
or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or
herself from school without parental permission shall not constitute truancy
if permission is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within
24 hours after such absence.



   (B)   False excuse prohibited. It shall be an offense under this
section for a parent or person in loco parentis to knowingly submit to the
proper school authorities a written excuse under division (A) above that
contains false information.



   (C)   Parental permission. Parental permission shall include
permission from a person in loco parentis, and shall be given for reasons
only of personal illness, serious family illness, death in the family,
serious home emergencies, necessary and lawful family support employment,
religious convocation classes, principal’s permission and compelling family
reasons.



(1999 Code, § 132.16)  (Ord. 1060, passed 7-5-1983)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.17  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody of a
minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act,
ILCS Ch. 705, Act 405, §§ 1-1 et seq.



      MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 19
years.



   (B)   Failure to exercise proper parental responsibility. The parent
or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or
legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor
shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the knowledge
and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon
the concurrence of the events described in divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) and
(B)(3) below.



      (1)   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or
legal guardian either shall have been adjudicated to be in violation of any
ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing
injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions
from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of
violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious
acts causing injury to a person or property.



      (2)   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a
written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal
service returned, from the Police Department of the city following said
adjudication or non-judicial sanction.



      (3)   At any time within one year following receipt of the
notice set forth in division (B)(2) above, said minor is either adjudicated
to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in division
(B)(1) above, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any
ordinance, law or statute as described in division (B)(1) above.



(1999 Code, § 132.17)  (Ord. 905, passed 3-19-1979)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 130.99.



   (B)   In addition to any penalty imposed as set forth in § 10.99,
any person convicted of disorderly conduct, per § 132.01, shall be ordered
by the court to perform community service, as set forth under the provisions
of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1.



   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of §
132.15 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than
$10 nor more than $500, except that neither a person who has been made a ward
of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, ILCS Ch. 705, Act 405,
§§ 1-1 et seq., nor that person’s legal guardian, shall be subject to any
tine. In addition to or instead of the fine imposed by § 132.15, the court
may order a parent, legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation
of § 132.15(B) to perform community service as determined by the court,
except that the legal guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the
court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform
community service. The dates and times established for the performance of
community service by the parent, legal guardian, or other person convicted of
a violation of § 132.15(B) shall not conflict with the dates and times that
the person is employed in his or her regular occupation.



(1999 Code, § 132.15)



   (D)   Any person who shall so absent himself or herself, per §
132.16 of this chapter, shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and be
penalized as provided in § 10.99 of this code. A person convicted of an
offense under this section shall be penalized as provided in § 10.99 of this
code.



(1999 Code, § 132.16)



   (E)   Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of §
132.17 of this chapter shall be penalized as provided in § 10.99 of this
code.



(1999 Code, § 132.17)



(Ord. 905, passed 3-19-1979; Ord. 1060, passed 7-5-1983; Ord. 3251, passed
5-3-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



Section



   133.01   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, firefighter or
correctional institution employee



   133.02   Refusing to aid an officer



   133.03   Tampering with public notice



   133.04   Impersonation of officers



   133.05   Refusing to obey police officer



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER OR
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance
by one known to the person to be a peace officer, firefighter or correctional
institution employee of any authorized act within his or her official
capacity.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE. Any person employed to
supervise and control inmates incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm,
reformatory, prison, jail, house of correction, police detention area,
half-way house or other institution or place for the incarceration or custody
of persons under sentence for offenses or awaiting trial or sentence for
offenses, under arrest for an offense, a violation of probation, a violation
of parole, a violation of aftercare release, a violation of mandatory
supervised release, or awaiting a bail setting hearing or preliminary
hearing, or who are sexually dangerous persons or who are sexually violent
persons.



      FIREFIGHTER. Any individual, either as an employee or volunteer,
of a regularly constituted fire department of a municipality or fire
protection district who performs firefighting duties, including, but not
limited to, the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Captain, engineer, driver,
ladder person, hose person, pipe person and any other member of a regularly
constituted fire department. FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the
office of the State Fire Marshal to conduct arson investigations.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if
a person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to
be a firefighter by returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence,
building or other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1)  (1999 Code, § 133.01)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 133.02  REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.



   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to
aid a person known by him or her to be a police officer in:



   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to
apprehend; or



   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8)  (1999 Code, § 133.02)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 133.03  TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.



   No person shall knowingly and without lawful authority alter, destroy,
deface, remove, or conceal any public notice posted according to law, during
the time for which the notice was to remain posted.  A violation of this
section is a petty offense.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9)  (1999 Code, § 133.03)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 133.04  IMPERSONATION OF OFFICERS.



   No person in the city shall falsely represent himself or herself to be
an officer of the city, or shall, without being duly authorized by the city,
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a
city officer, or hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any
city officer in the discharge of the duties of office, or attempt to prevent
any such officer from arresting any person, either by force or by giving
notice to such person, or attempt to rescue from such officer any person in
his or her custody, or impersonate any of the members of the police force of
the city, or maliciously, or with the intention of deceiving any person, wear
the uniform of or a uniform similar to that worn by the members of the Police
Department or use any of the signs, signals or devices adopted and used by
the Police Department.



(1999 Code, § 133.04)  (Ord. 700, passed 3-20-1972)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.05  REFUSING TO OBEY POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   Obedience required. Whenever the presence of any person in any
public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in division (B)
below, any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any
person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police
officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section.



   (B)   Types of conduct prohibited. No person shall conduct himself
or herself in a public place or perform any act in such a manner as to:



      (1)   Create or cause to be created a breach of peace;



      (2)   Create or cause to be created in an unreasonable manner
any alarm or disturbance to any other person or persons;



      (3)   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
and/or



      (4)   Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully
in any public place.



(1999 Code, § 133.05)  (Ord. 766, passed 6-2-1975; Ord. 835, passed
12-5-1977)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 130.99 of this code.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to any other sentence that may be
imposed, a court shall order any person convicted of resisting or obstructing
a peace officer, firefighter or correctional institution employee, per §
133.01 of this chapter, to be sentenced to a minimum of 48 consecutive hours
of imprisonment or ordered to perform community service for not less that 100
hours as may be determined by the court. The person shall not be eligible for
probation in order to reduce the sentence of imprisonment or community
service.



      (2)   A person convicted for a violation of § 133.01 of this
chapter, whose violation was the proximate cause of injury to a peace
officer, firefighter or correctional institution employee, is guilty of a
felony.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1)



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   134.01   Public indecency



   134.02   Obscenity



   134.03   Harmful material



   134.04   Sexually oriented establishments



 



   134.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Curfew, see § 132.15



   Disorderly conduct, see § 132.01



   Ephedrine Control, see Ch. 138



   Truancy, see § 132.16



§ 134.01  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any
of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:



      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct; and/or



      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse
or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.



   (B)   Breast-feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where the conduct may reasonably be
expected to be viewed by others.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30)  (1999 Code, § 134.01)  Penalty, see §
134.99



Statutory reference:



   Public indecency by person 18 year of age or older, or within 500 feet
of elementary or secondary school grounds when children are present, Class 4
felony, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30



§ 134.02  OBSCENITY.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content
thereof, he or she:



      (1)   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to
sell, deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other
representation or embodiment of the obscene; 



      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other
performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it
obscene;



      (3)   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available
anything obscene;



      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene
exhibition of his or her body for gain;



      (5)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or
material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of
the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or



      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material
represented or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is
obscene.



   (B)   “Obscene” defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE
if:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the
prurient interest;



      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and/or



      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.



      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary
adults except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other
specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the
material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed
for or directed to such an audience.



      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section,
evidence shall be admissible to show:



         (a)   The character of the audience for which the
material was designed or to which it was directed;



         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would
be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it
would probably have on the behavior of such people;



         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or
other merits of the material, or absence thereof;



         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the
material in this state;



         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof,
in advertising or other promotion of the material; or



         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or
disseminator.



   (D)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement or
possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity
specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more
than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.



   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to
obscenity that the dissemination:



      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates
other than children under 18 years of age; and/or



      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or
other special justification for possession of such material.



   (F)   Forfeiture of property. A person who has been convicted
previously of the offense of obscenity and who is convicted of a second or
subsequent offense of obscenity is subject to the property forfeiture
provisions set forth in Article 124B of the Code of Criminal Procedure of
1963, being ILCS Ch. 725, Act 5, Title VIII, Art. 124B.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20)  (1999 Code, § 134.02)  Penalty, see §
134.99



§ 134.03  HARMFUL MATERIAL.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.



      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sado- masochistic abuse when, taken as a whole, it does the
following:



         (a)   Predominately appeals to the prurient interest in
sex of minors;



         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in
the adult community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for minors; and



         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value for minors.



      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject
matter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would
have disclosed the contents.



      MATERIAL.



         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film,
video game, computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any
such representation or image which is stored electronically; or



         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or recorded audio of any sort.



      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.



      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the
top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of
being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one
clothed for sexual gratification or stimulation.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or
physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or, if the person be a female, breast.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor
when he or she does either of the following:



      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes, exhibits to,
depicts to or gives away to a minor any of the following, knowing that the
minor is under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person’s true age: 



         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct
or sado-masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or
sado-masochistic abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors; 



         (b)   A motion picture, show or other presentation which
depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to
minors; or



         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where
there is exhibited or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other
presentation.



      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or
to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other presentation, knowing
that the minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise
reasonable care in ascertaining the person’s true age.



   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an
affirmative defense:



      (1)   The minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver’s license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon
by the accused;



      (2)   The defendant was in a parental or guardianship
relationship with the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian;



      (3)   The defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
employee or official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with
and serving the educational purpose of the organization;



      (4)   The act charged was committed in aid of legitimate
scientific or educational purposes; or 



      (5)   An advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of the harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his or her employees or agents, as where the order or
request for the harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, Internet
or similar means of communication, and delivery of the harmful material to
the child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he
or she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchaser falsely stated that
he or she was not under the age of 18:



         NOTICE: IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 18
TO PURCHASE THE MATTER ADVERTISED. ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 18 THAT
FALSELY STATES THAT HE OR SHE IS NOT UNDER THE AGE OF 18 FOR THE PURPOSE OF
OBTAINING THE MATERIAL ADVERTISED IS GUILTY OF A CLASS B MISDEMEANOR UNDER
THE LAWS OF THE STATE.



   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material
shall be judged with reference to average children of the same general age of
the child to whom the material was sold, lent, distributed or given, unless
it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its
dissemination or distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible
groups, in which case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged
with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.



   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section
is a Class A misdemeanor.



   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 who falsely states, either
orally or in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or that
presents or offers to any person any evidence of age and identity that is
false or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining,
viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful
material is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.



   (G)   A person over the age of 18 who fails to exercise reasonable
care in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to or
sends, or causes to be sent, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute, or
exhibits any harmful material to a person that he or she believes is a minor
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (H)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service
providers and providers of information services, including, but not limited
to, Internet service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable
under this section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of
the transmission, storage or caching of electronic communications or messages
of others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services or information services used by others in
violation of this section.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21)  (1999 Code, § 134.03)  Penalty, see §
134.99



Statutory reference:



   Distribution of harmful material, second or subsequent offense, a Class
4 felony, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21



   Use of a computer web camera, cellular telephone, or any other type of
device to manufacture the harmful material, a Class 4 felony, see ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, § 11-21



§ 134.04  SEXUALLY ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to own or operate a sexually oriented
establishment, or to sell, display, offer or otherwise provide obscene
materials, as defined in § 134.02, within 1,000 feet of the property
boundaries of any:



      (1)   School, university or college;



      (2)   Day care center;



      (3)   Cemetery;



      (4)   Public park or forest preserve;



      (5)   Public housing; and/or



      (6)   Place of religious worship.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      SEXUALLY ORIENTED ESTABLISH- MENT. Any business or use that
includes offering its patrons goods or services of which a material portion
involves the sale, display or provision of sexually oriented products or
services. Any establishment in which sexually oriented products and services
constitute more than 10% of the building floor area or gross receipts of the
establishment, or any establishment in which any sexually explicit activities
or adult entertainment facilities are located shall be deemed a sexually
oriented establishment.



      SEXUALLY ORIENTED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES.



      (1)   Sexual devices. Any three dimensional object designed or
marketed as useful primarily in the performance of a sexual act or to enhance
or entice sexual stimulation or gratification. Such devices include any item
which has no substantial non-sex related utility, such as erotic
undergarments and artificial sexual organs, as well as devices with other
utility when they are marketed for sexual purposes, such as chains, handcuffs
or the like, but does not include devices primarily intended for protection
of health or prevention of pregnancy.



      (2)   Sexually explicit materials. Any book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper or other printed or written matter, picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, pictorial representation, statue, figure or
other three-dimensional object, recording, transcription or anything which is
or may be used as a means of communication that depicts, describes, or
portrays human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
masturbation, urinary and defecatory functions, sadism, masochism,
sadomasochistic abuse, exhibition of the genitals or any touching of the
exposed genitals, pubic areas, breasts or buttocks of the human male or
female, whether alone, or between members of the same or opposite sex, or
between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.



      (3)   Sexually explicit activities. Any live exhibition of the
human genitals, or female breasts or any touching of the genitals, pubic
areas, breasts or buttocks of the human male or female, whether alone, or
between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals in
an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.



      (4)   Adult entertainment facilities.



         (a)   A striptease club or pornographic movie theater
whose business is the commercial sale, dissemination or distribution of
sexually explicit material, shows or other exhibitions; or



         (b)   An adult bookstore or adult video store whose
primary business is the commercial sale, dissemination or distribution of
sexually explicit material, shows or other exhibitions, as set forth in 
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-1.5.



   (D)   Except where contrary to any superceding applicable law, it
shall be unlawful for an any person to:



      (1)   Employ in a sexually oriented entertainment
establishment any person under the age of 18 years or who has been convicted
of a sex offense under ILCS Ch. 720, Title III, Article 11 (Act 5, §§ 11-6
et seq.), as amended, or any city ordinance adopted thereunder, including
this chapter;



      (2)   Permit any sexually oriented products and services to be
visible from outside the building in which such item or items are sold,
displayed, offered or provided, or inside the building except by a separate
room with the entrance staffed at all times to ensure no entry by persons
under 18 years; or



      (3)   Sell, display, offer or otherwise provide child
pornography as that term is defined and used in ILCS Ch.720, Act 5, §
11-20.1, as amended, or obscenity as that term is defined by § 134.02 of
this chapter, as amended;



      (4)   Sell, display, offer or otherwise provide a sexually
oriented product and service to a person under the age of 18 years;



      (5)   Sell, display, offer or otherwise provide any sexually
oriented products and services to any person if such sexually oriented
products and services constitute more than 25% of the total gross sales or
gross floor space of the establishment where sold, displayed, offered or
provided;



      (6)   Sell, provide or consume liquor on the premises of any
sexually oriented establishment or within any public area or on the premises
of any commercial enterprise within 100 feet of such sexually oriented
establishment;



      (7)   Sell, display, offer or otherwise provide any sexually
oriented products that are otherwise prohibited by law;



      (8)   No sexually oriented establishment may be located closer
than 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented establishment; and/or



      (9)   Make a false written statement or provide false
information in conjunction with any required permit application form filed
with the city.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to permit any
obscenity otherwise prohibited by § 134.02 of this chapter, nor shall this
section be deemed to imply that any activity prohibited herein shall be
consistent with the community standard or otherwise lawful if undertaken in
locations not governed by this section.



(1999 Code, § 134.04)  (Ord. 3103, passed 5-6-2002)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Conviction for violation of any provisions of § 134.04 of
this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration in a penal
institution other than the penitentiary not to exceed six months and a fine
not to exceed $750 for each offense. Unless otherwise required by law, each
day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(1999 Code, § 134.04)  (Ord. 3103, passed 5-6-2002)



CHAPTER 135:  GAMBLING OFFENSES



Section



   135.01   Definitions



   135.02   Gambling



   135.03   Keeping a gambling place



   135.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds



Cross-reference:



   Video gaming, see Ch. 121



§ 135.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ACCESS. The meaning ascribed to it in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16D-2.



   COMPUTER. The meaning ascribed to it in ILCS Ch. 750, Act 5, § 17-0.5.



   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other
machines or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on
chance or skill, or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is
staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture,
equipment or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A
GAMBLING DEVICE does not include the following, as more specifically defined
in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2(a)(1) through (a)(5):



      (1)   Coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical devices;



      (2)   Vending machines;



      (3)   Crane games; and



      (4)   Redemption machines.



   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, including, but not limited to,
an information service, system, or access software provider that provides
access to a network system commonly known as the INTERNET or any comparable
system or service, and also including, but not limited to, a world-wide web
page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other online service.



   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration
for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name, excluding savings promotion
raffles authorized under § 5g of the Illinois Banking Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act
5, § 5), § 7008 of the Savings Bank Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act 205, § 7008),
§ 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act 305, § 42.7), §
5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or § 4 of the Home Owners
Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).



   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other
device that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in
the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser
or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2)  (1999 Code, § 135.01)



§ 135.02  GAMBLING.



   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of
the city, he or she:



      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B) below;



      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or
any political nomination, appointment or election;



      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any
gambling device;



      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself, herself or another
the option to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any
grain or other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company,
as described in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(4);



      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or
apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or
registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in
the courses of a bet or wager;



      (6)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election;



      (7)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;



      (8)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or other similar device;



      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket
or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device,
except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles
authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of the state or any
other state or foreign government;



      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except
for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by
and conducted in accordance with the laws of the state or any other state;



      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting
odds or changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or
similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the
transmission or receipt of such information; except that, nothing in this
division (A)(11) prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for
use in news reporting of sporting events or contests; or



      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains or operates an
Internet site that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for
money or other thing of value by means of the Internet or to make a wager
upon the result of any game, contest, political nomination, appointment or
election by means of the Internet. This division (A)(12) does not apply to
activities referenced in division (B)(6) below.



   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling:



      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the
happening of chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or
guaranty and life or health or accident insurance;



      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards or compensation to the actual
contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed,
strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest;



      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of the
state;



      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the
acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for
transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside the
state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal
law, or the manufacture, distribution or possession of video gaming
terminals, as defined in the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1
et seq.), by manufacturers, distributors and terminal operators licensed to
do so under the Video Gaming Act;



      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo”, when conducted
in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (6)   (a)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq. This exemption includes
any activity conducted by the Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets
pursuant to the provisions of the State Lottery Law and its rules.



         (b)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the
Internet for a lottery conducted by the state under the program established
in ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, § 7.12.



      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither
used nor intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful
gambling activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division (B)(7), an
ANTIQUE SLOT MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;



      (8)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Ch.
230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (11)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized
under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (12)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed
establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment or licensed veterans establishment when conducted in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.; and



      (13)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of
value can be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate.



   (C)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under division (A) of
this section, circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight
as in any criminal prosecution.



(1999 Code, § 135.02)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Second and subsequent offenses of § 135.02(A)(3) through (A)(11),
felonies, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1



§ 135.03  KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE  is any real
estate, vehicle, boat or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes
of gambling other than gambling conducted in the manner authorized by the
Riverboat Gambling Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.) or the Video
Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). No person shall knowingly
permit any premises or property owned or occupied by him or her or under his
or her control to be used as a gambling place.



   (B)   When any premises is determined by the circuit court to be a
gambling place:



      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and may be proceeded against as such; and



      (2)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon
a violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for and may
be sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any
unsatisfied fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3)  (1999 Code, § 135.03)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 135.04  SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.



   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of
lawful use or every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a
gambling device  and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and
destruction by city authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE
includes any slot machine and includes any machine or device constructed for
the reception of money or other thing of value and so constructed as to
return or cause someone to return on chance to the player thereof money,
property or a right to receive money or property. With the exception of any
device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use, no gambling
device shall be forfeited or destroyed unless an individual with a property
interest in the device knows of the unlawful use thereof.



   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing
of value integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited
as contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a),(b))  (1999 Code, § 135.04)



CHAPTER 136:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section




Litter




   136.01   Definitions



   136.02   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions



   136.03   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited



   136.04   Accumulation of litter prohibited



   136.05   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from
motor vehicle



   136.06   Receptacles required in public areas



   136.07   Power of court to order removal of litter




Other Prohibitions




   136.20   Refrigerators



 



   136.99   Penalty



LITTER



§ 136.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   LITTER. Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER
may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, cigarettes,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste; newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging
construction material, abandoned vehicle, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 1-100 et seq., motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead
animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to
injure any person or create a traffic hazard, potentially infectious medical
waste as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360; or anything else of an
unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned or
otherwise disposed of improperly.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3)



   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in Chapter 70 of this code of ordinances.



(1999 Code, § 136.01)



§ 136.02  DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.



   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or
permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of
litter upon any public or private property in this city, or upon or into any
river, lake, pond or other stream or body of water in the city unless:



   (A)   The property has been designated by the city or any of its
agencies for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that
property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the State
Pollution Control Board;



   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container
intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the
deposit of litter;



   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the
owner or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a
public nuisance or a fire hazard;



   (D)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public
officials during special cleanup days; and/or



   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of any litter, including, but not limited to, potentially infectious
medical waste as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360, when the emergency
situation no longer exists.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 4)



(1999 Code, § 136.02)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.03  DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any
public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or
body of water in the city, except as permitted under § 136.02(A) through (E)
of this chapter. Nor shall any person transport, by any means, garbage or
refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site to
and deposit the material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other
receptacles placed along public highways or at roadside rest areas.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 5)  (1999 Code, § 136.03)  Penalty, see §
136.99



§ 136.04  ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.



   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which
the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown
or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of
another person.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 6)  (1999 Code, § 136.04)  Penalty, see §
136.99



§ 136.05  PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.



   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated § 136.03 of this chapter, but
that presumption may be rebutted.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 9)



§ 136.06  RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.



   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this
subchapter, the owner or person in control of any property which is held out
to the public as a place for assemblage, the transaction of business,
recreation or as a public way shall cause to be placed and maintained
receptacles for the deposit of litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient
numbers to meet the needs of the numbers of people customarily coming on or
using the property.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



      PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS.
Includes, but is not limited to, commercially operated parks, campgrounds,
drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business parking lots, car
washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas, industrial parking
lots, boat moorage and fueling stations, piers, beaches and bathing areas,
airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in movies and shopping malls.



      PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION OR AS
A PUBLIC WAY. Includes, but is not limited to, any property that is publicly
owned or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this
division (B) for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF
BUSINESS  but excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located
thereon.



(1999 Code, § 136.06)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.07  POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.



   The penalties prescribed in § 136.99 are in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities which may be
otherwise imposed or conferred by a court.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8(c))




OTHER PROHIBITIONS




§ 136.20  REFRIGERATORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or
permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or
within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure
under his, her or its control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container
which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which
may not be released from the inside without first removing the door or lid,
snap lock or other device from the icebox, refrigerator or container.



(1999 Code, § 136.20)  (Ord. 378, passed 9-19-1955)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 130.99 of this code.



   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of § 136.02 of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.



      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this Act, the
court may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and
properly dispose of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such
removal and disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs
against the person so convicted.



      (3)   An individual convicted of violating § 136.02 of this
chapter by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the
agency having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, at the
site where the offense occurred, as provided in ILCS Ch. 605, Act 120, § 50.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8(a), (b), (d))  (1999 Code, § 136.02)



   (C)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of § 136.03 of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500.



      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this act, the
court may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and
properly dispose of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such
removal and disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs
against the person so convicted.



      (3)   An individual convicted of violating § 136.03 of this
chapter by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the
agency having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, at the
site where the offense occurred, as provided in ILCS Ch. 605, Act 120, § 50.



      (4)   A mandatory minimum fine of $50 must be imposed against
any person who is convicted of violating § 136.03.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8(a), (b), (d), (e))  (1999 Code, § 136.03)



   (D)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of § 136.04 of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.



      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this act, the
court may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and
properly dispose of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such
removal and disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs
against the person so convicted.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8(a), (b))  (1999 Code, § 136.04)



   (E)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in
§ 136.06 of this chapter, the owner or person in control of the property
shall be fined $100 for violating § 136.06 of this chapter. If the owner or
person in control of the property has placed litter receptacles on his or her
property, but the number or size of the receptacles has proved inadequate to
meet the needs of the numbers of people coming on or using his or her
property as indicated by the condition and appearance of that property, and
the owner or person in control has failed to provide sufficient or adequate
receptacles within ten days after being made aware of that fact by written
notice from the police, he or she shall be fined $25 for each receptacle not
so provided and maintained.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 10)  (1999 Code, § 136.06)



CHAPTER 137:  WEAPONS



Section




Deadly Weapons




   137.01   Unlawful use of weapons



   137.02   Exemptions



   137.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition



   137.04   Confiscation and disposition of weapons



   137.05   Discharging firearms




Air Rifles




   137.20   Definitions



   137.21   Selling, renting or transferring to children; prohibition



   137.22   Carrying or discharging on public streets



   137.23   Permissive possession



   137.24   Permissive sales



   137.25   Seizure and removal




Explosives and Fireworks




   137.40   Blasting



   137.41   Storage of explosives



   137.42   Fireworks



 



   137.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Disorderly conduct, see § 132.01



   Offenses Against Public Justice and Administration, see Ch. 133



Statutory reference:



   Firearms and ammunition registration, see ILCS Ch. 430, Act 65, §§
0.01 through 16-3



DEADLY WEAPONS



§ 137.01  UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly:



      (1)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry any
bludgeon, black-jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or
other knuckle weapon regardless of composition, throwing star or any knife,
commonly referred to as a switch-blade knife, which has a blade that opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of the knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels
a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material
or compressed gas, but which shall not be deemed to include crossbows, common
or compound bows and/or underwater spearguns in accordance with ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, § 24-1(e);



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(1))



      (2)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully
against another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto,
broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser, or any other
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(2))



      (3)   Carry on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a
tear gas gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or
substance, other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or
substance designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years
of age or older;



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(3))



      (4)   Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about
his or her person, except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode,
legal dwelling, or fixed place of business or on the land or in the legal
dwelling of another person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any
pistol, revolver, stun gun, taser or other firearm; except that, this
division (A)(4) does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that
meet one of the following conditions:



         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;



         (b)   Are not immediately accessible;



         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm
carrying box, shipping box or other container by a person who has been issued
a currently valid firearm owner’s identification card; or



         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the
Firearm Concealed Carry Act (ILCS Ch. 430, Act 66) by a person who has been
issued a currently valid license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(4))



      (5)   Set a spring gun;



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(5))



      (6)   (a)   Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun or taser
or other deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating
beverages, or at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by
any governmental body or any public gathering at which an admission is
charged, excluding a place where a showing, demonstration or lecture
involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted;



         (b)   This division (A)(6) does not apply to any auction
or raffle of a firearm held pursuant to a license or permit issued by a
governmental body, nor does it apply to persons engaged in firearm safety
training courses.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(8))



      (7)   Carry or possess on or about his or her person, upon any
public street, alley or other public lands within the corporate limits of a
city, village or incorporated town, except when an invitee thereon or
therein, for the purpose of the display of such weapon or the lawful commerce
in weapons, or except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode,
legal dwelling or fixed place of business, or on the land of in the legal
dwelling of another person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any
pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm; except that this
division (A)(7) does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that
meet one of the following conditions:



         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state; 



         (b)   Are not immediately accessible;



         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm
carrying box, shipping box or other container by a person who has been issued
a currently valid firearm owner’s identification card; or



         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the
Firearm Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid
license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(10))



      (8)   Sell, manufacture or purchase any explosive bullet.
EXPLOSIVE BULLET shall mean the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge
which contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon contact
with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case
having a projectile affixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the
rear end thereof, with the propellant contained in the tube between the
projectile and the car; or



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(11))



      (9)    Carries or possesses on or about his or her person
while in a building occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other
weapon of like character or other instrument of like character intended for
use as a weapon. For the purposes of this section, BILLY CLUB means a short
stick or club commonly carried by police officers which is either telescopic
or constructed of a solid piece of wood or other human-made material.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(13))



   (B)   A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A) above, means:



      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a
length of wire and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current
capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to
render him or her incapable of normal functioning; or



      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing
worn by a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting the person’s
nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal
functioning.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(10))



(1999 Code, § 137.01)  Penalty, see § 137.99



Statutory reference:



   Silencers on guns; machine guns; bombs; possession of weapon while
hooded, robed/masked; or possession of weapons on school or university
grounds (all of which are felonies), see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§
24-1(a)(6), (7), (8) and (9) and § 24-1(c)(2), respectively



§ 137.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Section 137.01(A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(7) and (A)(9) of this
chapter do not apply to or affect any of the following:



      (1)   Peace officers or any person summoned by a peace officer
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while actually engaged
in assisting such officer;



      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons,
penitentiaries, jails and other institutions for the detention of persons
accused or convicted of an offense, while in the performance of their
official duty, or while commuting between their homes and places of
employment;



      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the
United States or the Illinois National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training
Corps, while in the performance of their official duty;



      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public
utility to perform police functions, and guards of armored car companies,
while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment
or commuting between their homes and places of employment; and watchmen while
actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment;



      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors,
private detectives or private alarm contractors, or employed by a private
security contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor agency
licensed by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, if their
duties include the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of the Private
Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith
Act of 2004, ILCS Chapter 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq., while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment. A person shall be considered
eligible for this exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours
of training for a private security contractor, private detective, or private
alarm contractor, or employee of a licensed private security contractor,
private detective, or private alarm contractor agency and 20 hours of
required firearm training, and has been issued a firearm control card by the
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. Conditions for the
renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this section
shall be the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of the
Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and
Locksmith Act of 2004. The firearm control card shall be carried by the
private security contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor,
or employee of the licensed private security contractor, private detective,
or private alarm contractor agency at all  times when he or she is in
possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control
card.



      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or
industrial operation as a security guard for the protection of persons
employed and private property related to such commercial or industrial
operation, while actually engaged in the performance of his or her duty or
traveling between sites or properties belonging to the employer, and who, as
a security guard, is a member of a security force registered with the
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation; provided that such
security guard has successfully completed a course of study, approved by and
supervised by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation,
consisting of not less than 40 hours of training that includes the theory of
law enforcement, liability for acts, and the handling of weapons. A person
shall be considered eligible for this exemption if he or she has completed
the required 20 hours of training for a security officer and 20 hours of
required firearm training, and has been issued a firearm control card by the
State Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. Conditions for the
renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this section
shall be the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of ILCS
Chapter 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq. The firearm control card shall be
carried by the security guard at all times when he or she is in possession of
a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control card;



      (7)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative
Investigating Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons
specified in § 137.01(A)(3) and (A)(4) of this chapter, while on duty in the
course of any investigation for the Commission;



      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution as a
security guard for the protection of other employees and property related to
such financial institution, while actually engaged in the performance of
their duties, commuting between their homes and places of employment, or
traveling between sites or properties owned or operated by the financial
institution, and who, as a security guard, is a member of a security force
registered with the Department; provided that any person so employed has
successfully completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, consisting of not less
than 40 hours of training which includes theory of law enforcement, liability
for acts, and the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be
eligible for this exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours
of training for a security officer and 20 hours of required firearm training,
and has been issued a firearm control card by the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation. Conditions for renewal of firearm control cards
issued under the provisions of this section shall be the same as for those
issued under the provisions of ILCS Chapter 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq.
The firearm control card shall be carried by the security guard at all times
when he or she is in possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or
her firearm control card. For purposes of this division, FINANCIAL
INSTITUTION means a bank, savings and loan association, credit union or
company providing armored car services;



      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive
an armored car, while actually engaged in the performance of his or her
duties;



      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.;



      (11)   Investigators of the Office of the State’s Attorneys
Appellate Prosecutor authorized by the board of governors of the Office of
the State’s Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to §
7.06 of ILCS Ch. 725, Act 210, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State’s Attorney
under ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005;



      (13)   Probation officers while in the performance of their
duties, or while commuting between their homes, places of employment or
specific locations that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent
of the Chief Judge of the circuit for which they are employed, if they have
received weapons training according to requirements of the Peace Officer and
Probation Officer Firearm Training Act;



      (14)   Court security officers while in the performance of
their official duties or while commuting between their homes and places of
employment, with the consent of the Sheriff;



      (15)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a
nuclear energy, storage, weapons or development site or facility regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening
and training mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission; and/or



      (16)   Manufacture, transportation or sale of weapons to
persons authorized under divisions (A)(1) through (15) above to possess those
weapons.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a))



   (B)   Section 137.01(A)(4) and (7) do not apply to or affect any
person carrying a concealed pistol, revolver, or handgun and the person has
been issued a currently valid license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act
at the time of the commission of the offense.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a-5))



   (C)   Section 137.01(A)(1) of this chapter does not apply to the
purchase, possession or carrying of a black-jack or slung- shot by a peace
officer.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(d))



   (D)   Section 137.01(A)(6) does not apply to any owner, manager or
authorized employee of any place specified in that division, nor to any law
enforcement officer.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(e))



   (E)   Section 137.01(A)(4) and (A)(7) of this chapter do not apply
to any of the following:



      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the
purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges,
whether public or private, while using their firearms on those target ranges;



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(f))



      (2)   Members of any club or organization organized for the
purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges,
whether public or private, and patrons of such ranges, while such members or
patrons are using their firearms on those target ranges;



      (3)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while
parading, with the special permission of the Governor;



      (4)   Hunters, trappers or fishermen with a license or permit
while engaged in hunting, trapping or fishing;



      (5)   Transportation of weapons that are broken down in a
non-functioning state or are not immediately accessible;



      (6)   Carrying or possessing any pistol, revolver, stun gun or
taser or other firearm on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person
as an invitee with that person’s permission; and



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(b))



      (7)   Any parole agent or parole supervisor who meets the
qualifications and conditions prescribed in § 3-14-1.5 of the Unified Code
of Corrections.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g-6))



   (F)   Section 137.01(A)(8) of this chapter does not apply to:



      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the
United States or the State National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty;



      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military
ordnance;



      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics,
or specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance; and/or



      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly or possession of
explosive bullets by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal
government, in connection with the supply of those organizations and persons
exempted by division (F)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside
the state, or the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or
person exempted in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or
leased by an exempted manufacturer.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g))



   (G)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any
provision of this subchapter need not negative any exemptions contained in
this subchapter. The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an
exemption.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(h))



   (H)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to or affect
the transportation, carrying or possession of any pistol or revolver, stun
gun, taser or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under
license with the state or the federal government, where such transportation,
carrying or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which such
common carrier is engaged. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply
to or affect the transportation, carrying or possession of any pistol,
revolver, stun gun, taser or other firearm not the subject of and regulated
by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7) or 24-2(c), which is unloaded and
enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping box or other container by
the possessor of a valid firearm owner’s identification card.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(i))



(1999 Code, § 137.02)



§ 137.03  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of
firearms or firearm ammunition when:



      (1)   He or she is under 18 years of age and has in his or her
possession any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person;



      (2)   He or she is under 21 years of age, has been convicted
of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent, and has
any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession;



      (3)   He or she is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or
firearm ammunition in his or her possession;



      (4)   He or she has been a patient in a mental institution
within the past five years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his
or her possession. For purposes of this division (A)(4), MENTAL INSTITUTION
means any hospital, institution, clinic, evaluation facility, mental health
center, or part thereof, which is used primarily for the care or treatment of
persons with mental illness. PATIENT IN A MENTAL INSTITUTION means the person
was admitted, either voluntarily or involuntarily, to a mental institution
for mental health treatment, unless the treatment was voluntary and solely
for an alcohol abuse disorder and no other secondary substance abuse disorder
or mental illness;



      (5)   He or she is a person with an intellectual disability
and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession; or



      (6)   He or she has in his or her possession any explosive
bullet. For the purposes of this division (A)(6), EXPLOSIVE BULLET  means
the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries
an explosive charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human
or an animal. CARTRIDGE  means a tubular metal case having a projectile
fixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof with
the propellent contained in the tube between the projectile and the cap.



   (B)   (1)   Unlawful possession of firearms, other than handguns,
and firearm ammunition is punishable under § 130.99 of this code. Unlawful
possession of handguns is a felony punishable under appropriate state law.



      (2)   The possession of each firearm or firearm ammunition in
violation of this section constitutes a single and separate violation.



   (C)   Nothing in division (A)(1) above prohibits a person under 18
years of age from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a
firearm such as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon
established public or private target ranges or hunting, trapping, or fishing
in accordance with the Wildlife Code, ILCS Ch. 520, Act 5, or the Fish and
Aquatic Life Code, ILCS Ch. 515, Act 5.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1)  (1999 Code, § 137.03)  Penalty, see §
137.99



§ 137.04  CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.



   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed
by the offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for
further disposition consistent with state law.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6)  (1999 Code, § 137.04)



§ 137.05  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall, within the city, fire or discharge
any firearms or air guns without written permission from the Mayor first
obtained, which permission shall prescribe the limits within which such
firing may be done, and may be revoked at any time after it has been granted.



      (2)   A registered gun club shall be excluded from the
provisions of this section, but limited to the club grounds.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall, within the city, release, shoot,
fire or otherwise discharge any arrow or other projectile through the use of
a crossbow, common bow, compound bow, underwater spear gun or other device
within the city limits without written permission from the Mayor first
obtained, which permission shall prescribe the limits within which such
action may be done, and may be revoked at any time after it has been granted.



      (2)   An organized and established public or private archery
club or range shall be excluded from the provisions of this section, but
limited to the club or range grounds.



(1999 Code, § 137.05)  (Ord. 3303, passed 12-6-2004)  Penalty, see §
137.99



AIR RIFLES



§ 137.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   AIR RIFLE.  Includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring
pistol, B-B gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a
firearm which impels a breakable paint ball containing washable marking
colors or, a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard
materials with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.



   DEALER.  Any person, copartnership, association or corporation engaged
in the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles included
in the definition of AIR RIFLE.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-0.1)  (1999 Code, § 137.10)



§ 137.21  SELLING, RENTING OR TRANSFERRING TO CHILDREN; PROHIBITION.



   (A)   A dealer commits selling, renting or transferring air rifles
to children when he or she sells, lends, rents, gives or otherwise transfers
an air rifle to any person under the age of 13 years where the dealer knows
or has cause to believe the person to be under 13 years of age or where the
dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of the
person and the person is under 13 years of age.



   (B)   A person commits selling, renting, or transferring air rifles
to children when he or she sells, gives, lends, or otherwise transfers any
air rifle to any person under 13 years of age except where the relationship
of parent and child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil, exists
between this person and the person under 13 years of age, or where the person
stands in loco parentis to the person under 13 years of age. 



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-1)  (1999 Code, § 137.11)  Penalty, see §
137.99



§ 137.22  CARRYING OR DISCHARGING ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   A person under 13 years of age commits carrying or discharging
air rifles on public streets when he or she carries any air rifle on the
public streets, roads, highways or public lands within this state, unless the
person under 13 years of age carries the air rifle unloaded.



   (B)   A person commits carrying or discharging air rifles on public
streets when he or she discharges any air rifle from or across any street,
sidewalk, road, highway or public land or any public place except on a safely
constructed target range. 



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-2)  (1999 Code, § 137.12)  Penalty, see §
137.99



§ 137.23  PERMITTED POSSESSION.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter, it is lawful for any
person under 13 years of age to have in his or her possession any air rifle
if it is:



   (A)   Kept within his or her house of residence or other private
enclosure; 



   (B)   Used by the person and he or she is a duly enrolled member of
any club, team or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining
as part of its facilities or having written permission to use an indoor or
outdoor rifle range under the supervision guidance and instruction of a
responsible adult and then only if the air rifle is actually being used in
connection with the activities of the club team or society under the
supervision of a responsible adult; or 



   (C)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under
circumstances when the air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in a manner
as not to endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in a
manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space
outside the limits of the grounds or residence. 



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-3)  (1999 Code, § 137.13)  Penalty, see §
137.99



§ 137.24  PERMITTED SALES.



   The provisions of this subchapter do not prohibit sales of air rifles:



   (A)   By wholesale dealers or jobbers;



   (B)   To be shipped out of the state; or



   (C)   To be used at a target range operated in  accordance with §
137.23 or by members of the Armed Services of the United States or
Veterans’ organizations. 



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-4)  (1999 Code, § 137.14)



§ 137.25  SEIZURE AND REMOVAL.



   The state police or any sheriff or police officer shall seize, take,
remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any air rifle sold
or used in any manner in violation of this subchapter. 



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-5)  (1999 Code, § 137.15)



EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS



§ 137.40  BLASTING.



   No person shall, by himself or herself, or by his or her agent or
employee, fire off any blast, unless the blast is properly guarded so as to
prevent accident to person or property, or open any stone quarry within the
city, without permission of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 137.25)  Penalty, see § 137.99



§ 137.41  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   Nitroglycerine, dynamite and the like. No person shall have,
keep, possess or store, at or in any place within the city, any
nitroglycerine, dynamite or giant powder, or any form or combination of any
of them.



   (B)   Blasting powder and the like. No person shall keep, possess or
store any gun or blasting powder, or any gun or explosive cotton, at or in
any one place in the city in any quantity exceeding five pounds, except a
dealer thereof, or quarryman of rock, or miner, who may keep 25 pounds at any
one time.



(1999 Code, § 137.26)  (Ord. 700, passed 3-20-1972)  Penalty, see § 137.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-8-4



§ 137.42  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIREWORKS. Any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion,
combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges,
toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require
fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets,
Roman candles, bombs or other fireworks of like construction, and any
fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances
producing visual effects; provided, however, that, the term FIREWORKS shall
not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers
known as “party poppers”, “booby traps”, “snappers”, “trick
matches”, “cigarette loads” and “auto burglar alarms”; sparklers;
toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing
they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap
when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which
contain less than 0.20 grains of explosive mixture (excluding recoverage
model rockets sold for the express use of modelers and/or exhibitions of
rocketry); the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.



   (B)   Prohibition. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, co- partnership or corporation to offer for
sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks within
the city limits.



   (C)   Permit. Consumer displays of fireworks will be permitted in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35 (State Fireworks Use Act). Each consumer
display shall be handled by a competent individual who has received training
from a consumer fireworks training class approved by the State Fire Marshal.
The location of the display is subject to approval based upon an inspection
by the Fire Chief.



      (1)   Application for permits shall be made in writing to the
City Clerk at least 15 days in advance of the date of the display and action
shall be taken on the application within 48 hours after such application is
made. The application must include proof of completion of the training class
approved by the Fire Marshal and the Fire Chief’s site inspection.



      (2)   No permit hereunder shall be transferable.



      (3)   No permit shall be required for supervised public
displays by state or county fair associations.



   (D)   Fee. There shall be a charge of $10 for the issuance of a
permit.



   (E)   Insurance policy. Each applicant who applies for a permit
shall furnish to the city an insurance policy of combined single limit
general liability in the sum of $1,000,000 naming the city as an additional
insured.



(1999 Code, § 137.27)  (Ord. 1557, passed 7-20-1992; Ord. 3564, passed
3-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 137.99



Cross-reference:



   Pyrotechnic Use Act, see ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35



§ 137.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 130.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 137.22 of this
chapter commits a petty offense.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-5)  (1999 Code, § 137.12)



CHAPTER 138:  EPHEDRINE CONTROL



Section



   138.01   Definitions



   138.02   Public access to ephedrine



   138.03   Exceptions



   138.04   Reporting theft or excessive purchases



 



   138.99   Penalty



§ 138.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COUNTER. Any obstructive, physical barrier that separates ephedrine
products from access by a customer or the general public, and which makes
such products available to a customer or the general public only through or
by the act of an employee of the seller.



   EPHEDRINE. All forms of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine
hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, phenylpropanolamine and all
combinations of these chemicals.



   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. Any product that contains ephedrine, its salts,
isomer or salts of isomer, as its sole active ingredient or in combination
with less than therapeutically significant quantities of other active
ingredients.



   PACKAGE. Any number of pills, tablets, capsules, caplets or individual
units of substance held within a container intended for sale.



   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, limited
liability company, firm,



association or other entity selling an ephedrine product or other entity
selling an ephedrine product to customers.



   SELL. To knowingly furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver,
surrender or supply, whether or not for monetary gain.



(1999 Code, § 138.01)  (Ord. 3235, passed 3-15-2004)



§ 138.02  PUBLIC ACCESS TO EPHEDRINE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to display or offer to sell any
ephedrine product unless the ephedrine product is placed behind a counter.



(1999 Code, § 138.02)  (Ord. 3235, passed 3-15-2004)  Penalty, see §
138.99



§ 138.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   The prohibition contained in § 138.02 shall not apply to the sale of
animal feed containing ephedrine.



(1999 Code, § 138.03)  (Ord. 3235, passed 3-15-2004)



§ 138.04  REPORTING THEFT OR EXCESSIVE PURCHASES.



   (A)   Any person who sells ephedrine products and who discovers a
theft, disappearance or other loss of an ephedrine product shall report the
theft, disappearance or loss in writing to the City Police Department within
three calendar days of such a discovery.



   (B)   Any person who sells ephedrine products shall report to the
City Police Department any difference between the quantity of ephedrine
products shipped and the quantity of ephedrine products received within three
calendar days of discovery.



   (C)   Any person who sells three or more ephedrine products to one
individual during one or successive transactions shall notify the City Police
Department upon the departure of the purchaser from the store, and must then
provide the police with any and all information leading to the identity of
the purchaser.



(1999 Code, § 138.04)  (Ord. 3235, passed 3-15-2004)



§ 138.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each day a violation of this chapter exists it shall be
considered a separate offense subject to a fine as set forth herein for each
offense.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already otherwise provided for by appropriate federal
or state statutory penalty shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine or
other relief as provided in § 130.99 of this code.



   (C)   Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter by any agent or employee of any person shall be
deemed and held to be in the act of such person, and said person shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
omitted by him, her or it personally, provided such act or omission was
within the scope of authority of such agent or employee.



(1999 Code, § 138.05)  (Ord. 3235, passed 3-15-2004)  Penalty, see §
130.99



CHAPTER 139:  UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS



Section



   139.01   Unmanned aircraft systems



§ 139.01  UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings.



      UNMANNED AIRCRAFT. An aerial vehicle that:



         (a)   Does not carry a human operator and is operated
without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the
aircraft;



         (b)   Uses aerodynamic forces to provide vehicle lift;



         (c)   Can fly autonomously or be piloted remotely; and



         (d)   Can be expendable or recoverable.



      UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS (UAS). An unmanned aircraft and
associated elements (including communication links and the components that
control the unmanned aircraft) that are required for the pilot in command to
operate safely and efficiently in the national airspace system. To be part of
a UAS, the unmanned aircraft must be capable of sustained flight in the
atmosphere;



         (a)   Flown within the visual line of sight of the
person operating the aircraft; and



         (b)   Flown for hobby or recreational purposes.



      VISUAL OBSERVER. A person who is designated by the operator of an
unmanned aircraft system to assist the operator to see and avoid other air
traffic or objects aloft or on the ground.



   (B)   All operators of unmanned aircraft systems shall adhere to
applicable federal and state regulations, rules, and laws regarding their
use, and as may be amended from time to time, and implemented thereafter.



      (1)   https://www.faa.gov/uas/media/Sec_ 331_336_UAS.pdf - The
original regulation which addresses sUAS entering controlled airspace.



      (2)   https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2018-title14-vol2/xml/CF
R-2018-title14-vol2- part101.xml - Federal law regulating model aircraft and
hobby drones.



      (3)   https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2018-
title14-vol2/xml/CFR-2018-title14-vol2- part107.xml//seqnum107.205 - Federal
law regulating commercial uses of drones.



   (C)   The unmanned aircraft system must remain within visual line of
sight of the operator of the unmanned aircraft system. Alternatively, the
unmanned aircraft must remain within the visual line of sight of a visual
observer, provided that the operator of the unmanned aircraft system and the
visual observer maintain effective communication with each other always.



   (D)   Operators of unmanned aircraft systems shall not intentionally
operate unmanned aircraft systems over persons unprotected by shelter or
moving vehicles, or within 25 feet from any person, building, or vehicle.



   (E)   Operators of unmanned aircraft systems shall not operate an
unmanned aircraft system in adverse weather conditions, such as in high winds
or reduced visibility.



   (F)   Operators of unmanned aircraft systems shall not operate an
unmanned aircraft system, nor shall a visual observer observe the operation
of an unmanned aircraft system, under the influence of alcohol or controlled
substances.



   (G)   Operators of unmanned aircraft systems shall ensure the
operating environment is safe and shall not operate unmanned aircraft systems
in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the life or property of
another or constitute an unreasonable interference with enjoyment of life,
quiet, comfort, or outdoor recreation of an individual or individuals of
ordinary sensitivity or habits.



   (H)   Operators of unmanned aircraft systems shall not without the
consent of the owner of the property, public utility, or appropriate
governmental entity operate an unmanned aircraft system within 25 feet of or
over sensitive infrastructure or property, such as power stations, utility
lines, water treatment facilities, correctional facilities, streets or
highways with a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or more, government
facilities, or other public utility facilities.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly operate an unmanned aircraft
system directly over the private property of another without the property
owner's consent, if such operation of the unmanned aircraft system:



      (1)   Enters into the immediate reaches of the air space next
to private property and



      (2)   If it interferes substantially with the property owner's
use and enjoyment of his or her property.



   (J)   All unmanned aircraft systems shall be limited to
daylight-only operations, or civil twilight (30 minutes before official
sunrise to 30 minutes after official sunset, local time).



   (K)   Except as may be otherwise expressly permitted by federal or
state law, it shall be unlawful to operate any unmanned aircraft systems
weighing in excess of 55 pounds (25 kilograms) in the city.



   (L)   The City Administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate
policies and procedures for the operation of unmanned aircraft systems upon
and over property owned or controlled by the city, consistent with this
chapter. Such policies and procedures shall provide for reasonable
restrictions on the time, place, and manner in which a person may land,
launch, or otherwise operate an unmanned aircraft system so as not to
interfere with the health, safety, and welfare of city residents. Such
restrictions may not place an undue burden on recreational or commercial
operation of unmanned aircraft systems. Such policies and procedures may
require certain conditions be fulfilled prior to the take-off, landing, or
operation of an unmanned aircraft system from certain designated properties
owned or controlled by the city.



(Ord. 4050, passed 8-6-2018)



Cross-reference:



   Constructive invasion of privacy, § 132.02



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION



      152.   FLOOD HAZARD MANAGEMENT



      153.   PLANNING



      154.   SUBDIVISIONS



      155.   DEVELOPMENT MANUAL



      156.   MOBILE HOME PARK CODE



      157.   RESERVED



      158.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



   150.01   Adoption of building codes



   150.02   Commercial Building Code amendments



   150.03   Fire Prevention Code amendments



   150.04   Mechanical Code amendments



   150.05   Property Maintenance Code amendments



   150.06   Residential Code amendments



   150.07   Existing Building Code amendments



   150.08   Fuel Gas Code amendments



   150.09   Energy Conservation Code amendments



   150.10   Electrical Code amendments



   150.11   Plumbing Code amendments



§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES.



   (A)   The Building Codes of the city shall consist of the following
which are incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as though fully
set out herein, and are hereby adopted:



      (1)   The “2012 International Building Code”, published by
the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices G, H and J and the
amendments prescribed in § 150.02 of this chapter is hereby adopted as the
“Building Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois” (the “Commercial
Building Code”);



      (2)   The “2012 International Fire Code”, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices B, C, D and E and the
amendments prescribed in § 150.03 of this chapter is hereby adopted as the
“Fire Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois” (the “Fire Code”);



      (3)   The “2012 International Mechanical Code”, published
by the International Code Council, Inc., et al., including App. A thereto and
the amendments prescribed in § 150.04 of this chapter is hereby adopted as
the “Mechanical Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois” (the
“Mechanical Code”);



      (4)   The “2012 International Property Maintenance Code”,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., et al., including App. A
and the amendments thereto prescribed in § 150.05 of this chapter is hereby
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of O’Fallon,
Illinois” (the “Property Maintenance Code”);



      (5)   The “2012 International Residential Code”, published
by the International Code Council, Inc., et al., including Appendices G and H
and the amendments thereto prescribed in § 150.06 of this chapter is hereby
adopted as the “Residential Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois”
(the “Residential Code”);



      (6)   The “2012 International Existing Building Code”,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., et al., including the
amendments thereto prescribed in § 150.07 of this chapter is hereby adopted
as the “Existing Building Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois” (the
“Existing Building Code”);



      (7)   The “2012 International Fuel Gas Code”, published by
the International Code Council, Inc., et al., including the amendments
thereto prescribed in § 150.08 of this chapter is hereby adopted as the
“Fuel Gas Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois” (the “Fuel Gas
Code”);



      (8)   The “2012 International Energy Conservation Code”,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., et al., including the
amendments thereto prescribed in § 150.09 of this chapter is hereby adopted
as the “Energy Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois (“Energy Code”);



      (9)   The “2011 National Electrical Code”, published by
the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., including the amendments
thereto prescribed in § 150.10 of this chapter is hereby adopted as the
“Electrical Code of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois” (the “Electrical
Code”); and



   (10)   The "Illinois Plumbing Code 77 IL Admin Code 890" published
by the Illinois Department of Public Health thereto prescribed in Section 12
of this Ordinance is hereby adopted as the "Plumbing Code of the City of
O'Fallon" (the "Plumbing Code").



   (B)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to maintain
on file in the Office of the City Clerk one copy each of the Commercial
Building Code, the Fire Prevention Code, the Mechanical Code, the Property
Maintenance Code, the Residential Code, the Existing Building Code, the Fuel
Gas Code, the Energy Code and the Electrical Code as herein adopted
(collectively, the “City Codes”).



(1999 Code, § 150.01)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.02  COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Commercial Building Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]”;



   (B)   Section 103.1 is hereby repealed and a new Section 103.1 is
adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “103.1 Department of Building Safety, Code Official defined.
The term “department of Building Safety” as used in this code shall mean
the Building and Inspection Division of the Community Development Department
of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois. The term “building official” as used
in this code shall mean the duly appointed Code Official of the City of
O’Fallon, Illinois and including any designee thereof.”;



   (C)   Section 103.2, inclusive is hereby repealed in its entirety;



   (D)   Section 109.2 is hereby amended by substituting “by written
order or resolution of the City Council” for the words “by the applicable
governing authority;”



   (E)   Section 108.6 is hereby repealed and a new Section 108.6 is
hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “109.6 Refunds. No portion of any fee shall be returned to a
permit holder in the case of a revocation of a building permit or a
suspension, discontinuance, or abandonment of work.”;



   (F)   Section 112.0 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 112.0 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 113.0 Means of Appeal



      113.1 Application for appeal; limitations. Any person shall have
the right to appeal to the Building Code Review Committee established in
Section 112.2 of this code from a decision of the code official or from any
notice issued in connection with the enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code,
the Mechanical Code, the Property Maintenance Code, the Residential Code, the
Existing Building Code, the Fuel Gas Code, the Energy Conservation Code and
the Electrical Code (as applicable, “the code”). Any such appeal shall be
based solely upon and shall state a claim that: (i) the true intent of the
code or the rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been
incorrectly interpreted, (ii) the provisions of the code do not apply, or
(iii) an equivalent form of construction can be used; provided that the
Building Code Review Committee shall have no authority to interpret the
administrative provisions of the code nor to waive substantive requirements
of the code. Any appeal under this section shall be in writing, shall contain
a written statement of the grounds for the  appeal and shall be filed in the
office of the code official within thirty (30) days after the rendering of
the decision or from the date of service of the notice from which the appeal
is taken.



      113.2 Committee established; membership. The Building Code Review
Committee hereby established shall consist of five (5) members appointed by
the chief appointing authority. The members are to be qualified by experience
and training to pass on matters pertaining to the building codes. All members
shall serve without compensation.



      The terms of members first appointed shall be staggered as
follows: one for five (5) years, one for four (4) years, one for three (3)
years, one for two (2) years, and one for one (1) year. Subsequent terms
shall be for five (5) years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the
unexpired portion of a term only.



      The Committee shall annually elect one of its members to serve as
chair, one of its members to serve as vice-chair, and one of its members to
serve as secretary. Members so elected may be re-elected for successive
terms. The Committee is hereby authorized to adopt and from time to time to
amend the rules of procedure for hearings under this code. The procedures
shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate
that only relevant information shall be received.



      The chief appointing authority shall appoint two alternate
members who shall be called by the board chairman to hear appeals during the
absence or disqualification of a member. A member shall be disqualified to
hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional, or
financial interest in the subject matter. Alternate members shall be
appointed for five-year terms. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for
the unexpired portion of a term only.



      113.3 Hearing on appeal; decisions. The Committee shall meet to
hear an appeal upon notice from the chair within thirty (30) days of the
filing of the appeal. The Committee shall immediately determine whether the
appeal filed complies with the jurisdictional requirements of Section 112.1
of this code. Upon so determining, the Committee may hear testimony and
evidence and, upon conclusion of the hearing, may modify or reverse the
decision or order of the code official by a concurring vote of three (3)
members. The decision of the Committee shall be in writing and a copy shall
be made available to the appellant and to the code official within a
reasonable time after the vote and rendering of the decision.



   (G)   Section (114), Violations, is hereby amended and adopted in
addition to the Commercial Building Code and is hereby incorporated as if
fully set forth therein by adding to Paragraph 113.4 as follows:



      114.4.1 Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a
violation of this code shall be punished by a fine of not less than $75 and
not more than $750. With respect to violations of this code that are
continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a
separate offense.



      114.4.2 The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation
or suspension of a license, permit or franchise.



      114.4.3 Violations of this code that are continuous with respect
to time may be abated by injunctive or equitable relief. The imposition of a
penalty does not prevent equitable relief.



   (H)   The following Section(117), named “Maintenance of
Construction Sites,” including additional regulations and requirements are
hereby adopted in addition to the Building Code and are hereby incorporated
as if fully set forth therein.



      117.1 Dumpsters



      (1)   Each building construction site shall have on-site a
dumpster(s) of sufficient capacity to contain the construction debris
generated by the construction activity on the site.



      (2)   All construction debris from each building construction
site shall be placed in the construction site dumpster(s) by the end of each
work day.



      (3)   Every construction site dumpster, having been filled,
shall be removed from the construction site and where appropriate, replaced
with another empty dumpster until such time as construction debris is no
longer generated on the site.



      117.2 Rocked Driveways



      (1)   Each commercial construction site or subdivision
construction site entrance shall have its driveway or roadway (as delineated
on the building permit application site plan) rocked with CA3 (three-inch
minimum) to a minimum depth of six (6) inches. This subsection may not be
required if the permanent paved driveway or entry road is in place and can be
used by all construction equipment or delivery vehicles.



      (2)   Each residential building construction site shall have
its driveway (as delineated on the building permit application site plan)
rocked with CA6 to a minimum depth of three (3) inches.



      (3)   Rock drives or roadways must be constructed and
maintained on stable soil in order to maintain the desired intent or the rock
shall be replaced and/or soil stabilization may be required, as directed by
the Code Official.



      (4)   All deliveries of building materials, of all kinds,
shall be made using the rocked road or driveway, without exception.



      117.3 Sanitary Facilities



      Each building construction site shall provide sanitary facilities
(including toileting and hand washing facilities) for the convenience of all
workers and shall be discharged into a sanitary sewer or if the facility is
portable, it shall be an enclosed, chemically-treated tank tight unit. All
non-sewered units shall be pumped regularly to assure adequate working and
sanitary facilities.




      117.4 Responsibility



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and
any individual or company acting under the direction of the permit holder to
ensure compliance of all provisions of Section 116.”



(1999 Code, § 150.02)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.03  FIRE PREVENTION CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]” and by
adding the sentence, “The term “jurisdiction” wherever appearing in
this code shall mean the City of O’Fallon, Illinois.”;



   (B)   Section 103 “Department of Fire Prevention” is hereby
amended as follows:



      “103.1 Department of Fire Prevention and Fire Code Official,
defined. The term “Department of Fire Prevention” as used in this code
shall mean the Building and Inspection Division of the Community Development
Department of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois. The term “fire code
official” as used in this code shall mean the duly appointed Code Official
of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and any designee thereof.”;



   (C)   Section 103.2 is hereby repealed in its entirety;



   (D)   Section 104.1 General, is hereby amended by adding the
following text: “The Code Official shall not exercise any authority over
fire service features regarding fire scenes or any other sections of this
code that pertain to operation of and/or duties performed by the O’Fallon
Fire Department. Those duties and authority remain with the O’Fallon Fire
Chief or his or her designee.”;



   (E)   Section 105, Permits is hereby amended by adding Section
105.1.2 hereby adopted as follows:



      “105.1.4 Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination,
building permit, and inspection shall be paid to the City Clerk at the rate
or rates established by written order or resolution of the City Council.”



   (F)   Section 108.0 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 108.0 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 108.0 Means of Appeal



      108.1 Means of Appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right of appeal to the Building Code Review Committee, established by section
112.0 of the Building Code, which shall additionally govern the grounds and
regulate the procedures for such appeals.”;



   (G)   Section 109.3 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 109.3 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “109.3 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section of this code, upon conviction therefor, shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 113.4 of
Section 3, Commercial Building Code.



(1999 Code, § 150.03)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.04  MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Mechanical Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]”;



   (B)   Section 103 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 103 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 103 Code Official



      103.1 General. The term “department of mechanical inspection”
wherever used in this code shall mean the Building and Inspections Division
of the Community Development Department of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois.
The term “code official” as used in this code shall mean the duly
appointed Code Official of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and any designee
thereof.”



   (C)   Section 106.5.2 is hereby repealed and a new Section 106.5.2
is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “106.5.2 Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination,
building permit, and inspection shall be paid to the City Clerk at the rate
or rates established by written order or resolution of the City Council.”;



   (D)   Section 106.5.3 is hereby repealed in its entirety.



   (E)   Section 108.4 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 109.3 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section of this code, upon conviction therefore, shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 113.4 of
Section 3, Commercial Building Code.”



   (F)   Section 109.0 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 109.0 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 109.0 Means of Appeal



      109.1 Means of Appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right of appeal to the Builders Grievance Committee, established by section
112.0 of the Building Code, which shall additionally govern the grounds and
regulate the procedures for such appeals.”



(1999 Code, § 150.04)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.05  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]”;



   (B)   Section 103 is hereby amended as follows:



   “Section 103 Code Official and Department



      103.1 General. The term “department of property maintenance
inspection” wherever used in this code shall mean the Building and
Inspections Division of the Community Development Department of the City of
O’Fallon, Illinois. The term “code official” as used in this code shall
mean the duly appointed Code Official of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and
any designee thereof.”



   (C)   Section 103.5 is hereby repealed in its entirety and fees are
adopted per Section 6.01, paragraph (a)(v), under additional regulations.



   (D)   Section 104.3 is hereby repealed in its entirety.



   (E)   Section 106.4 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 106.4 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section of this code, upon conviction therefor, shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 113.4 of
Section 3, Commercial Building Code.”



   (F)   Section 109.6 is hereby repealed in its entirety.



   (G)   Sections 110.3 and 110.4 are hereby repealed in their
entirety. [See applicable Illinois law on demolition of unsafe structures.]



   (H)   Section 111 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 111 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 111 Means of Appeal



      111.1 Means of Appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right of appeal to the Building Code Review Committee, established by Section
121.0 of the Building Code, provided that provisions of this code shall
regulate the procedures for such appeals.”



   (I)   Section 302.4 shall have 8 inches inserted as the jurisdiction
requirement.



   6.01 Occupancy Permit and Inspections



   (A)   The following additional regulations are hereby adopted as
supplementary and in addition to the requirements of the Property Maintenance
Code and are hereby incorporated as if fully set forth therein.



      “(i)   Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for the owner
of a parcel of real estate on which a residential or non-residential
structure is situated, to occupy the structure or permit the occupancy of the
structure by any person without complying with prior thereto Section
6.01(a)(ii). Further, the owner shall not occupy or allow the occupancy of
any existing residential or non-residential structure, if the Occupancy
Permit thereto  has been revoked.



      To obtain an Occupancy Permit, the owner must comply with the
application process outlined in Section 6.01(a)(ii) within the prescribed
time.



      Once an Occupancy Permit is issued it shall thereafter, except as
provided in Section 6.01(a)(i)(E),  be unlawful for the owner to change or
allow a change of occupancy with or without change of ownership of the
residential or non-residential structure without the owner complying with
Section 6.01(a)(ii) prior to the change of occupancy.



      For purposes of this Section 6, “owner” is defined as the
person or entity maintaining fee simple title to the real estate on which the
structure is located  at the time of transfer of the title to the real
estate to the transferee or at the time of change in occupancy of the
structure situated on the real estate.



      For purposes of this Section 6, the term “change in
occupancy” shall mean a change in possession of a residential or
non-residential structure by way of rental, leasehold, ownership, or other
manner of tenancy.



      For purposes of this Section 6, the term “change of
ownership” shall mean:



      (a)   Transfer of title to the real property via a deed.



      (b)   Transfer of a majority interest in a land trust holding
title to the real property.



      (c)   Transfer of majority interest in a Corporation, Limited
Liability Company, Partnership or other entity holding title to the real
property.



      A Certificate of Occupancy issued for new or renovated structures
by the code official under section 110.0 of the Building Code and section
R110 of the Residential Code shall be considered and is expressly
distinguished from the Occupancy Permit required pursuant to this Section
6.01(a)(i). However, such Certificate of Occupancy may be honored as an
alternative to the Occupancy Permit required by Section 6.01(a)(i) and this
code, provided the subject structure otherwise complies with the standards
and requirements of this code. In the absence of such compliance, any
building permit fees paid to the City shall be counted toward the fee
required for the Occupancy Permit under the Property Maintenance Code.



      Any existing structures inspected under this Property Maintenance
Code will not be subject to the requirements of the Building Code or
Residential Code, unless the building is also subject to new construction,
alteration, addition, or relocation requirements, and then only the portion
that is affected by that work. The legal occupancy of any structure existing
on the date of the adoption of this code, or for which it has been heretofore
approved shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is
otherwise specifically covered in this property maintenance code, the
building code, or fire prevention codes or presents a threat to the life,
health and safety of the occupants.



EXCEPTIONS: The inspection provisions of this Section 6.01(a)(i) shall not be
applicable in the following instances:



      A.   To the change in ownership of a residential or
non-residential structure containing a dwelling unit when the change in
ownership is between co-owners and if there is no change in occupancy;



      B.   To the change in occupancy or ownership of a residential
or non-residential structure within twenty- four (24) months from the date of
the last issue of the Occupancy Permit herein required, but not at a longer
interval as required by other sections of this code, provided there is no
just cause for re-inspection of the premises;



      C.   To a change in ownership of a residential or
non-residential structure when the new buyer or transferee within seven (7)
days from date of purchase or transfer, delivers a notarized statement to the
Code Official stating that the buyer/transferee will cause the structure to
be demolished within six (6) months from the date of purchase or transfer.



      D.   To the change in ownership or occupancy of a residential
structure within thirty-six (36) months from the date of issue of a
Certificate of Occupancy for new construction.



      E.   To the change in ownership of any structure when a new
owner accepts all responsibility for obtaining the inspection and an
Occupancy Permit required by Section 6.01(a)(i) and 6.01(a)(ii), provided
that the owner or the new owner submits an application for an Occupancy
Permit along with a written and signed agreement between the owner and new
owner, with signatures notarized that the new owner accepts responsibility
for obtaining the inspection and an Occupancy Permit. The structure may not
be occupied until the above documents have been filed with the Code Official.



   (ii)   Application Process. Application for the Occupancy Permit
required by the Property Maintenance Code shall be made by the owner of the
structure or by his or her agent. Any application submitted by a person other
than the fee owner shall be done so with legal authorization from the fee
owner. The application shall contain the full name and address of the owner
or the names and addresses of the responsible officers if the owner is other
than a natural person, and the name and address of the applicant.



The application for such Occupancy Permit shall be submitted in such form as
the code official prescribes and shall be filed with the Code Enforcement
Section of the Planning & Zoning Department:



      A.   In the case of a change of ownership, irrespective of
tenancy, at least seven days before the date of transfer of title or
effective date of contract for deed.



      B.   In the case of a change of renter, tenant of lessee.



Once application is made, owner can allow the structure to be occupied,
unless the conditions in exception (a) apply. The property maintenance
inspection required for issuance of an Occupancy Permit must be scheduled
within 7 days after application is made and once the property maintenance
inspection is completed and the owner has been notified of any violations,
all violations shall be corrected within 30 days and a re-inspection
scheduled. An extension of the 30-day period listed above can be obtained,
with due cause, only after written request and then by approval of the Code
Official.



      A.   If the property is sold/purchased "As Is" or if the
structure has not been occupied for a period of 6 months or more then the
initial inspection must be completed and all life safety violations must be
corrected before the structure can be occupied. Tins type inspection can be
scheduled to be performed within 2 business days of the request. Once the
life safety violations are completed, normal time requirements will apply.



   (iii)   Action on Application; Permit Contents. The code official
shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for an Occupancy
Permit and shall inspect or cause to be inspected, the structure which is the
subject of the application within thirty (30) days after filing. If the
application and the structure conform to the requirements of all pertinent
laws of the City, the code official shall issue the Occupancy Permit within
the same thirty (30) day period. The Occupancy Permit shall certify that the
structure complies with the provisions of this code and shall additionally
set forth the use, street address or other means of identification, date of
issuance, and such other information as the code official shall deem
appropriate for the implementation of this code. Occupancy Permits for
residential structures shall additionally state the maximum number of
occupants permitted.



   (iv)   Scheduling of Regular Inspections; Utility Services. Regular
inspections and regular re-inspections shall be scheduled for normal work
days of the City. Appointments for inspection and/or re-inspection shall be
made for time(s) of mutual convenience of the applicant and the code official
whenever possible and within the time frames specified in Section 6 (a)(ii),
above. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the owner’s agent or
tenant to provide access to the residential or non-residential structure(s)
within seven (7) days from the date of request by the City for gain of entry
and free access.



Water and electric utility services connections, and gas utility service
connection, if applicable, shall be in service at the time scheduled for
inspection and re-inspection. Water service through the City of O’Fallon
and authorization to have electric service activated by that service provider
will not be authorized until application is made, when required, for an
Occupancy Permit and has been filed with the Code Official.




   (v)   Fees. Fee(s) for an Occupancy Permit shall be paid to the City
Clerk at the rate or rates established by written order or resolution of the
City Council.



   6.02  Residential Occupancy Permit



   Requirements



   (a)   The following additional regulations and standards are hereby
adopted for residential units as supplementary and in addition to the
requirements of the Property Maintenance Code and are hereby incorporated as
if fully set forth therein:



      (i)   Existing receptacles in the following locations shall
have GFCI protection pursuant to Part VIII of the 2012 International
Residential Code:



         a.   Toilet and bathrooms.



         b.   Garages.



         c.   Outdoor receptacles.



         d.   Kitchen and bar sink receptacles that serve
countertop surfaces.



         e.   Unfinished basement receptacles.



         f.   Hydromassage bathtubs.



         g.   Crawl space receptacles.



      (ii)   The garage shall be separated from the residence and
its attic by the following means:



         a.   The garage shall be separated from the residence
and its attic area by means of minimum of 1/2-inch gypsum board applied to
the garage side.



         b.   Openings from a private garage directly into a room
used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the
garage and residence shall be equipped with either solid wood doors not less
than 1 and 3/8 inch in thickness, 20-minute fire-rated doors or metal
insulated doors.



      (iii)   Each gas appliance shall be provided with a shutoff
valve separate from the appliance. The  shutoff valve shall be located in
the same room as the appliance, not further than 6 feet from the appliance or
within reasonable proximity, and installed upstream from the union,
connector, or quick disconnect device it serves.



      (iv)   Swimming pools must comply with the safety regulations
of App. G of the 2012 International Residential Code.



      (v)   Provide access to and allow for removal or cause to be
removed electric service panel covers for inspection of inside service panel,
if required.



      (vi)   Provide Carbon Monoxide Detectors in all residential
occupancies, pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Illinois Carbon
Monoxide Detector Act.



   6.03  Non-Residential/Commercial Occupancy Permit Requirements



   (a)   The following additional regulations and standards are hereby
adopted for non-residential/commercial structures as supplementary and in
addition to the requirements of the Property Maintenance Code and are hereby
incorporated as if fully set forth therein:



      (i)   Annual inspections shall be required on all
non-residential/commercial structures or premises of the following types and
uses:



         (a)   A principal non-residential/ commercial structure
that contains a residential occupancy, such as apartments, that constitutes
an accessory use to the structure. The residential portion of that structure
shall be only inspected under the guidelines for residential occupancy and
related exceptions.



         (b)   All structures in the R1 Use Group as defined in
the Building Code, i.e., hotels, motels, bed and breakfast and boarding
houses.



         (c)   All structures in the A-1 Use Group as defined in
the Building Code, i.e., theaters, concert halls.



         (d)   All structures in the A-3 Use Group as defined in
the Building Code, i.e., structures intended for worship, recreation,
amusement, community halls, dance halls, etc.



         (e)   Any other structure within the Assembly Group as
defined in the Building Code, which in the determination of the Code Official
presents a potential public safety hazard to the occupants.



         (f)   All structures having automatic fire suppression
systems, including fire suppression cooking hood systems.



         (g)   All structures and facilities used for child care
and having an average daily attendance of eight or more children.



         (h)   Any structure in the H (hazardous) Use Group as
defined by the Building Code.



   (b)   Commercial buildings required to have a fire alarm system
either by code requirements or by agreement with the Code Official or Fire
Department as a condition of occupancy must have those systems monitored by
an approved central station alarm company or proprietary supervising station.



The building owner and/or occupant must notify the Planning and Zoning
Department of the central station alarm company or proprietary supervising
station contracted to monitor the system. This notification must be done on
an annual basis. Owner/occupant must immediately notify the Building and
Inspections Division of any change in status of the alarm, the central
service company or proprietary supervising station, discontinuance of
service, or for any other reason that may render the alarm inoperable.
Central station alarm companies monitoring alarm systems within the City of
O'Fallon must notify the Building and Inspection Division of any
discontinuance of service of any fire alarm system monitored within the city.



   (c)   Commercial parking lot maintenance, striping and signage shall
be maintained for compliance with the Illinois Accessibility Code.



(1999 Code, § 150.05)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.06  RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Residential Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section R101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]”;



   (B)   Section R103.1 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section R103.1 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section R103.1 Department of Building Safety, Code Official defined



      R103.1 General. The term “department of building safety”
wherever used in this code shall mean the Building and Inspections Division
of the Community Development Department of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois.
The term “building official” as used in this code shall mean the duly
appointed Code Official of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and any designee
thereof.”



   (C)   Section R103.2, inclusive is hereby repealed in its entirety.



   (D)   Sections R108.2 and R108.3 are hereby amended by substituting
“by written order or resolution of the City Council” for the words “by
the applicable governing authority.”



   (E)   Section R108.5 is hereby repealed and a new Section R108.5 is
hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “R108.5 Refunds. No portion of any fee shall be returned to a
permit holder in the case of a building permit or a suspension,
discontinuance, or abandonment of work.”



   (F)   Section R112 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section R112 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section R112 Means of Appeal



      R112.1 Means of Appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right of appeal to the Building Code Review Committee, established by section
112.0 of the Building Code, which shall additionally govern the grounds and
regulate the procedures for such appeals.”



   (G)   Section R113.4 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section R113.4 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “R113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any
of the provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section of this code, upon conviction therefor, shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 113.4 of
Section 3, Commercial Building Code.



   (H)   Section R302.2 Townhouses is repealed in its entirety and
insert:



      Section R302.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a
separate building and shall be separated by fire-resistant-rated wall
assemblies meeting the requirements of Section R302.1 for exterior walls.



      Exceptions:



      1.   A common 1-hour-fire-resistance-wall assembly tested in
accordance with ASTM-E-119 or UL 263 is permitted for townhouse protected by
a residential fire sprinkler system if such walls do not contain plumbing or
mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. The
wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and
be tight against exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing.
Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 34
through 43. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance
with Section R302.4.



      2.   A common 2-hour-fire-resistance-wall assembly tested in
accordance with ASTM-E-119 or UL 263 is required for townhouses not protected
by a residential fire sprinkler system if such walls do not contain plumbing
or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. The
wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and
be tight against exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing.
Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 34
through 43. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance
with Section R302.4.



   (I)   Section R313.2 Sprinklers in residential Structures is
repealed in its entirety and insert:



      Section R313.2 One and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire
Systems A builder of one and two family dwellings to be constructed for a
prospective purchaser shall offer to the purchaser at the time of entering
into the construction/purchase contract the option, at the purchasers cost,
to install or equip fire sprinklers in the dwelling, residence or unit. No
purchaser of such one or two family dwelling shall be denied the right to
choose or decline to install a fire sprinkler system in such dwelling or
residence being purchased. Written verification by the builder affirming that
a fire sprinkler system was offered to the purchaser at the time of entry
into the construction/purchase contract must be included in the permit
application.



   (J)   Section R403.1.4.1 is hereby amended by substituting "200
square feet" under "Exceptions (1) and (2) for 600 and 400 square feet",
respectively.



(1999 Code, § 150.06)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.07  EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Existing Building Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]”;



   (B)   Section 103.1 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section R103.1 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 103.1 Department of Building Safety, Code Official defined



      103.1 General. The term “department of building safety”
wherever used in this code shall mean the Building and Inspections Division
of the Community Development Department of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois.
The term “code official” as used in this code shall mean the duly
appointed Code Official of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and any designee
thereof.”;



   (C)   Section 103.2 inclusive is hereby repealed in its entirety;



   (D)   Section 108.2 is hereby amended by substituting “by written
order or resolution of the City Council” for the words “by the applicable
governing authority.”;



   (E)   Section 108.6 is hereby repealed and a new Section 108.6 is
hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “108.6 Refunds. No portion of any fee shall be returned to a
permit holder in the case of a building permit or a suspension,
discontinuance, or abandonment of work.”;



   (F)   Section 112 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 112 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 112 Means of Approval



      112.1 Means of Approval. Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right of appeal to the Building Code Review Committee, established by section
112.0 of the Building Code, which shall additionally govern the grounds and
regulate the procedures for such appeals.”



   (G)   Section 113.4 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 113.4 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section of this code, upon conviction therefore, shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 113.4 of
Section 3, Commercial Building Code.”



   (H)   Sections 117.3 and 117.4 are hereby repealed in their
entirety. (See applicable Illinois law on demolition of unsafe structures.)



(1999 Code, § 150.07)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.08  FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Section 101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]”;



   (B)   Section 103.1 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section R103.1 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 103.1 Department of Building Safety, Code Official defined



      103.1 General. The term “department of inspection” wherever
used in this code shall mean the Building and Inspections Division of the
Community Development Department of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois. The
term “code official” as used in this code shall mean the duly appointed
Code Official of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and any designee
thereof.”;



   (C)   Section 103.2 inclusive is hereby repealed in its entirety;



   (D)   Section 106.5.2 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 106.5.2 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “106.6.2 Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination,
building permit and inspection shall be paid to the City Clerk at the rate or
rates established by written order or resolution of the City Council.”;



   (E)   Section 106.5.3 is hereby repealed and a new Section 106.5.3
is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “106.6.3 Refunds. No portion of any fee shall be returned to a
permit holder in the case of a building permit or a suspension,
discontinuance, or abandonment of work.”;



   (F)   Section 108.4 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 108.4 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section of this code, upon conviction therefore, shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 113.4 of
Section 3, Commercial Building Code.”



   (G)   Section 109 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 109 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 109 Means of Appeal



      109.1 Means of Appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right of appeal to the Building Code Review Committee, established by section
112.0 of the Building Code, which shall additionally govern the grounds and
regulate the procedures for such appeals.”



(1999 Code, § 150.08)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.09  ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section C101.1 is hereby amended by substituting “City of
O’Fallon, Illinois” for the words “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]”;



   (B)   Section C107.2 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 107.2 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “C107.2 Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination, building
permit and inspection shall be paid to the City Clerk at the rate or rates
established by written order or resolution of the City Council.”



   (C)   Section 107.5 is hereby repealed and a new Section 107.5 is
hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “107.5 Refunds. No portion of any fee shall be returned to a
permit holder in the case of a building permit or a suspension,
discontinuance, or abandonment of work.”



   (D)   Section C108.4 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 108.4 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



      “C108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any
of the provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section of this code, upon conviction therefore, shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 113.4 of
Section 3, Commercial Building Code.”



   (E)   Section 109 is hereby repealed in its entirety and a new
Section 109 is hereby adopted in lieu thereof as follows:



   “Section 109 Means of Appeal



      109.1 Means of Appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right of appeal to the Building Code Review Committee, established by section
112.0 of the Building Code, which shall additionally govern the grounds and
regulate the procedures for such appeals.”



(1999 Code, § 150.09)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.10  ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Electrical Code is hereby amended as follows:



   (A)   Section 90-4 is hereby amended by adding thereto the following
provisions:



   “The Building and Inspections Division of the Community Development
Department of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and the duly appointed Code
Official of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois and authorized designees
(individually a “code official”and together, the “code officials”)
that are hereby authorized and designated to carry out the enforcement
provisions of this code.



   Any person affected by a decision of a code official or a notice or
order lawfully issued under this code shall have the right of appeal to the
Building Code Review Committee, established by section 121.0 of the Building
Code, which shall additionally govern the grounds and regulate the procedures
for such appeals.”



   (B)   The following additional regulations and standards are hereby
adopted as supplementary and in addition to the requirements of the
Electrical Code and are hereby incorporated as if fully set forth therein.



      (1)   No other electrical conductor other than copper shall be
used in the City other than,



         (a)   by the utility company in its service supply lines



         (b)   service and feeders approved by the Code Official



      (2)   Branch circuits shall be at least Number 12 gauge wire.



      (3)   Use of circuit breakers commonly known and referred to
as “space saver circuit breakers” shall be prohibited in new
construction. It may be allowed in panelboard replacement in existing
services and in upgrading of existing services if the service panel is rated
for their use, with the approval of the code official. The minimum width of
any service panelboard circuit breaker shall be 3/4 inch. All such circuit
breakers shall be of “unit-pole” design and operation, having one
overcurrent protection device per set of terminals; the use of twin, tandem
or similar circuit breakers which feature or allow two or more overcurrent
protection devices on a single set of terminals shall not be permitted. For
the purpose of this code, a “unit pole” circuit breaker is a single
overcurrent protection device which exclusively, without another, makes use
of one line-side terminal and its opposite load center bus-bar terminal. Any
such use shall meet manufacturers requirements.



      (4)   A maximum of 42 circuits per panel shall be allowed on a
200 amp service panel and 24 circuits on a 125 amp service panel. Breaker
panels and/or fuse panels shall be clearly marked within the panel
designating circuit numbers and the corresponding area(s) and/or equipment or
features they service. All service panels shall contain a 2-pole space for
future expansion.



(1999 Code, § 150.10)  (Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



§ 150.11  PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENTS.



   The Plumbing Code is hereby adopted with no amendments.



(Ord. 3853, passed 12-1-2014)



CHAPTER 151:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Definitions



   151.02   Purpose



   151.03   Certificate of merit (Heritage award)




Historic Preservation Commission




   151.15   Establish; composition; terms of office; organization;
duties




Landmark Sites




   151.30   Procedures for designation



   151.31   Criteria for designation




Alterations and Demolitions at Landmark Sites




   151.45   Alterations



   151.46   Certificate of appropriateness



   151.47   Certificate of economic hardship



   151.48   Appeals




Fees




   151.60   Fees authorized



 



   151.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
terms shall have meanings respectively ascribed below unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ALTERATION. Any act or process other than demolition which
results in changes to one or more exterior features of a building, structure,
district or object designated as a landmark site pursuant to this chapter.



      ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE. A quality or attribute of a building
or structure which satisfies one or more of the following criteria:



         (a)   The building or structure is the work of or
associated with a nationally or locally noted architect, builder or
architectural firm;



         (b)   The building or structure is an example of a
particular style (whether local or typical) in terms of detail, material or
workmanship and possesses a high degree of integrity;



         (c)   The building is one of a few remaining examples of
a particular style or use, or is an example which represents a recognized
architectural movement or style and has undergone little or no alteration
since its initial construction; and/or



         (d)   The building or structure is one of a contiguous
grouping of such having a sense of cohesiveness expressed through a
similarity of characteristics of style, period or method of construction and
accenting the architectural significance of the area in which the building or
structure is located.



      BUILDING. A structure occupied or erected for the support,
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property and permanently affixed
to the ground.



      CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate from the Commission
approving plans for demolition of a designated landmark site.



      CITY. The City of O’Fallon, Illinois.



      COMMISSION. The Historic Preservation Commission of the city
established by and appointed in accordance with this chapter.



      DEMOLITION. Any act or process which destroys or removes, in
whole or in part, a building or structure within a designated landmark site.



      EXTERIOR FEATURES. Elements of a building or structure which are
visible from public streets and thoroughfares, including by way of
illustration rather than limitation, architectural character, general
composition and the general arrangement of the exterior, type, color and
texture of building materials, and the type and character of windows, doors,
light fixtures, signs, fences, landscaping and appurtenant elements.



      INTEGRITY. Authenticity of a building or structure’s historic
identity, evidenced by the survival of physical characteristics that existed
during the historic period to which the building or structure belongs.



      LANDMARK SITE. An area, place, building or structure so
designated by the Commission to this chapter and/or rule or regulation
adopted under authority of this chapter or designated as a landmark or
historic district of the city under authority of Ord. 1833 or the
Preservation Act. As required by the context, the term LANDMARK SITE shall
also mean individual buildings or structures within such LANDMARK SITE.



      PRESERVATION ACT. ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-48.2, as amended and
any predecessor statutes.



      REPAIR. A change to a building or structure other than an
alteration and which does not require a building permit.



      STRUCTURE. Anything built, constructed or erected.



   (B)   Rules of interpretation. For purposes of this chapter, words
in the present tense shall include the future; use of the singular number
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular; the word
“shall” is mandatory and not directory.



(1999 Code, § 151.01)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)



§ 151.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect, through
enhancement and use, area places, buildings and structures of special
character or  historical interest or value in the interest of health,
prosperity, safety, culture and welfare of the people of the city by:



   (A)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic
and architectural characteristics of the city which represent elements of the
city’s cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;



   (B)   Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments
of the past as symbolized in the city’s area places, buildings and
structures suitable for designation as landmarks;



   (C)   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of
the city’s landmark sites;



   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to
homebuyers, visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting business, commerce,
industry and providing economic benefit to the city; and



   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation and restoration of
buildings and structures.



(1999 Code, § 151.02)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)



§ 151.03  CERTIFICATE OF MERIT (HERITAGE AWARD).



   (A)   Purpose. A certificate of merit may be awarded to properties
which might not otherwise qualify for the status of historic landmark
designation or whose owners might not wish to shoulder the legal
responsibilities of such status.



   (B)   Initiation of request. Any person, organization or association
may make a written application on forms provided by the Commission requesting
a certificate of merit be considered for an area, place, building, structure
or object within the city and be recognized as contributing to the city’s
architectural or historical heritage.



   (C)   Recommendation and final action. The Commission may make a
written recommendation to the City Council. If the Commission recommends a
certificate of merit, the Council may accept or reject the recommendation or
take other appropriate action. If the recommendation is accepted, the City
Council, by resolution, shall recognize the property with a certificate of
merit and recognize its boundaries.



   (D)   Landmark application. The awarding of a certificate of merit
will not preclude the possibility of a future Historic Landmark award.



   (E)   Criteria for designation. In recommending and approving the
designation of a proposed site for a certificate of merit, the Commission and
the City Council shall utilize the same criteria as for landmark designation
except that the failure to satisfy or fully satisfy any specific requirements
of such designation shall not preclude award of certificate of merit if the
objectives of such one or more of such criteria are advanced by the
designation.



   (F)   Fees authorized. The City Council is hereby authorized to
establish an appropriate system of processing fees for the review of
nominations for certificate of merit designation.



(1999 Code, § 151.03)  (Ord. 3178, passed 6-2-2003; Ord. 3252, passed
5-17-2004)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 151.15  ESTABLISH; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE; ORGANIZATION; DUTIES.



   (A)   Establishment, composition of Commission. There is hereby
established the Historic Preservation  Commission of the city. The
Commission shall consist of ten voting members who shall be residents of the
city appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council, and
with due regard to proper representation of fields such as history,
education, architecture, urban planning, archaeology, real estate, art and
law. The Commission may also have one ex-officio non-voting member, who may
or may not be a resident of the city, and who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. No person holding an elected
office in the city government shall be eligible for appointment. Any member
who has a pecuniary interest in any matter coming before the Commission for
vote shall disclose in writing to the Commission that the member has an
interest and shall not be entitled to vote on that matter. Such a member
shall be counted for purposes of determining a quorum which shall be defined
as a simple majority of currently appointed members.



   (B)   Term of office. Of the Commission members first appointed two
shall serve for a term of one year, two shall serve for a term of two years
and three shall serve for a term of three years. Thereafter, all members
shall serve for terms of three years and all members shall be eligible for
reappointment. Appointments for unexpired terms shall be for the duration of
such unexpired term. All members shall serve without compensation.



   (C)   Organization. The Commission shall annually elect a Chair, a
Vice-Chair and a Secretary from its own members and is hereby authorized to
establish, adopt and from time to time amend by-laws setting forth procedural
rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this chapter, as from
time to time amended, or successor chapters. The Commission shall report
annually in writing to the Community Development Committee of the City
Council or any such successor sub-committee.



   (D)   Duties. The duties of the Commission shall be as follows:



      (1)   To recommend to City Council the adoption of ordinances
designating areas, places, buildings, structures or other objects, including
city-owned property, having significant historical, architectural or
aesthetic features as the city’s landmark sites;



      (2)   To involve departments of city government and interested
members of the community as much as possible in its work, and to encourage
complementary activity with other agencies and organizations;



      (3)   To recommend to City Council  measures to protect those
portions of the city that have significant historical, architectural or
aesthetic features;



      (4)   To hold a public hearing concerning any proposed
designation of any area, building, structure or any other object, as a
landmark site;



      (5)   To hold a public hearing on and to review any
application for demolition affecting proposed or designated landmark sites or
structures within historic districts and issue or deny certificates of
appropriateness and economic hardship for such actions in accordance with
provisions of this chapter;



      (6)   To recommend to the City Council the acquisition through
donation, purchase or eminent domain of a fee or lesser interest in landmark
sites and structures within historical districts; and



      (7)   To undertake such additional tasks and responsibilities
as the City Council may from time to time determine.



(1999 Code, § 151.15)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)



LANDMARK SITES



§ 151.30  PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION.



   (A)   Initiation of request. Any person, organization or association
may make written application on forms provided by the Commission requesting
that an area, place, building, structure or object within the city be
designated as a landmark site. The Commission may also initiate the
designation of any area, place, building, structure, district or object 
within the city as a landmark site. The Commission after determining the
preliminary boundaries for any proposed landmark site, shall set a time and
place for a public hearing on the merits of designating the landmark site
proposed. The boundaries of the landmark site finally designated may include
less than the area established as the preliminary boundaries, but shall not
include less than the area established as the preliminary boundaries, but
shall not include more area without a new or continued public hearing for
which separate notice is provided in accordance with this section.



   (B)   Notice required. The Commission shall provide notice of the
public hearing in writing and by publication. The Commission shall mail by
first class United States mail written notification to all owners of record
of property within the preliminary boundaries of the area to be considered
not less than 15, nor more than 30, days prior to the date of the public
hearing and shall cause notice to be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city not less than 15 days  prior to the date of the
public hearing. Each such notice shall set forth the preliminary boundaries
of the area under consideration, and the date, time and place of the public
hearing. A copy of the notice of the public hearing shall also be given to
the city’s Code Enforcement Official, the Community Development Director,
Zoning Hearing Officer, the Chair of the Planning Commission and the City
Council.



   (C)   Hearing; recommendation and final action. The public hearing
shall be conducted by the Commission, and all interested persons shall be
given an opportunity to be heard, in person, by counsel or by correspondence.
The hearing may be continued without additional notice; provided that, the
boundaries of the area recommended does not exceed the limits of the
preliminary boundaries as set forth in the original notices. After the
conclusion of testimony and within 35 days of the adjournment of the public
hearing, the Commission shall make written recommendations to City Council.
If the Commission recommends designation as a landmark site, the Council
shall within 35 days of receiving the recommendation, either accept or reject
the recommendations. If the recommendation is accepted, the City Council, by
ordinance, shall designate the landmark site and establish its boundaries.



   (D)   Resubmittals. Applicants for designation which are not
recommended by the Commission may be resubmitted not sooner than 180 days
from the date of the Commission decision, where the applicant demonstrates
that new, material changes exist or that additional, relevant information can
be presented to the Commission. Upon such resubmittal, the Commission shall
determine the sufficiency of the changes or additional information.



(1999 Code, § 151.30)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001; Ord. 3252, passed 5-17-2004)



§ 151.31  CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION.



   In recommending and approving the designation of a proposed landmark
site, the Commission and the City Council shall utilize the following
criteria:



   (A)   Significance or value as part of the historical, cultural,
artistic, social, ethnic, political or other heritage of the community, state
or nation;



   (B)   Location as a site of a significant local, county, state or
national event;



   (C)   Identification with a person who significantly contributed to
the development of the community, county, state or nation;



   (D)   Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer
or architect whose individual work has influenced the development of the
community;



   (E)   Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials or
craftsmanship that renders it architecturally significant or innovative;



   (F)   Its archaeological significance to the community, county,
state or nation by virtue of information yielded or is likely to yield
important to history or prehistory;



   (G)   Character as a particularly fine or unique example of
utilitarian structure including, but not limited to, farmhouses, buildings or
other commercial structures with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance; and



   (H)   Representation of a sense of time and place unique to the city.



(1999 Code, § 151.31)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)



ALTERATIONS AND DEMOLITIONS AT LANDMARK SITES



§ 151.45  ALTERATIONS.



   (A)   Proposed alterations to be reviewed. Before any demolition,
new construction or alteration is made to a landmark site or to any building
or structures within a landmark site and before issuance of any permit
therefor, the owner or owners of such landmark site, building or structure
shall refer plans for the alteration to the Commission for review and
comment. The Commission shall have the opportunity to provide comments and
advice regarding the proposed alteration to the owner(s) within five days
after the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting following receipt of
such plans. The Commission shall make every reasonable effort to identify and
suggest compatible uses for landmark site property which require minimal
alterations, which meet the Secretary of Interior’s Standards, or to re-use
such property as originally used.



   (B)   Natural destruction, demolition or alteration. In any case of
a partial or complete alteration or demolition of a landmark site or to any
building or structure within a landmark site by natural causes, prior to
repair or reconstruction thereof, the owner shall obtain a certificate of
appropriateness from the Commission. In considering the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness for repair or reconstruction, the Commission
need not require exact duplication of the building or structure within a
landmark site or any feature thereof which was altered or demolished;
provided that, the Commission determines that the proposed reconstruction
will be in harmony with:



      (1)   The exterior design of the building or structure prior
to alteration or demolition; and



      (2)   The character of the landmark site.



(1999 Code, § 151.45)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001; Ord. 3252, passed 5-17-2004)



§ 151.46  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   Applications. A certificate of appropriateness shall be
required before proceeding with any demolition in whole or in part of any
landmark site or building or structure within a landmark site. Certificates
of appropriateness shall be applied for and issued in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements.



      (1)   A copy of each application for permit for demolition
affecting a landmark site or building or structure within a landmark site
shall be forwarded together with accompanying plans and specifications to the
Commission by the Building and Inspection Division of the Community
Development Department within seven days following receipt of the application
by the Building and Inspection Division of the Community Development
Department. The Building and Inspection Division of the Community Development
Department shall not issue a permit until a certificate of appropriateness
has been issued by the Commission.



      (2)   Where a proposed demolition does not require a building
permit, the owner of the property shall make application for a certificate of
appropriateness on forms provided by the Commission. The Commission shall
consider the completed application at its next regular meeting. The
Commission may establish a subcommittee of five members including the Chair
or Vice-Chair, to review routine applications for certificate of
appropriateness when, in the determination of the Commission, the lapse of
time to the next regular meeting would create unnecessary inconvenience to
the applicant. Such a certificate of appropriateness may be issued prior to
the next regular meeting upon the affirmative vote of four members of the
subcommittee. All meetings must be publicly noticed. Public notification for
meetings are to meet the requirements of the State Open Meetings Act (ILCS
Ch. 5, Act 120).



   (B)   Review and decision. Any applicant may request in writing a
meeting with the Commission before the application is sent by the Building
and Inspection Division of the Community Development Department to the
Commission or during the review of the application by the Commission. The
Commission shall review each application for demolition permit or for
certificate of appropriateness and shall issue or deny the certificate of
appropriateness within 45 days of receipt of the application. Written notice
of the approval or denial of certificate of appropriateness shall be provided
the applicant and the Building and Inspection Division of the Community
Development Department within seven days following the determination. Denial
of a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a written
statement of the reasons for the denial. The Commission shall make
recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposed
action which would cause the Commission to reconsider the denial. The
applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a demolition
permit that takes into consideration the recommendations of the Commission.



   (C)   Criteria. In acting on an application for a demolition permit
or for a certification of appropriateness, the Commission shall consider, in
addition to any other guidelines in this chapter, the following:



      (1)   The contribution of the building, structure or object
proposed for demolition to the immediate surroundings and to the landmark
site as a whole;



      (2)   The historical and architectural quality and
significance of the building, structure or object proposed for demolition;



      (3)   The structural condition of the building, structure or
object proposed for demolition; and



      (4)   The compatibility of any proposed replacement structure
with the landmark site as a whole.



(1999 Code, § 151.46)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001; Ord. 3252, passed 5-17-2004)



§ 151.47  CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.



   (A)   General. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 151.46 of this
chapter, the Commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship
permitting demolition of a landmark site or a building or structure with a
landmark site where denial of a certificate of appropriateness would result
in a loss of all reasonable use of the property.



   (B)   Applying for certificate. Certificate of economic hardship may
be applied for and issued in accordance with the following procedures and 
requirements.



      (1)   Application, hearing required. Application for a
certificate of economic hardship shall be made on forms prepared by the
Commission. Within a reasonable time following receipt of an application for
a certificate of economic hardship, the Commission shall set a date, time and
place for public hearing in writing concerning the application. The
Commission shall  provide notice of the public hearing in writing and by
publication. The Commission shall mail by first class United States mail
written notification to all owners of record of property within the
preliminary boundaries of the area to be considered not less than 15 days,
nor more than 30 days, prior to the date of the public hearing. Each such
notice shall identify the property or properties under consideration, and the
date, time and place of the public hearing. A copy of the notice of public
hearing shall also be given to the city’s Code Enforcement Official, the
Community Development Director, the Zoning Hearing Officer, the Chair of the
Planning Commission and the City Council.



      (2)   Hearing procedures. The public hearing shall be
conducted by the Commission, and all interested persons shall be given an
opportunity to be heard, in person, by counsel or by correspondence. The
hearing may be continued without additional notice. The Commission may
solicit expert testimony and require that the applicant for a certificate of
economic hardship make submissions concerning any or all of the following
information before the Commission makes a determination on the application:



         (a)   Estimate of the cost of the proposed demolition
and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with
the recommendations of the Commission for changes necessary for the issuance
of a certificate of appropriateness;



         (b)   A report from a licensed engineer or architect
with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any
structures on the property and its suitability for rehabilitation;



         (c)   Estimated market value of the property in its
current condition; after completion of the proposed demolition; and, after
any changes recommended by the Commission;



         (d)   An estimate from a real estate consultant,
appraiser or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as
to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing
structure on the property;



         (e)   Amount paid for the property, the date of
purchase, and the party from whom purchased, and any terms of financing
between the seller and buyer;



         (f)   If the property is income producing, the annual
gross income from the property for the previous two years; itemized operating
and maintenance expenses for the previous two years; and depreciation
deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during
the same period;



         (g)   Remaining balance on any mortgage or other
financing secured by the property annual debt service, if any, for the
previous two years;



         (h)   All appraisals obtained within the previous two
years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or
ownership of the property;



         (i)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent,
price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years;



         (j)   Assessed value of the property according to the
two most recent assessments;



         (k)   Real estate taxes for the previous two years;



         (l)   Form of ownership or operation of the property,
whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation,
limited partnership, joint venture or other; and



         (m)   Any other information considered necessary by the
Commission to a determination as to whether the property yields or may yield
a reasonable return to the owners.



   (C)   Review and decision. The Commission shall review all the
evidence and information required of an applicant for a certificate of
economic hardship and shall issue written findings and approve or deny the
application within 45 days of conclusion of the public hearing. A copy of the
written decision shall be provided to the applicant and to the city’s Code
Enforcement Official, the Community Development Director, the Zoning Hearing
Officer, the Chair of the Planning Commission and the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 151.47)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)



§ 151.48  APPEALS.



   (A)   A denial by the Commission of an application for a certificate
of appropriateness or for a certificate of economic hardship may be appealed
in writing by the applicant to the City Council upon forms provided by the
city.



   (B)   Upon written notification by the City Council of the filing of
such appeal, the Commission shall promptly provide to the City Council a copy
of the applicable record including any testimony taken and of the written
decision and findings.



   (C)   In considering such an appeal, the Council shall confine its
review to the record and the written decision and findings of the Commission.



   (D)   The City Council may grant an appeal upon two-thirds vote of
the entire Council.



(1999 Code, § 151.49)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)




FEES




§ 151.60  FEES AUTHORIZED.



   The Commission is hereby authorized to establish an appropriate system
of processing fees for the review of nominations for landmark site
designation and applications for certificates of appropriateness and
certificates of economic hardship.



(1999 Code, § 151.60)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who undertakes or causes demolition of any designated
landmark site or any proposed landmark site being considered for designation
by the Commission without a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate
of economic hardship therefor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $75, nor more
than $750. Any person who fails to comply with an order of the Commission or
of the city’s Code Enforcement Official or designee to cease and desist
from demolition activity undertaken without obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship therefor shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be punished by a
fine not less than $75, nor more than $750. Every day each such violation
shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation. The Commission
may additionally recommend to the City Council that the Council institute any
appropriate action or proceeding in the name of the city to enjoin, correct
or abate any violation of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 151.61)  (Ord. 1833, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 3043, passed
2-5-2001)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD HAZARD MANAGEMENT



Section



   152.01   Purpose



   152.02   Definitions



   152.03   Base flood elevation



   152.04   Duties of the Community Development Department



   152.05   Development permit



   152.06   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages



   152.07   Protecting buildings



   152.08   Subdivision and other development requirements



   152.09   Variances



   152.10   Disclaimer of liability



 



   152.99   Penalty



§ 152.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
city by the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1,
11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8 and 11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following
purposes:



   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or
drainage hazards to others;



   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings
from flood damage;



   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;



   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control,
repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;



   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by
minimizing the potential for creating blight areas;



   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and



   (G)   To preserve the natural and beneficial characteristics and
functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and
stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect
aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide
aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall have
meanings respectively ascribed below unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.  The base flood is also known as the 100-year
flood.  The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in § 152.03.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the crest of the base flood.



   BUILDING.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks.  The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than 180 days per year.



   DEVELOPMENT. 



      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:



         (a)   Demolition, construction, recon-struction, repair,
placement of a building or any addition to a building;



         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;



         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a
site for more than 180 days per year;



         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, culverts or similar projects;



         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or
fences;



         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading,
excavating, paving or other alterations of the ground surface;



         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of
gas and liquid storage tanks; and



         (h)   Channel modifications or any other activity that
might change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT.  Does not include routine maintenance of
existing buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing
and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of
levees.



   FEMA.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the floodplain outside of the
regulatory floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP.  A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area
(SFHA) within a community.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE).  The elevation of the base flood
plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.



   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) are synonymous.  Those
lands within the jurisdiction of the city, the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city or that may be annexed into the city, that are subject to
inundation by the base flood.  The floodplains of the city are generally
identified as such on the countywide flood insurance rate map of the county
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5,
2003.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed
and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.



   FLOODWAY.  That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey
the base flood.  The floodway for the floodplains of Richland Creek, Ogles
Creek, Engle Creek and Rock Spring Branch or other floodplains of the city
shall be as delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
county prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November
5, 2003.  The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the city,
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the
city, shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources.



   IDNR/OWR.  The Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of
Water Resources.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure transportable in one or more sections,
that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.



   NFIP.  The National Flood Insurance Program.



   REPETITIVE LOSS.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   SFHA.  See definition of FLOODPLAIN.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a building
whereby the cost of restoring the building to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the building before the
damage occurred regardless of the actual repair work performed.  Costs
associated with volunteer labor and materials shall be estimated and counted
toward the restoration costs.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, structural alteration or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the improvement or repair is started.  SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered
to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.  The term does not,
however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply
with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration
of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
Illinois Register of Historic Places.



   TRAVEL TRAILER (RECREATIONAL VEHICLE).  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   400 square feet or less in area;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.03  BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood.  The best
available base flood data are listed below.  Whenever a party disagrees with
the best available data, the party may finance the detailed engineering study
needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for approval.



   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Richland
Creek, Ogles Creek, Engle Creek and Rock Spring Branch or other floodplains
of the city shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
Countywide Flood Insurance Study of the county prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5, 2003.



   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an
“AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated
on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the county.



   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map
shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or other
sources.  Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed
to determine base flood elevations.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.04  DUTIES OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Community Development Department shall be responsible for
the general administration of this chapter and ensure that all development
activities, within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city, meet
the requirements of this chapter. 



   (B)   Specifically, the Community Development Department shall:



      (1)   Process development permits in accordance with § 152.05;



      (2)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a
floodplain with no delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention
requirements of § 152.06;



      (3)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all
buildings subject to § 152.07 are met and maintain a record of the
“as-built” elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or
floodproofing certificate;



      (4)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the
requirements of § 152.08;



      (5)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet
the public health standards of § 152.09;



      (6)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements
of § 152.09 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;



      (7)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all
actions necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;



      (8)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and
all other required local, state and federal permits;



      (9)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse;



      (10)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon
request about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;



      (11)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of
this chapter;



      (12)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data,
floodplain maps, copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of
compliance for development activities subject to this chapter;



      (13)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this
chapter including post damage site inspections in order to make substantial
damage determinations on structures within the floodplain; and



      (14)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain data and maps
including the notification of IDNR/OWR and submitting information to FEMA
within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the
base flood elevation or result in a change to the FIRM.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.05  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted
by state law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the Community Development Department. 
The Community Development Department shall not issue a development permit if
the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:



      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property
line dimensions;



      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling;



      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings; and



      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of § 152.07.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Community Development Department shall compare the elevation of the site to
the base flood elevation.  Any development located on land that can be shown
by survey data to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the
date of the site’s first flood insurance rate map identification is not in
the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Conversely, any land shown to be below the base flood elevation and which is
hydraulically connected to the flooding source, but not shown on the flood
insurance rate map shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The
Community Development Department shall maintain documentation of the existing
pre-development ground elevations and certification that the ground
elevations existed prior to the date of the site’s first flood insurance
rate map identification.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.06  PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.



   Within the floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate
map of the county, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not
been delineated, the following standards shall apply:



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no
development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and
anticipated development, will cause any increase in flood heights or
velocities or threat to public health and safety.  The following specific
development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:



      (1)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 3;



      (2)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 4;



      (3)   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 5;



      (4)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No 6;



      (5)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;



      (6)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;



      (7)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 9;



      (8)   Accessory structures and additions to existing
residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No.
10;



      (9)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11; and



      (10)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located
entirely in a flood fringe area.



   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) of
this section may be permitted only if:



      (1)   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or
written documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required);
and



      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when
necessary, and approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory
map and base flood elevation.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.07  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
152.06, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation.  This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building valued at
more than $1,000;



      (2)   Construction or placement of a new building greater than
70 square feet in area;



      (3)   Substantial improvement as defined in § 152.02 to an
existing building; or a building whose cumulative improvements, repairs or
structural alterations, beginning with the first improvement, repair or
structural alteration made subsequent to the effective date of this chapter,
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the first
improvement, repair or structural alteration was made;



      (4)   Substantial damage as defined in § 152.02 to an
existing building; or a building whose cumulative damage repairs, beginning
with the first damage repair made subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter, equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the first damage repair was made;



      (5)   Structural alterations to an existing building that
increase the floor area by more than 20%;



      (6)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements
do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage); and



      (7)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days per year; and



      (8)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
152.02.



   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:



      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill
in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at
or above the flood protection elevation;



         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
six inches before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the
residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods;



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural
measure;



         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporate debris or refuse materials; and



         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary,
stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins shall be
incorporated; or



      (2)   The building may be elevated in accordance with the
following:



         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on
stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters;



         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters
shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation;



         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the
flood protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or by having a minimum of one
permanent openings on each wall no more than one foot above grade.  The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation;



         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so
as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice
and floating debris;



         (e)   The finished interior grade shall not be less than
the finished exterior grade;



         (f)   All structural components below the flood
protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood
damage;



         (g)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone
lines, submersible pumps and other service facilities may be located below
the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; and



         (h)   The area below the flood protection elevation
shall be used solely for parking or building access and not occupied or later
modified as habitable space.



   (C)   Manufactured homes, or travel trailers and recreational
vehicles installed on site for more than 180 days per year, shall be:



      (1)   Elevated in accordance with division (B) of this
section; and



      (2)   Shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and
regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77
IL Adm. Code 870.



   (D)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more
than 180 days per year shall meet the requirements of division (C) of this
section unless all the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall be
either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck.  A hitch must remain
on the vehicle at all times;



      (2)   The travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall not be
attached to external appurtenances such as decks or porches;



      (3)   The travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall be
designed solely for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use and shall not
be used as a permanent dwelling;



      (4)   The travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall be less
than 400 square feet in area;



      (5)   The travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall have
wheels on all axles with tires inflated and road ready;



      (6)   If so equipped, air conditioning units shall be attached
to the frame so as to be safe for movement out of the floodplain;



      (7)   If so equipped, propane tanks, electrical and
sewer/septic connections shall be quick disconnect and above the flood
protection elevation or otherwise made water tight;



      (8)   The travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall have a
current license and title as a recreational vehicle or park model; and



      (9)   The travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall either
be entirely supported by jacks rather than blocks or have a hitch jack
permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground and be supported by
blocks in such a manner that will allow the blocks to be removed by use of
the hitch jack.



   (E)   (1)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that:



         (a)   Below the flood protection elevation, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the base flood;



         (b)   The building design accounts for flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and the impact from debris and ice; and



         (c)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into
the building design and operable without human intervention and without an
outside source of electricity.



      (2)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works shall not be
considered floodproofing for the purpose of this division.



   (F)   Garages or sheds shall be protected in accordance with
divisions (B) or (E) of this section unless all of the following conditions
are met:



      (1)   The garage or shed shall be non-habitable;



      (2)   The garage or shed shall be used only for storage and
shall not later be converted to another use;



      (3)   The garage or shed shall be located outside of the
floodway;



      (4)   The garage or shed shall be located on a single-family
residential lot and be accessory to an existing principal residential
structure;



      (5)   Below the flood protection elevation, the garage or shed
shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;



      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical shall be elevated above the flood protection elevation;



      (7)   The garage or shed shall have a minimum of at least one
permanent opening on each wall no more than one foot above grade.  The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of floor area;



      (8)   The garage or shed shall be less than $7,500 in market
value or replacement cost whichever is greater and less than 500 square feet
in area;



      (9)   The garage or shed shall be anchored to resist
floatation, collapse, lateral movement or overturning;



      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials including but not
limited to gasoline, paint, insecticides and fertilizers shall be stored
above the flood protection elevation; and



      (11)   The lowest flood elevation of the garage or shed shall
be documented and the owner notified of flood insurance implications.



   (G)   A residential building may be elevated on a crawlspace
provided all the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The building shall be designed and adequately anchored
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation
shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.  A minimum of one opening on each
wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one square
foot of enclosed area.  The openings shall be no more than one foot above
grade;



      (3)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood
protection elevation shall not be more than two feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade;



      (4)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed
four feet at any point;



      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable
period of time after the flood waters recede;



      (6)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above the flood protection elevations; and



      (7)   The bottom of the lowest structural member of the first
finished floor (lowest habitable floor) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.08  SUBDIVISION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the
extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land
management use and development.



      (1)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building
protection standards of §§ 152.06 and 152.07.  Any proposal for such
development shall include the following data:



         (a)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the
floodplain (where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing
study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood
elevation);



         (b)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and



         (c)   A signed statement by a registered professional
engineer that the proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage
of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act 210, §
2).



      (2)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain
development.  In addition to the requirements of §§ 152.06 and 152.07, the
following standards apply:



         (a)   No development in the floodplain shall include
locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and
anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or are within
a floodproofed non-residential building constructed according to the
requirements of § 152.07(E) of this chapter;



         (b)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage;



         (c)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply
systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into flood waters; and



         (d)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines
or waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.  Manholes or
other above ground openings located below the flood protection elevation
shall be watertight.



   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed
so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.09  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Whenever the standards of this chapter  place undue hardship
on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the City
Council for a variance.  The Community Development Director shall review the
applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to
the City Council.  The City Council may attach such conditions to granting
of a variance, as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.



      (1)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The development activity cannot be located outside
the floodplain;



         (b)   An exceptional hardship would result if the
variance were not granted;



         (c)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



         (d)   There will be no additional threat to public
health or safety, or creation of a nuisance;



         (e)   There will be no additional public expense for
flood protection, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads,
utilities, or other public facilities;



         (f)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do
not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and



         (g)   All other required state and federal permits have
been obtained.



      (2)   The city shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of §
152.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:



         (a)   Result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 for $100 of insurance;



         (b)   Increase the risks to life and property; and



         (c)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge
of these risks and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption
of the risk and liability.



   (B)   Variances to the building protection requirements of § 152.07
of this chapter requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or
alteration of a site or building included on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsection (A)(1)(a)
through (d).



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.10  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.  Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This
chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the
floodplain will be free from flooding or damage.  This chapter does not
create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain
or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be
deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the
Community Development Department may determine that a violation of the
minimum standards of this chapter exists.  The Community Development
Department shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.



      (1)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the
violation:



         (a)   The county shall make application to the Circuit
Court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the
ordinance;



         (b)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750 or as
provided for by the violation of the ordinances of the city;



         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues; and



         (d)   The county shall record a notice of violation on
the title of the property.



      (2)   The Community Development Department shall inform the
owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood
damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy
to be suspended.



   (B)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations.  All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 3210, passed 11-3-2003)



CHAPTER 153:  PLANNING



Section




Comprehensive Plan




   153.01   Short title



   153.02   Purpose of subchapter



   153.03   Adoption of future maps and standards



   153.04   Applicability



   153.05   Adoption of Comprehensive Plan and Official Map



   153.06   Adoption of standards



   153.07   Adoption by reference of adopted maps and standards into
other ordinances



   153.08   Administration and enforcement



   153.09   Advisory



   153.10   Filing



   153.11   Recording




Bicycle Facilities Plan




   153.25   Regulations adopted by reference




Major Thoroughfare Plan - Northeast Quadrant of City




   153.35   Regulations adopted by reference




Transportation Plan Update for Development Northwest of City




   153.45   Regulations adopted by reference




Landscape/Environmental Framework Plan




   153.55   Regulations adopted by reference



Cross-reference:



   Planning Commission, see §§ 33.01 through 33.09



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 154



COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



§ 153.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Official
Comprehensive Plan and Map Ordinance”.



(1999 Code, § 153.01)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.02  PURPOSE OF SUBCHAPTER.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter:



   (A)   To adopt and designate an Official Map;



   (B)   To adopt and designate other standards governing future
development and redevelopment of the city;



   (C)   To adopt, establish and help implement an official
Comprehensive Plan; and



   (D)   To provide for the filing of copies of such maps and standards
in the office of the City Clerk and the Recorder of Deeds of the county for
the information of the public.



(1999 Code, § 153.02)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.03  ADOPTION OF FUTURE MAPS AND STANDARDS.



   Future maps and standards adopted by reference as amendments to this
chapter shall be on file and available for inspection in the office of the
City Clerk, incorporated herein by reference and identified by the following
statement marked or stamped thereon:



      “Adopted by reference as a part of the Official Comprehensive
Plan and Map Ordinance passed on                 , by the Mayor and
City Council of the City of O’Fallon Illinois, approved by          
    , Mayor, attest                     , City Clerk.”



(1999 Code, § 153.03)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.04  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter, the Official Comprehensive Plan and map and all maps
and standards adopted herein shall be applicable to land situated within the
corporate limits and all land within the one and one-half extraterritorial
planning jurisdiction beyond the corporate limits and not included in any
municipality.



(1999 Code, § 153.04)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.05 ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OFFICIAL MAP.



   (A)   The 2001 Comprehensive Plan is hereby repealed and replaced
with the document attached to Ord. 3470 and entitled “O’Fallon Illinois
2006 Comprehensive Plan”, which is hereby adopted and designated as the
“Official Comprehensive Plan of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois”.



   (B)   The Official Map of the corporate area of the city and
contiguous unincorporated area, attached to Ord. 3470, is hereby adopted and
designated as the “Official Map of the City of O’Fallon”. The Official
Map and Ord. 3470 shall also include the Subdivision and Development Control
Code, Chapter 154 of this code, incorporated herein as if set forth
establishing such additional standard requirements applicable within the city
and within its one and one-half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction.



   (C)   Such maps may show existing and proposed:



      (1)   Thoroughfares and other public ways;



      (2)   Natural watercourses;



      (3)   Storm water drainage, sanitary sewerage and water supply
systems and related appurtenances;



      (4)   Sites of parks, schools and other public grounds;



      (5)   Future annexations and recommended zoning; and



      (6)   Building setbacks along streets and watercourses.



(1999 Code, § 153.05)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.06  ADOPTION OF STANDARDS.



   Standards for the following items as set out in the Land Subdivision
Control Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance of the city, Chapters 154 and 158 of
this code, as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference
and made a part of the Official Comprehensive Plan and shall be known as the
Official Standards of the city:



   (A)   Streets and sidewalks;



   (B)   Sanitary sewerage;



   (C)   Storm water drainage;



   (D)   Water supply;



   (E)   Gas, electric and telephone utilities;



   (F)   Street lighting;



   (G)   Land uses; and



   (H)   Public ways, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other public
grounds.



(1999 Code, § 153.06)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.07 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF ADOPTED MAPS AND STANDARDS INTO OTHER
ORDINANCES.



   The maps and standards adopted under §§ 153.04 through 153.06 of this
chapter are hereby adopted by reference to their titles in other ordinances
which regulate the development of the city without further filing or
publication, except where the statutes require otherwise. This section shall
implement authority relating thereto as provided by statute or other
applicable law to the fullest extent of such laws.



(1999 Code, § 153.07)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.08  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Provisions of this subchapter, including such maps and standards the
chapter adopts by reference, which are incorporated by reference in other
regulatory ordinances shall be administered and enforced by the officers
designated in such regulatory ordinances. Those provisions of this subchapter
not incorporated in other ordinances shall be enforced by the Director.



(1999 Code, § 153.08)  (Ord. 1071, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 3081, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.09  ADVISORY.



   The Comprehensive Plan shall be advisory and in and of itself shall not
be construed to regulate or control the use of private property in any way,
except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by this chapter and
such other ordinances duly enacted by the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 153.09)  (Ord. 3081, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 3470, passed
8-21-2006)



§ 153.10  FILING.



   Such Comprehensive Plan, including the Official Map, shall be placed on
file with the City Clerk and shall be available at all times during business
hours for public inspection.



(1999 Code, § 153.10)  (Ord. 3081, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 3307, passed
12-20-2004; Ord. 3470, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 153.11  RECORDING.



   A certified copy of Ord. 3470 shall be filed with the County Recorder
of Deed’s Office.



(1999 Code, § 153.11)  (Ord. 3081, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 3470, passed
8-21-2006)



BICYCLE FACILITIES PLAN



§ 153.25  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s bicycle facilities plan is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN - NORTHEAST QUADRANT OF CITY



§ 153.35  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s major thoroughfare plan for the Northwest Quadrant of the
city is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in
full.



TRANSPORTATION PLAN UPDATE FOR DEVELOPMENT NORTHWEST OF CITY



§ 153.45  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s transportation plan update for the development northwest
of the city is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set
out in full.



LANDSCAPE/ENVIRONMENTAL FRAMEWORK PLAN



§ 153.55  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s landscape/environmental framework plan is hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section




Article 1:
General Provisions




   154.001   Title



   154.002   Scope



   154.003   Intent and purpose



   154.004   Interpretation



   154.005   Final plat required; non-compliance



   154.006   Suitability of land for subdivision development



   154.007   Conformity of Official Map



   154.008   Definitions




Article 2:
General Regulations




   154.020   Preliminary plat procedures



   154.021   Preliminary plat requirements



   154.022   Final plat procedures



   154.023   Final plat requirements



   154.024   Performance guarantee or bond



   154.025   Construction performance and final improvement plan
requirements



   154.026   Inspections and acceptance



   154.027   Quality assurance




Article 3:
Development Standards




   154.040   Minimum development standards for design and improvements



   154.041   Subdivision improvement standards and infrastructure
permit requirements



   154.042   Soil excavation and erosion control




Article 4:
Park Lands Dedication




   154.055   Intent; scope



   154.056   Compliance



   154.057   Criteria for required park and recreation land dedication



   154.058   Reservation of additional lands



   154.059   Criteria for a contribution in lieu of park sites



   154.060   Limitations; appeals




Article 5:
Administration and Enforcement




   154.075   Waiver and exceptions



   154.076   Appeals



   154.077   Minor subdivisions



   154.078   Recording



   154.079   Enforcement; stop-work order, revocation of permit



   154.080   Validity



   154.081   Repeal of conflicting regulations



   154.082   Fees



   154.083   Effective date




Article 6:
Amendments




   154.095   General



   154.096   Planning Commission advisory report



   154.097   Amendments of regulations and districts; public notice



 



   154.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Development Manual, see Ch. 155



   Planning, see Ch. 153



   Zoning, see Ch. 158



Editor’s note:



   The Development Manual (Ch. 155 of this code) and the Bicycles
Facilities Plan (Ch. 156 of this code) are part of the greater subdivision
regulations of the city.




ARTICLE 1:
GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 154.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the
“Subdivision and Development Control Ordinance” of the city.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.002  SCOPE.



   (A)   This chapter shall be applicable within the area of
jurisdiction of the city. The provisions of the statutes of the state are
hereby adopted as part of the Official Plan of the city in all lands within
the corporate limits at any given time as well as the unincorporated area
within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits at any given time,
except as otherwise provided, and subject to any jurisdictional boundary
agreements between the city and other municipalities establishing
jurisdiction for the unincorporated areas. The provisions of this chapter are
hereby adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan of the city and shall serve
to implement the Comprehensive Plan to the fullest extent allowed by the law.



   (B)   To the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, the
provisions of this chapter shall also apply to all planned developments
whether residential, commercial or otherwise in nature, and to any other
developments whether a subdivision is required or not under the law,
statutes, ordinances or regulations of the governmental body or agency having
jurisdiction or control, and regardless of whether the same is labeled a
subdivision or not, it being the intent of this chapter to apply to all types
of development, both within the city and to areas lying within one and
one-half miles of the corporate limits of the city. “Development”, for
purposes of this chapter, shall not include agricultural activities or
construction limited to one single-family dwelling.



   (C)   No subdivision of land and no plat of any subdivision or
assessment of more than one lot, dedication, vacation, annexation, planned
unit development or plat of survey under the Condominium Act, shall be valid
or recorded unless and until the same has been approved by the City Council
and recorded in accordance with procedures hereinafter provided, and no such
plat, including planned unit developments within the unincorporated area
within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits at any given time,
shall be approved without compliance with the standards and improvements
required as hereinafter set forth.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.003  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   This chapter is intended to provide adequate service and utilities,
safe convenient access, a desirable and attractive living environment through
good subdivision and development design, and utilizing development standards
directed toward reasonable costs for initial development and continuing
maintenance including the following:



   (A)   The proper location and width of streets, building setback
lines, open spaces, recreational areas and public lands;



   (B)   The avoidance of conditions which would lead to the creation
of blighted areas;



   (C)   The avoidance of overcrowding of population and congestion of
vehicular traffic;



   (D)   The manner in which streets, public areas and lands are to be
graded and improved, and the extent to which water, sewer, storm water and
other utility service are to be provided and the functional adequacy of such
utility services;



   (E)   The provision of adequate space for traffic for utility
facilities; access of emergency apparatus; control of the number, spacing,
type and design of access points to existing or future streets; minimum
width, depth, and area of lots; light and air; and a proper distribution of
population; and



   (F)   Assessing and protecting the community from the developmental
impact on the city of a proposed development.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.004  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   This chapter is intended to set forth minimum requirements to
provide for coordinated, efficient and economic development of the city, to
ensure the adequacy of street and utility facilities, and to promote the
public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   If any other provision of law relates to any matter covered
herein, the regulation or part thereof providing the highest standard shall
apply.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.005  FINAL PLAT REQUIRED; NON-COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   No lot in a subdivision, as defined herein, may be conveyed
unless a final plat of the property has been approved according to the
requirements and provisions of this chapter, and recorded in the office of
the County Recorder of Deeds.



   (B)   To the extent permitted by all applicable law, no subdivision
of land shall occur within the city or within any unincorporated area within
one and one-half miles of the municipal corporate boundaries without
compliance with the procedures and requirements of this chapter, unless
otherwise regulated by mutual agreement between the city and other applicable
jurisdictions through an appropriate jurisdictional boundary agreement.



   (C)   No transfer of land in violation of this section shall be
valid nor shall the city be required to issue any permits for construction,
occupancy or improvement of such land until the provisions of this chapter
are satisfied.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.006  SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT.



   Land unsuitable for subdivision development due to drainage, flood
hazard area, hillside area, rock formation or any other conditions
constituting a danger to health, life or property shall not be approved for
subdivision development unless the developer presents evidence or data
satisfactory to the city, establishing that the methods proposed to meet any
such conditions are adequate to avoid any danger to health, life or property.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.007  CONFORMITY OF OFFICIAL MAP.



   In the event that an area to be subdivided includes lands proposed to
be used for parks or schools as shown on the Official Map of the city, which
shall be deemed an incorporated part of this chapter, such subdivision shall
be subject to applicable zoning regulations.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.008  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General statement. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the
plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the word
“structure”; the word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is
permissive.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AG DISTRICT. Areas zoned for agricultural use.



      ALLEY. A minor way used primarily for vehicular service access to
the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.



      APPROVED PLAN. A set of representational drawings or other
documents that have been approved by the city as complying with the
provisions of this chapter submitted by an applicant (either as an
independent submittal or as part of another development application(s)
required by the city code) as a prerequisite to obtaining a building or land
disturbance permit and that contain the information and specifications
required by the city to minimize erosion and off-site sedimentation from land
disturbance activities.



      APPLICANT. Any person who makes application for an approved plan
or for a building permit for an activity involving building or development
that results in land disturbance or for a land disturbance permit, as
required by this chapter.



      AREA, GROSS. The entire area within the boundary lines of the
territory proposed for subdivision, including the area to be dedicated for
street and alley rights-of-way and public use.



      AREA, NET. The entire area within the boundary lines of the
territory proposed for subdivision, less the area to be dedicated for street
and alley rights-of-way and public use.



      AS-BUILT PLAN. A record drawing or plan prepared and certified by
a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor that represents the actual
dimensions, contours, elevations and the like of a completed structure,
facility or constructed feature.



      BARRIER (NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL). Any street, highway, river,
pond, canal, railroad, levee, embankment or screening by a fence or hedge.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Physical facilities, schedules
of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained,
will be effective to prevent or reduce the discharge of water or air
pollution associated with land disturbance activities regulated by this
chapter.



      BLOCK. A platted tract of land entirely surrounded by public
highways, streets, streams, waterways, railroad rights-of-way, cemeteries or
parks, or a combination thereof. In places where the platting is incomplete
or disconnected, the Director shall determine the outline of a BLOCK.



      BUILDING. Any structure, whether temporary, semi-permanent or
permanent, designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or
protection of persons or property.



      BUILDING LINE. See SETBACK LINE.



      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure, building or other
improvement.



      CERTIFIED CONTRACTOR. A person who has received training and is
licensed by a federal, state or local environmental agency to inspect and
maintain erosion and sediment control practices.



      CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. Formally attesting that the specific
inspections and tests, where required, have been performed and that such
tests comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.



      CITY. City of O’Fallon, St. Clair County, Illinois.



      CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. City Council of O’Fallon, Illinois.



      CITY ENGINEER. Director of the Public Works Department of the
city or his or her designee(s).



      CLEARING. Any act by which vegetative cover, structures or
surface material are removed, including, but not limited to, surface layer,
root mat or topsoil removal.



      CODE. The City of O’Fallon Code of Ordinances.



      COMMISSION. Planning Commission of the City of O’Fallon,
Illinois.



      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Comprehensive Plan of the city or any
portion thereof adopted by the city for the coordinated physical development,
including, among other things, plans and programs regarding the location,
character and extent of highways, transportation routes, bridges, public
buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial or industrial
land uses, parks, forests, dams, drainage facilities and projects affecting
the conservation of natural resources of the city.



      CUBIC YARDS. The amount of material in excavation and/or fill
measured by the method of “average end areas”.



      CUL-DE-SAC. The terminus of a dead-end street designed in a
circular turnaround.



      DEAD-END STREET. A short, minor local street, having only one end
open for vehicular traffic and the other permanently terminated by a
cul-de-sac.



      DESIGN. The arrangement of uses on the land and use of land for
easements, lots and rights-of-way, including materials, alignment, grade and
width of these elements.



      DESIGN STORM. The combination of rainfall depth, duration and
distribution of a hypothetical rainfall event with a given likelihood of
occurring in any year.



      DEVELOPER. Any subdivider or any person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company, owner, estate or other person, entity or
group, or combination thereof, acting as a unit, undertaking or proposing to
undertake any act within the scope, intent and purpose or other terms of this
chapter.



      DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION. All applications required by the city
code as a prerequisite to initiation of development, including, but not
limited to, a building permit application.



      DIRECTOR. Director, Community Development Department of the city,
or his or her designee(s), including, but not limited to, the city’s Code
Official responsible for application of this chapter and the permitting
authority of the city for this chapter.



      DRAINAGEWAY. Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout
the site.



      ENERGY GRADE LINE. The sum of the elevation of the hydraulic
grade line and velocity head.



      EROSION. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by
the action of the wind, water, ice, gravity or artificial means, and/or land
disturbance activities.



      EROSION CONTROL. A measure that prevents erosion.



      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A set of plans prepared by or
under the direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the
specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion
on a development site during and after construction.



      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL DESIGN CRITERIA. The erosion and
sediment control design criteria adopted in writing by the city.



      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL STANDARDS or STANDARDS. The erosion
and sediment control design criteria and specifications adopted in writing by
the City Engineer.



      EXCAVATION/EXCAVATING. Any act by which organic matter, earth,
sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.



      EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground
surface prior to excavation or filling.



      FEDERAL PROJECT. Any project on federally owned land that
involves land disturbance, or any project that involves land disturbance
activity and is administered by a federal agency. Use of federal funds does
not necessarily qualify an activity as a FEDERAL PROJECT.



      FILL/FILLING. Any act by which, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported or moved by humans to a new location and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.



      FINAL GRADE/FINISHED GRADE. The vertical location of the ground
or pavement surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with
the site development plan.



      FLOOD HAZARD AREA. All land subject to inundation from overflow
from natural waterways during a 100-year storm as calculated by approved
engineering methods, or areas subject to periodic ponding during the 100-year
storm, or areas defined as FLOOD HAZARD AREAS by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).



      FLOODPLAIN. The floodway and floodway fringe as identified by
FEMA Flood Insurance Study for “St. Clair County, Illinois and Incorporated
Areas”, dated 11-5-2003, or such other designation of the floodplain as is
subsequently adopted by the city, and representing the regulated 100-year
water surface and corresponding elevations. The floodway and flood fringe may
be revised based on best available data as approved by the State Department
of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources, as long as the developer
then subsequently applies and receives an approved map revision by FEMA.



      GRADING. Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, moved,
leveled, stockpiled or any combination thereof, and includes the conditions
that result from that act.



      HILLSIDE AREA. An area with an average slope of 20% or more.



      HYDRAULIC GRADE LINE. The height of the free surface of a body of
water above the conduit invert elevation. The elevation of the HYDRAULIC
GRADE LINE is the sum of the pressure head, plus elevation head of the
conduit invert.



      IEPA or ILLINOIS EPA. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



      IMPROVEMENT. Refers to site grading, street work and utilities
(including water, sewer, telecommunications, electric, gas and storm water)
to be installed or agreed to be installed by the developer on land to be used
for public or private streets and easements or other purposes as are
necessary for the general use of lot owners in the subdivision.



      IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The engineering plans showing types of
materials and construction details for the physical structures and facilities
to be installed both in, or in conjunction with, the subdivision.



      INFRASTRUCTURE PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for the
construction or alteration of public improvements to include public
infrastructure, including any associated grading, excavation or filling, and
the construction of monuments, streets, storm sewers and other drainage
appurtenances, storm water detention and drainage, public utilities, sanitary
sewers, street markers, sidewalks and/or other development and subdivision
improvements.



      LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any act by which soil is moved and
land changed that may result in erosion or the movement of sediments, and may
include tilling, clearing, grading, excavating, stripping, stockpiling,
filling and related activities, and the covering of land surfaces with an
impermeable material.



      LICENSED LAND SURVEYOR. An individual who is duly licensed by the
State Department of Professional Regulation, pursuant to the State
Professional Land Surveyor Act of 1989 (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330) to practice
surveying.



      LOT. A parcel of land intended to be separately owned, rented,
developed or otherwise used as a unit.



      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the boundaries of a
lot, exclusive of any land designated for street or alley purposes.



      LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.



      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two
non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.



      MAJOR STORM. The 100-year design storm.



      MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. The use of those best management
practices, which, based on sound engineering and hydro-geological principles,
will, to the greatest degree possible, given all relevant considerations,
including technology, climate and site conditions, minimize erosion and
sedimentation from a site during and after development.



      MINOR STORM. The design storm for the storm drainage facility.



      NATURAL DRAINAGE. Channels formed in the existing surface
topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.



      OPEN RECREATIONAL SPACE. Any land, under single ownership, which
is dedicated to open, outdoor recreational uses such as golf courses or ball
fields, and which is submitted for city development approval as a single plan
and developed pursuant to one grading plan.



      PARCEL. All contiguous land in one ownership.



      PARKING LANE. An auxiliary lane of a street used primarily for
vehicular parking.



      PERENNIAL VEGETATION. Grass or other appropriate natural growing
vegetation that provides substantial land cover, erosion protection and soil
stability and that is capable of sustained and healthy growth over multiple
years under the constraints of shade, temperature and moisture that will be
prevalent on the site. For the purposes of this chapter, annual grasses that
do not regenerate after winter, ornamental plants or shrubs that do not offer
effective erosion and sediment protection, and plants that are not suitable
for the expected growing conditions on the site shall not be considered
PERENNIAL VEGETATION.



      PERIMETER CONTROL. A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving
a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap
or basin.



      PERMIT. A building permit for activities involving building or
development resulting in land disturbance and a land disturbance permit for
activities resulting in land disturbance, that does not involve building or
development.



      PERMIT HOLDER. The owner or contractor who is issued a permit.



      PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.



      PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private,
the state and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States
of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant,
officer or employee of any of the foregoing.



      PHASING. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.



      PLANS. All of the drawings including plats, cross-sections,
profiles, working details and specifications, which the developer prepares or
has prepared to show the character, extent and details of improvements
required in this chapter, and which plans shall conform to any requirements
of the city as to scale and details for submittal to the appropriate
officials of the city for consideration, approval or disapproval.



      PLAT. The maps, drawings, charts and other documents complying
with all applicable provisions of this chapter which constitute the plan for
subdivision and which the developer submits to the city for consideration of
approval and intends in final form to record.



      PLAT, FINAL. A plat drawn in ink upon Mylar and conforming to the
requirements of § 154.023 of this chapter.



      PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A plat drawn upon tracing paper or other
materials from which reproductions can be made and conforming to the
requirements of § 154.021 of this chapter.



      PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer duly licensed by the State
Department of Professional Regulation, pursuant to the Professional
Engineering Practice Act of 1989 (ILCS Ch. 225, Act  325) to practice
engineering.



      REMOVAL. In relation to removal of vegetation, REMOVAL includes
the cutting of vegetation to the ground or to stumps, complete extraction or
killing by spraying.



      RESPONSIBLE PERSONNEL. Any foreperson, superintendent or project
engineer designated in the permit or in an approved plan, as the person in
charge of on-site land disturbance activities or erosion and sediment control
associated with land disturbance activities.



      RE-SUBDIVISION. See SUBDIVISION.



      ROAD, COUNTY. A term denoting a tract of land which is used
primarily for the purpose of vehicular movement and includes all of the
facilities and improvements within the rights-of-way. This tract of land must
have been presented to and accepted by the County Engineer.



      ROADBED. The graded portion of a street upon which the base
course, surface course, shoulders and median are constructed.



      ROADWAY. The entire improved portion of the street, including
shoulders, parking lanes, travel way, curbs and gutter which lies between the
rights-of-way lines.



      SEDIMENT. Soils or other materials transported or deposited by
the action of wind, water, ice, gravity or artificial means.



      SEDIMENT CONTROL. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.



      SETBACK LINE. The line parallel to the front, side or rear lot
line establishing the minimum space to be provided as the front, side or rear
yard.



      SITE. A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination
thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



      SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain and/or vegetation to
accommodate improvements and structures.



      SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for the
construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the
control of erosion, runoff and grading.



      SLOPE. The inclined surface of a fill, excavation or natural
terrain expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance over
a measured inclined surface.



      SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material (i.e.,
earth, sand, gravel, rock or other similar material) on the immediate surface
of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land plants.



      STABILIZATION. The use of practices that prevent exposed soil
from eroding.



      START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first land-disturbing activity
associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing,
grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for
basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and
installation of accessory buildings such as garages.



      STATE PROJECT. Any project on state-owned land that involves land
disturbance activity or any project that involves land disturbance activity
and is administered by a state agency. Use of state funds does not
necessarily qualify an activity as a STATE PROJECT.



      STORM SEWER SYSTEM. Any conveyance or system of conveyances for
storm water, including road with drainage systems, streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains, as well as any
system that meets the definition of a municipal separate storm sewer system
or “MS4”, as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency in 40 C.F.R.
§ 122.26.



      STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface
runoff and drainage.



      STREAM. Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine or
natural or human-made drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or
shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially
or intermittently. For purposes of this chapter, a STREAM does not include
very small headwater swales or ditches which generally would not be mapped on
U.S.G.S. 7.5 minute quadrangle maps.



      STREET. A general term denoting a public or private way for the
purpose of vehicular travel. The term includes all facilities which normally
occur within the rights-of-way; it shall also include such other designation
for a STREET as: a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through way, road, pike,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or as otherwise designated, but
excluding an alley or a way for pedestrian use only.



      STREET, ARTERIAL. A street designed or utilized primarily for
high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route,
with intersections at grade, and which may have direct access to abutting
properties, and on which geometric design and traffic-control measures are
used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic.



      STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which carries or is proposed to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
which may or may not be continuous.



      STREET, LOCAL. A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties, providing for minimum speeds and traffic volume.



      STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS or SERVICE ROAD. A local street parallel
and adjacent to arterial streets, providing access to abutting properties.



      STRIPPING. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface
cover, including tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of top soil.



      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, which requires permanent or
temporary location on the ground or is attached to something having a
permanent or temporary location on the ground.



      SUBDIVIDE. See SUBDIVISION.



      SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing
or proposing to divide land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as
herein defined.



      SUBDIVISION.



         (a)   1.   The division of land into two or more lots
or parcels for the purpose of either immediate or future sale, rental or
building development or use(s) other than agricultural use or production;



            2.   Establishment or dedication of a public
street or alley through a tract of land regardless of size;



            3.   Any development or improvement of one or more
tracts that impacts existing facilities protecting the health and safety of
the city’s residents;



            4.   Any dedication, vacation, annexation, planned
unit development or plat of survey under the Condominium Act; or



            5.   Any planned developments whether residential,
commercial or otherwise in nature, and any other developments whether a
subdivision is required or not under the law, statutes, ordinances or
regulations of the governmental body or agency having jurisdiction or
control, and regardless of whether the same is labeled a subdivision or not,
it being the intent of this definition to apply to all types of development,
both within the city and to areas lying within one and one-half miles of the
corporate limits of the city.



         (b)   The term SUBDIVISION shall also include all
re-subdivisions of land or lots.



         (c)   Excluded from this definition is:



            1.   The division of land into parcels each
containing five acres or more for agricultural purposes;



            2.   The division of land for cemetery usage;



            3.   The division and distribution of land
pursuant to law or court order;



            4.   Subdivisions of land solely for public
dedication to the city where the city waives any requirements herein; or



            5.   Any subdivision prohibited by superseding law
from being subject to these regulations to the extent of such invoked
preemption.



      SUBDIVISION, MINOR. A division of land into two, but not more
than six, lots, all of which front upon an existing street, not involving any
new streets or other rights-of-way, easements and improvements, or other
provisions for public areas and facilities.



      TRAVEL WAY. The portion of a street used for the movement of
vehicles, exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes.



      VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures
which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.



      VEGETATIVE COVER. Any grasses, shrubs, trees and other vegetation
that protects and stabilizes soils.



      WATER BODIES. Surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes and
wetlands, including all areas designated by the federal government as water
of the United States.



      WATERCOURSE or DRAINAGEWAY. Any natural or artificial
watercourse, including, but not limited to, streams, rivers, creeks, ditches,
channels, canals, conduits, culverts, drains, waterways, gullies, ravines or
washes in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently; and including any area adjacent to it that is
subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water, as well as water
bodies delineated by the city.



      WATERWAY. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse
or to the public storm sewer.



      WETLANDS. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. For the purposes of this
chapter, WETLANDS are intended to refer to areas which are subject to
regulations of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under § 404 of the Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1344. Very small areas meeting the wetland
definition (e.g., a roadside ditch) would not be subject to the special
provisions of this chapter that require a site development permit.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 2:
GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 154.020  PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any person desiring to subdivide a tract of land shall file an
application with the Community Development Department that shall include the
following:



      (1)   A written request to the city for preliminary review of
such subdivision and a general description of the location and size of the
tract to be platted; the intent as to character type and use of the property
and structures to be developed; the deed restrictions proposed, if any; a
statement of mineral rights; the extent and character of the improvements to
be made by the subdivider; the zone district classification(s) of the
territory and compliance of the proposed subdivision thereto; clear evidence
of subdivider’s ownership and right to subdivide. If appropriate, a
description of any unique hardship or difficulty limiting the physical
development of the property under consideration and a description of any past
history of the property under consideration which is pertinent thereto;



      (2)   Copies of the preliminary plat in a quantity determined
by the Director and other necessary documentation in accordance with the
requirements of § 154.021 of this chapter; and



      (3)   A filing fee and administrative review fees shall be as
determined by separate ordinance or resolution of City Council.



   (B)   City staff will review the preliminary plat prior to its
submission to the Planning Commission and such application shall be deemed to
grant consent to the city to access the site for purposes of inspection,
testing and enforcement of this code. The Planning Commission shall endeavor
to review the preliminary plat within 30 days from the date of application or
the filing by the subdivider of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later; provided that, such date of application and/or
filing is not less than 20 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Commission, otherwise the Planning Commission shall endeavor to
review the preliminary plat within 60 days from the date of application
and/or filing. However, in all instances, the Planning Commission shall
determine within 90 days from the date of the fully completed application or
the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by written mutual
consent, whether the preliminary plat shall be recommended for approval as
submitted; shall be recommended for approval subject to certain conditions or
modifications; or shall not be recommended for approval.



   (C)   The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted in
writing and if such preliminary plat is not recommended or is conditionally
recommended, the Planning Commission shall furnish written notice of such
action to the applicant setting forth the reasons for disapproval or
conditional approval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which
the preliminary plat fails to conform to the city’s ordinances, including
the Official Map.



   (D)   The City Council shall accept, reject or conditionally approve
the preliminary plat within 30 days after its next regularly scheduled
meeting following the recommendation of the preliminary plat by the Planning
Commission, unless such time is extended by written mutual agreement of the
City Council and the applicant, or such preliminary plat will be deemed as
approved. The City Council shall issue a decision by order or resolution on 
the preliminary plat as submitted. If the preliminary plat is disapproved,
the order or resolution shall state the reasons for disapproval, specifying
with particularity the aspects in which the preliminary plat fails to comply
with the ordinances or Official Map of the city code.



   (E)   A certified copy of the order or resolution of approval or
disapproval by the City Council shall be attached to the preliminary plat and
shall be filed with the City Clerk, one such copy shall be filed with the
Director and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. Approval of the
preliminary plat shall not qualify a plat for recording with the County
Recorder of Deeds.



   (F)   Preliminary plat approval shall confer upon the subdivider the
following rights and privileges.



      (1)   The preliminary plat approval will remain in effect for
a one-year period. The applicant may, during this period, submit all or part
or parts of said preliminary plat for final approval. In the event that the
subdivision is being developed in stages, the applicant may, by written
mutual agreement with the City Council, have final approval of the last part
of the plat extended no more than five years beyond approval of the
preliminary plat. Any part of a subdivision which is being developed in
stages shall contain a tract of land at least one block in length.



      (2)   The general terms and conditions under which the
preliminary plat approval was granted will not be substantially changed,
except as required to accommodate construction of the development as
determined by the construction plans approved by the city for the subdivision
infrastructure.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.021  PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.



   The preliminary plat to be provided by the subdivider, and prior to
review by the Planning Commission, shall meet and include the following
specifications:



   (A)   Proposed name of the subdivision and location;



   (B)   Small key map showing the relation of the proposed subdivision
to section or U.S. survey lines and to platted subdivisions and dedicated
streets within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision;



   (C)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and land planning
consultant, and the licensed engineer or registered land surveyor who
prepared the preliminary plat;



   (D)   Streets and rights-of-way on and adjoining the site of the
proposed subdivision, showing the names and including street roadway and
rights-of-way widths, approximate gradients, types and widths of pavement,
curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, platting strips and other pertinent data,
including classification of all existing or proposed streets as to function
as collector, arterial or local street or county road;



   (E)   All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision;



   (F)   Layout of lots, showing approximate dimensions, numbers, lot
area and zone district classification(s);



   (G)   Parcels of land, if any, proposed to be dedicated or reserved
for schools, parks, playgrounds, rights-of-way or other public, semi-public
or community purposes and use(s) of the area to be subdivided and compliance
of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the city;



   (H)   Easements, existing and proposed, showing locations, widths
and purposes;



   (I)   Building setback line and dimensions;



   (J)   General location and size of existing and proposed public
utilities and drainageways or facilities within or adjoining the proposed
subdivision and the location and size of nearest water trunk mains,
intercepter sewer lines and other pertinent utilities;



   (K)   Location, type and approximate size of utility improvements to
be installed;



   (L)   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings, angles and
references to known land lines;



   (M)   The gross area and net area acreage of the proposed
subdivision, the acreage of streets and of any areas reserved for the common
use of the property owners within the subdivision and/or for public use;



   (N)   Where the topography has a significant bearing upon the street
grades, the plan of public utilities and drainageways or facilities in the
proposed subdivision and when it would be difficult for the Planning
Commission or the City Council to understand the relation of the Plan to the
existing topographic conditions, contour lines at not greater than one-foot
intervals shall be shown on level ground, contour lines at not greater than
two-foot intervals shall be shown on rolling ground, and contour lines not
greater than ten-foot intervals shall be shown on hillside areas;



   (O)   Location of major watercourses, ponding areas, natural
drainageways and flood hazard areas and any riparian corridors, including
those shown on the Comprehensive Plan;



   (P)   The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch
equals 20 feet, 40 feet, 50 feet or 100 feet; however, the resulting drawing
should be either 24 inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. A digital
file shall also be submitted in a format acceptable to the city. Scales or
sheet sizes other than this may be approved only on a case-by-case basis by
the City Engineer. Lettering shall be 0.1 inches or larger for the sake of
legibility when the record documents are archived in microfilm by the city;



   (Q)   North arrow and date. Orient north towards top or right edges
of sheet. Show the date the drawing was initially completed and the dates of
all subsequent revisions to the drawings. All stationing should be from south
to north or from west to east;



   (R)   Whenever a large tract is intended to be developed in stages,
and only a part of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a
preliminary plat for subdivision of the entire tract shall be submitted;



   (S)   Show drainage arrows on all streets to indicate direction of
storm water flow;



   (T)   All proposed drainage easements shall be noted as such.
Drainage easements shall not be used for any other purpose unless so
authorized by the City Engineer; and



   (U)   Additional information that shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat is as follows:



      (1)   U.S.G.S. map with watershed areas shown for the
subdivision and all upstream land;



      (2)   Phase I Drainage Report; and



      (3)   Additional studies as may be required per Ch. 155 of
this code.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.022  FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The final plat shall be filed with the Director prior to
expiration of the preliminary plat. The final plat shall include all plans
and specifications and such other documents as may be necessary concerning
the form of guarantee or performance bond to be used.



   (B)   If there are no changes in the plat from the preliminary
approval stage to the final plat request, the Planning Commission need not
take action on the final plat. The Planning Commission will surrender this
decision to the Director and the City Engineer. The Planning Commission will
review and report on the final plat under the following conditions:



      (1)   There has been a substantial change made from the
preliminary plat to the final plat as notified to the Planning Commission by
the Director;



      (2)   The Mayor, City Council or City Engineer requests that
the Planning Commission review a particular final plat;



      (3)   The developer requests the Planning Commission to review
the final plat. However, the developer must waive normal time restrictions
for final plat approval; and



      (4)   The Planning Commission deems it necessary of its own
accord to review and report on the final plat.



   (C)   The Director will inform the Planning Commission, at its
regularly scheduled meetings, either orally or in writing, of any final plats
that will be reported to the City Council.



   (D)   When there is no change in the plat from the preliminary to
the approval stage, the Director  and City Engineer shall endeavor to review
the final plat and plans and transmit their report of findings and
recommendations to the City Council within 30 days of the filing date of the
final plat. The action of the Director and City Engineer, whether a
recommendation for approval or disapproval of the final plat as well as the
date of said action, shall be noted in writing and attached to the final
plat; if the final plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval should be
so stated. If the Director and City Engineer fail to act within the said
30-day time limit, the plat shall be deemed to have been recommended for
approval by the Director and City Engineer; provided that, the applicant
files a statement after such 30-day period with the city citing this
provision and thereby requesting action by the City Council on the final plat.



   (E)   In any event, the City Council shall take action on the final
plat within 60 days from the date of the subdivider’s filing of the last
required document or other paper or within 60 days from the date of the
subdivider’s filing application for approval of the final plat, whichever
date is later, unless such time is extended by written mutual consent.



   (F)   If the final plat is disapproved by the City Council, the
reasons for such action shall be noted in writing by order or resolution
stating the reasons for disapproval, specifying with particularity the
aspects in which the final plat fails to conform to the city’s ordinances.



   (G)   If the final plat is approved by the City Council, the final
plat shall be held by the City Clerk until such time as the subdivider posts
a performance guarantee or bond as required by §§ 154.024 and 154.025 of
this chapter. Upon receipt of said performance guarantee or bond, or when
otherwise provided in § 154.024 of this chapter, the Mayor shall affix his
or her signature to the final plat and attach thereto a notation that the
final plat has received final approval of the City Council; the City Clerk
shall attest the signature of the Mayor and affix his or her seal and attach
a certified copy of the City Council’s order or resolution of approval to
said approved final plat. If such performance guarantee or bond is not posted
by the subdivider within 60 days from the date of approval of the final plat
by the City Council, approval of such final plat shall expire and become null
and void.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.023  FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.



   The final plat to be provided by the subdivider shall meet the
following specifications:



   (A)   The final plat may include all or only a part of the
preliminary plat which has received approval;



   (B)   The plans of the final plat shall be drawn on polyester base
film (Mylar) with waterproof black ink. The scale shall be one inch equals 20
feet, 40 feet, 50 feet or 100 feet; however, the resulting drawing should be
either 24 inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. Scales or sheet
sizes other than this may be approved only on a case-by-case basis by the
City Engineer. Lettering shall be 0.1 inch or larger for the sake of
legibility when the record documents are archived in microfilm by the city.
Black or blue line prints in a quantity determined by the Director and a
digital file in a format acceptable to the city shall be provided to the city
on or before the time of the final plat application. One polyester base
(Mylar) film positive of the final plat, as approved by the City Council,
shall be provided;



   (C)   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot;



   (D)   Final improvement plans;



   (E)   Soil report. A soils report prepared and sealed by a licensed
engineer should be submitted with the final plat. The report should contain
information such as, but not limited to, engineering criteria for the
placement of structural fill, suitability of on-site soils for use as
structural fill, shrink/swell potential of subgrade soils, location and
general description of existing fill materials, anticipated settlement based
on general soil characteristics, feasibility of shallow foundations with
recommended bearing pressures and foundation depths, and former mining
activity;



   (F)   Phase II drainage report; and



   (G)   All surveys for a final plat shall be made under the active
and personal direction of a registered land surveyor of the state, and the
following basic information shall be shown:



      (1)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or
angles, which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure
of not more than one foot in 5,000 feet. Coordinates shall be established for
all property corners;



      (2)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest
established section corner monument. Reference corners shall be accurately
described on the final plat;



      (3)   All elevations shall be referenced to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, and the said reference and benchmark shall
be clearly stated on any plans or drawings showing such datum;



      (4)   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract, shown by heavy solid lines;



      (5)   Right-of-way line of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way and property lines and areas of lots and other tracts, with
accurate dimensions, bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs and
chords, points of tangency and central angles;



      (6)   Name and right-of-way width for each street or other
right-of-way;



      (7)   Location, dimensions and purposes of any easement, shown
by light dashed lines;



      (8)   Number each lot or site for identification and indicate
the address assigned by the County 911 Coordinator;



      (9)   Lot dimensions and areas of each lot and building
setback lines and dimensions;



      (10)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and
lot markers;



      (11)   Names of owners and mortgages accepting said plat with
owner or owners personally signing all plats;



      (12)   Names of owners of record of adjoining unplatted land;



      (13)   Reference to recorded subdivision plats within 300 feet
of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number;



      (14)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land
and become covenants in the deeds for lots. Restriction lines should be shown
by medium dashed lines;



      (15)   Title or name of subdivision; section, township and
range numbers in which the subdivision is located; and north arrow, scale and
date;



      (16)   Certification by a registered land surveyor and a
registered professional engineer with registration numbers and seal(s)
affixed to all final documents of the final plat. The engineer shall also
certify on the plat: “All required and applicable agencies were properly
notified and approved of the project”, and these agency notifications shall
include: Illinois Historic Preservation Agency (IHPA); Illinois Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR - endangered species); Illinois Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR - stream hydraulics); Natural Resource Conservation Service
(NRCS); U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE - Clean Water Act - stream
hydraulics); Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA - storm water
permit); St. Clair County Department of Roads and Bridges (entrance permit);
Illinois Department of Transportation Division of Highways (IDOT - entrance
permit); U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA - prime farm land).” The
applicable agency sign-offs shall be submitted to the city before the city
will sign the final plat;



      (17)   Certificate of dedication of all public areas;



      (18)   Certificate that all taxes due have been paid;



      (19)   Certificate for approval by the City Council; and



      (20)   Notation on plat of required finished floor elevations
and suitability of each lot for walkout basements.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.024  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE OR BOND.



   (A)   All developers shall post with the City Engineer a performance
guarantee in the form of a good and sufficient cash bond or irrevocable
letter of credit (or other guarantee acceptable to the city) and deposit
agreement in a form prescribed by the city (“performance guarantee”)
after final plat approval but before recording, within the time requirements
set forth in § 154.022 of this chapter, and before construction of the
improvements is started. Such performance guarantee shall be in an amount
equal to 100% of the City Engineer’s approved estimate of cost of properly
and fully completed construction and installation of all improvements
(“estimated costs”) intended to be dedicated to the city, any public
entity, or public or private utility for maintenance and operation and such
other improvements required on the final improvements as designated by the
City Engineer.



   (B)   The performance guarantee amount shall cover expenditures
including, but not limited to, reasonable inspection fees and professional
review fees of the city, installation and maintenance of improvements
(including landscaping and street trees, where applicable), storm water
detention/retention, survey monumentation and soil erosion and sediment
control measures, and such other improvement obligations required herein, for
a two-year period after inspection, approval and acceptance by the city, if
applicable, as specified by the city, as well as engineering and inspection
costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the
site, all to be borne by the applicant, and necessary to conform to the
requirements established and conditioned upon completion of the requirements
set forth in this chapter. As public improvements are completed, a pro rata
amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced upon approval by the City
Engineer. Performance guarantees for development performance and maintenance
may be separate. Where permanent maintenance will be assumed by an agency or
entity other than the developer, the time period of the maintenance
performance guarantee should be limited accordingly. The City Engineer may
draw funds from the guarantee to remedy any failure of the developer to meet
the performance guarantee obligations; provided that, except in emergencies,
prior written notice shall be provided to the developer to reasonably allow
for the developer to remedy the deficiency.



   (C)   In accordance with the above, the developer shall submit a
detailed engineer’s estimate to the City Engineer for review and approval.
The estimate shall include quantities of each individual work items and an
estimated unit price. Performance of work necessary to complete construction
and installation of the required improvements to be dedicated to the city
shall be within two years of the date of approval of the final plat, unless
such time is extended by written mutual consent of the subdivider and the
city. If such improvements are not satisfactorily installed within the time
constraints imposed herein, then such guarantee or bond shall be forfeited by
the subdivider, and the surety shall be used to complete and/or install such
improvements in accordance with the requirements specified herein.



   (D)   In lieu of the performance guarantee required above, the city
may at its discretion permit the developer to install certain improvements by
posting a construction guarantee in an amount of 10% of the estimated costs
(but such guarantee to be not less than $50,000) of these certain
improvements to be completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the city
prior to recording of the final plat; provided that, the developer also posts
the full guarantee required for all improvements not being completed prior to
recording and such guarantee includes an amount for all maintenance and
warranty obligations for all improvements as required by this section. Such
specific improvements proposed for immediate construction with a 10%
construction guarantee shall be noted on the final plat and shall be
completed for inspection not later than 12 months after Council approval of
the final plat. Where the developer requests this alternative, the final plat
shall not be signed by any city representative, nor may it be recorded until
the City Engineer has inspected such completed improvements and approved such
recording in writing to the Mayor. If such improvements are not completed
within the 12-month period required herein, or unless such time is extended
by the Council, the final plat approval shall be void and shall provide no
authorization of any kind. After Council approval, but prior to recording of
the final plat, the city shall have all rights of access, testing and
inspection as it would after the final plat is recorded. Where the
subdivision is completed in multiple plats, any improvements attributable to
or for the benefits of all plats shall be completed or guaranteed as part of
the first final plat.



   (E)   Where a performance guarantee otherwise fully satisfying the
purpose of this section is posted by the developer with the county, the
Council may waive in whole or in part the required placement of a performance
guarantee with the city; provided that, prior to final plat approval the
developer provides to the city a performance guarantee otherwise in
compliance with this chapter in the amount of 10% of the estimated costs, to
guarantee both completion of improvements and the warranty period. Upon
annexation of any subdivision into the city prior to completion and release
of all improvements, the developer shall transfer to the city or replace with
the city the performance guarantee posted with the county, and the Council
may require the developer to post a new performance guarantee to ensure that
any improvements meet the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.025  CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE AND FINAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All improvements in the proposed subdivision or part thereof
intended to be dedicated to the city for maintenance and operation shall be
constructed and/or installed within two years of the date of final plat
approval in accordance with the requirements specified herein, and such
improvements shall not be considered as completed until officially approved
and accepted by the City Engineer conditioned on any modification required by
the City Council as a part of final plat approval. Construction plans and
specifications for such improvements shall be provided by the subdivider on
final improvement plans at the time that the final plat is submitted to the
City Council.



   (B)   Such plans shall include improvements as required by the City
Engineer. The plans and profiles of all streets, storm and sanitary sewers,
water lines and drainage structures together with their drainage area, shall
be prepared on standard plan and profile sheets and shall bear the seal and
signature of the registered professional engineer responsible for their
preparation. A cross-section of the proposed streets shall be included
showing the widths of roadways, location and width of sidewalks and the
location of underground utilities. The plans shall show the lines of all
proposed sidewalks and the location of all proposed street lights.



   (C)   The plans, cross-sections and specifications for the proposed
improvements shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer prior to
submission to the City Council with the final plat. Four black or blue line
prints of the approved documents shall be included with the final plat
submission. After the completion of the construction of the improvements, a
set of reproducible cloth or polyester base film (Mylar) positives and a
digital file in a format acceptable to the city showing the as-built details
and changes, if any, shall be filed with the city.



   (D)   The developer shall provide and honor a two-year full warranty
against defects in materials and workmanship for the completed work. The term
shall commence immediately after the final inspection punch list items have
been addressed by the developer and approved by the City Engineer. The
original performance guarantee will not be released prior to the commencement
of the two-year warranty term. The warranty period shall be secured with a
performance guarantee in the amount of 10% of the estimated costs. If a
separate warranty and maintenance bond is not provided at the time of final
plat approval, the construction bond shall guarantee these obligations and
any pro rata release for each improvement shall withhold the 10% amount
necessary to meet these obligations.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.026  INSPECTIONS AND ACCEPTANCE.



   (A)   All public improvements proposed to be made under the
provision of this chapter will be inspected during the course of construction
by the city’s duly designated representative. The developer shall inform
the City Engineer or his or her duly authorized representative prior to the
construction of, and upon the completion of, each phase of construction of
said public improvement(s). All fees and costs connected with such
inspections and tests, and in reviewing the plans and specifications for such
improvements shall be paid by the developer at a rate to be determined by the
City Engineer and as approved by the City Council. All subdivision
inspections, including plan review and all associated review, performance,
and inspection fees, shall be applicable and enforced within the city and
within one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to retain outside expertise for
performing special inspections. In these instances, the city shall select the
outside inspection consultant and coordinate their work. The cost for such
special inspections shall be borne by the applicant. No land, property
interest or improvement dedicated to the city on a recorded final plat shall
be deemed accepted by the city for purposes of public maintenance or
liability until acceptance for such purposes shall have been specifically
approved by subsequent formal written order signed and dated by the City
Engineer and Mayor.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.027  QUALITY ASSURANCE.



   City inspections will be made periodically to ensure that the
subdivision is being constructed substantially in accordance with the
approved plans on file and the city’s Development Manual. The developer is
responsible for quality assurance checks on the work, to include both on-site
inspection and appropriate testing. City inspections are not to be construed
as relieving the developer of any part of his or her responsibility for
quality assurance of the work.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 3:
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS




§ 154.040  MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS.



   All developments and subdivisions subject to this chapter shall conform
to the minimum development standards adopted by the city and contained in
this chapter and Ch. 155 of this code. Failure to conform a development
subject to this chapter to the terms of the Development Manual shall be
unlawful and a violation of this chapter punishable as set forth herein. The
city’s Development Manual, as amended, is hereby incorporated and attached
hereto as part of this chapter and that part shall be hereinafter referred to
as the city’s Development Manual. At least three copies of the city’s
Development Manual shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
Additional copies shall be on file with the city’s Public Works Department.
The improvement specifications in the Manual may be amended from time to time
by submission of modification to and approval by ordinance of the Council
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 154.095 through 154.097 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.041  SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS AND INFRASTRUCTURE PERMIT
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Generally. All subdivision applications and plats shall be
reviewed pursuant to and subject to the minimum subdivision improvement
standards set forth in the Development Manual, including, but not limited to,
such requirements for monuments, streets, storm sewers and other drainage
appurtenances, storm water detention and drainage planning, public utilities,
sanitary sewers, street markers, sidewalks and other subdivision improvements
(“infrastructure”).



   (B)   Infrastructure permit required. Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, no person shall commence installation or construction of any
public infrastructure, including any associated grading, excavation or
filling, and the construction of monuments, streets, storm sewers and other
drainage appurtenances, storm water detention and drainage, public utilities,
sanitary sewers, street markers, sidewalks and/or other development and
subdivision improvements without having first obtained an infrastructure
permit from the City Engineer.



   (C)   Exceptions. A separate infrastructure permit shall not be
required for any of the following:



      (1)   Agricultural use of land in an AG District, including
the implementation of conservation measures included in a farm conservation
plan approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District, and including the
construction of agricultural structures; and



      (2)   Development of a single lot requiring no public
infrastructure.



   (D)   Requirements.



      (1)   In addition to the requirements for any infrastructure
installation set forth in the Development Manual, the infrastructure shall
meet any and all additional requirements of applicable local, state and
federal law.



      (2)   The substantive and procedural requirements for any
infrastructure installation subject to a required permit shall be as set
forth in the Development Manual, and as otherwise required by applicable
local, state and federal law.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.042  SOIL EXCAVATION AND EROSION CONTROL.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
no person shall commence or perform any clearing, grading, stripping,
excavating or filling of any land subject to this chapter (“land
disturbance”) without having first obtained a site development permit from
the Director, Community Development Department, of the city if the land
disturbance meets the following characteristics:



      (1)   Any land disturbance activity that will affect an area
in excess of 2,000 square feet;



      (2)   Any land disturbance activity that will affect an area
in excess of 500 square feet if the activity is within 25 feet of a lake,
pond, stream or wetland; and/or



      (3)   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof that will
exceed 100 cubic yards.



   (B)   Exceptions. A separate site development permit shall not be
required for any of the following; provided that, the person responsible for
any such development shall implement necessary soil erosion and sediment
control measures to satisfy the purposes of this chapter and Development
Manual:



      (1)   If a building permit has been issued and:



         (a)   A grading plan has been approved for the site; or



         (b)   The grading is limited to the area necessary for
footing and foundation.



      (2)   Agricultural use of land in an AG District, including
the implementation of conservation measures included in a farm conservation
plan approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District, and including the
construction of agricultural structures;



      (3)   Installation, renovation or replacement of a septic
system to serve an existing dwelling or structure;



      (4)   Landscaping or home gardening for existing residences;



      (5)   Grading and trenching for utility installation within
the rights-of-way or easements; and



      (6)   Asphalt plants, gravel yards, landscaping supply yards
and other similar bulk material handling facilities; however, these types of
facilities shall install and maintain basic erosion and sedimentation control
measures as part of their business operation.



   (C)   Requirements. The substantive and procedural requirements for
any land disturbance subject to a required permit shall be as set forth in
the Development Manual, and as otherwise required by applicable local, state
and federal law.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 4:
PARK LANDS DEDICATION




§ 154.055  INTENT; SCOPE.



   (A)   The intent of this legislation is to maintain the existing
high quality of life for present and future residents by preserving open
space for public parks without raising taxes and by placing the
responsibility for these services on the subdivision developments that create
the need for recreational and other open space and that cause the impact on
existing resources. This legislation is intended to provide the city with a
financing mechanism for developing and maintaining a safe and clean park
system, which meets the recreational and leisure needs of the residents of
the city. The requirements herein are supported by a legislative
determination of impact and need, including as reflected in the city’s
parks plan, market value study and park dedication study, undertaken to
ensure that the requirements imposed are not more than those necessary to
address impacts specifically attributable to the applicable subdivision.



   (B)   As a condition of approval of any subdivision, as defined
herein, authorizing new residential lots or units, to the extent the
requirements of this subchapter have not already been satisfied, within the
corporate limits of the city, or within the planning jurisdiction of the city
(being one and one-half miles outside the corporate limits), the subdivider
shall dedicate real property on-site, or equivalent real property off-site
acceptable to the city, or make a cash payment in lieu of land dedication, or
a combination of both, at the option of the city, for parks and open space to
serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development or
redevelopment. Such dedication or payment shall be (“land/cash
contribution”) in a total amount sufficient to satisfy the criteria and
formula contained within this subchapter.



   (C)   (1)   Unless otherwise agreed in writing between the
developer and city, any land to be dedicated for park or recreational
purposes shall be platted, dedicated and improved as part of the first phase
of any subdivision. Dedication deeds and plats shall be in such form as
required by the City Attorney and required by the city for acceptance.



      (2)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to require the city to
accept any dedication of land until express action by the city accepting such
dedication for maintenance purposes.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.056  COMPLIANCE.



   No subdivision approval for activity subject to this subchapter shall
be granted without compliance to this subchapter, except where it may
otherwise be required by law; provided, however, this subchapter shall not
apply to any subdivision that has already received preliminary plat approval
by the city as of 11-1-2004 and for which the final plat is thereafter
consistent with the approved preliminary plat.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.057  CRITERIA FOR REQUIRED PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The land dedication required herein shall be six acres
per 1,000 new residents,  derived from the following calculation:



 

Types of Park/Recreation Area
 

Minimum Size of Park (Range)

 

Minimum Acres Per 1000 People

 

Service Area Radius

 

Maximum Street/Trail Distance from Any Proposed Dwelling



Mini-Park
 

1 acre

 

0.5

 

0.25 mile radius

 

1,000 feet



Neighborhood Park
 

3.0 - 10.0 acres

 

1.5

 

0.5 mile radius

 

2,500 feet



Community-Wide Recreation Park
 

30 - 50 acres

 

4.0

 

3.0 mile radius

 

Within jurisdictional area



TOTAL:  6 acres of land per 1,000 people



 



      (2)   Dedicated land shall not be limited to the specific
formulas described above, but the dedications shall comply with the
additional size, location, design and other requirements in this subchapter.



   (B)   Density formula. The following table of population density is
generally indicative of current and short-range projected trends in family
size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of
required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof attributable to each development:



 


Density Formula for Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit




Type of Unit

 

Total Persons Per Unit



Detached single-family
 

2.83



Attached sf/duplexes
 

1.97



Apartments/condominiums*
 

1.66



Mobile homes
 

2.43




 

NOTES TO TABLE:

*Calculations are based on information provided for O’Fallon City, IL by
the U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 (www.census.gov). Data was taken from
table H33. TOTAL POPULATION IN OCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS BY TENURE BY UNITS IN
STRUCTURE and divided by H32. TENURE BY UNITS IN STRUCTURE. Ex. Detached
single-family data give 16,514 residents (H33) living in 4,962 detached units
(H32). 16,514 people/4,692 units = 2.83.



 



   (C)   Certain area required. No park dedication shall be less than
three contiguous acres unless otherwise approved by Council.



   (D)   General requirements for land contributions. Unless otherwise
waived, real property to be dedicated to the city shall conform to the
following criteria. The city reserves the right to reject at will any parcel
offered for dedication.



      (1)   Location. The location of any dedicated land shall only
be as approved by the city, consistent with the following guidelines:



         (a)   Locations shall generally conform with the
city’s Park Master Plan, the general location of park sites;



         (b)   Neighborhood park sites should be accessible to
the public and designed to serve a population within one-half to one mile
radius from the site;



         (c)   Park sites should be located in conjunction with
and adjacent to school sites whenever possible and desirable; and



         (d)   Community parks are intended to serve a broader
area and should be located and designed to offer a greater variety of
facilities and activities. These parks should typically be located on
arterial or collector streets.



      (2)   Topography and soils. Park sites must possess suitable
topography and soil types for the use to which they are dedicated. The
developer shall supply the city with soils information in sufficient detail
to determine suitability for dedication. The developer shall also provide the
city with a Phase I environmental study and any hazardous materials found on
the site shall be removed by the developer prior to conveyance.



      (3)   Storm water and surface water detention or retention
areas. Storm water and surface water detention and retention areas will be
accepted at the discretion of the city and not count towards the total land
dedication.



      (4)   Wetlands and other natural areas. Wetland and other
natural areas will be considered acceptable only when they are considered
significant in size, quality and uniqueness, contain endangered plants or
animal species, or are adjacent to existing natural areas currently owned by
the city. Wetland areas will be accepted at the discretion of the City
Council. Any such wetland area accepted by the city shall not count towards
the total land dedication required herein; provided that, exceptional wetland
designs or accompanying amenities may be given partial or full credit toward
the greenspace requirements at the discretion of the Council.



      (5)   Private open space and recreation land. Credit may be
granted at the discretion of the Council towards the total land/cash
contribution for suitable private open space or recreation land and/or
recreational improvements thereon or on public space provided within the
subdivision; provided that:



         (a)   Such total credit shall not exceed 50% of the
land/cash contribution obligation;



         (b)   Any credit for improvements shall not exceed 10%
of the land/cash contribution; and



         (c)   All credited private lands and improvements shall
otherwise comply with the requirements of this subchapter.



      (6)   Dimensions. Sites should be generally square to
rectangular in shape with dimensions generally proportionate to the ratio of
a depth of between one to one and three to two (1:1 and 3:2). These criteria
shall not apply to sites contemplated for extraordinary types of facilities
such as, but not limited to, trails and shore line frontages.



      (7)   Street frontage. Park space shall have a minimum street
frontage of 50 feet, and should generally be centrally located within a
development.



      (8)   Access. Access to park sites and connections to other
park sites are to be provided by way of open access ways between homes and/or
from public right-of-way. The access ways should be a minimum of 50 feet.



      (9)   Drainage. Except for storm water and surface water
drainage facilities servicing the park facilities constructed on the site,
detention or retention basins for storm water drainage from the surrounding
development will not be located on or adjacent to park sites unless approved
by the city.



      (10)   Networks. Open space shall be laid out in general
accordance with the open space, greenway and riparian networks as depicted in
the Comprehensive Plan.



      (11)   Certain open space. Long, narrow strips of open space
are discouraged, except where designated to protect linear sources such as
streets or trails or to provide connections between larger open space areas.



   (E)   Improvements required for land dedication. Park sites to be
dedicated by developer shall include the following land improvements.



      (1)   Utilities. Each dedicated park site shall be provided
with the following utilities to the property line:



         (a)   Sanitary sewer adjacent to the site shall be a
minimum of eight inches in diameter. If the sanitary sewer is across the
right-of way from the park site, the developer shall provide a capped
six-inch minimum diameter service line to the property line, accessible by a
manhole where necessary, and as approved by the city.



         (b)   Water line adjacent to the site shall be a minimum
of six inches in diameter. If the water line is across the right-of-way from
the park site, the developer shall provide a capped one-inch minimum diameter
water line to the property line, as approved by the city, and unless
otherwise requested for a special facility.



         (c)   Storm sewers shall be provided at appropriate
locations to properly drain the park site, as approved by the city.



         (d)   Other utilities, such as electric, gas and
telephone shall be provided adjacent to or at the property line of the park
site. The utility extension for any development adjacent to the park site
shall be at the cost of the developer and the city shall be responsible
solely for utility extensions necessary to construct a park facility. The
city shall not be responsible for utility extensions for any other purpose.



      (2)   Grading. Except for natural areas designated by the city
for retention in a non-disturbed state, each dedicated park site shall be
graded to drain at a minimum of 2% for open areas and slopes on berms, when
berms are required, shall not exceed 4:1 (3:1 or steeper shall be deemed
unacceptable). Grading shall include, but not limited to: berms for
separation, screening or aesthetics; placement of six inches of topsoil and
fine grading. Grading and berming shall be in accordance with plans approved
by the city.



      (3)   Other site developments. The developer shall be required
to provide other site developments for the land to be dedicated for park
purposes, which site developments shall include, but not limited to, the
following.



         (a)   Seed entire park site with a blend approved by the
city. Seeding shall include placement, watering as necessary and mowing until
such time as a full stand of turf is established and accepted by the city,
but not less than one full growing season.



         (b)   The developer may, at the discretion of the
Council, make the following cash contribution in lieu of the required
improvements to park land: the sum of $51,000 per acre or proportional amount
thereof for fractional portions of an acre; or such other amount as
established by the Council pursuant to § 154.079 of this chapter.



         (c)   The developer shall install all public walks,
curbs, pavement, sewers and utilities along all park site frontages as per
city subdivision regulations.



         (d)   The developer shall install curb cuts and aprons,
if necessary, for maintenance access areas, when parking is not required, as
per city specifications.



         (e)   At such time as the developer applies for
development permits, a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of
100% of the value of all park improvements shall be delivered to the city and
inure to the benefit of the city.



         (f)   Unless otherwise agreed, the above-listed park
improvements shall be completed at such time as the residential development
reaches 50% completion or at such time as 50% of the residential building
permits for the development have been issued, whichever occurs earlier.



         (g)   The storage of overburden on a park site and the
use of the park site as a borrow pit is prohibited, though temporary storage
shall be granted in some cases. Terms of such temporary storage shall be
determined by the city. No foreign material shall be added to the park site,
except as approved by the city.



         (h)   The developer will supply the city with a complete
survey of the site and as-built drawings, showing engineering and utilities.
The developer shall mark the corners of the property with permanent monuments.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.058  RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LANDS.



   Whenever the city’s Comprehensive Plan or the standards established
by the city indicates that a larger site than that required of the developer
is to be dedicated by this subchapter, and said site is wholly within the
proposed subdivision, the city may request a reservation of additional
property adjoining the dedication site for subsequent purchase for park
purposes. Such request shall include the designation of specific property to
be reserved on the final plat and labeled a letter of intent stating the
city’s intent to purchase the property at the fair market value at the time
of final subdivision approval. The failure of the city to initiate
acquisition proceedings within 60 days of notice by the city shall cause the
termination of the “reserved” designation and will release said property
for further development within the subdivision regulations of the city.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.059  CRITERIA FOR A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK SITES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Where the development is small and the resulting park
site is too small to be practical or is undesirable to the developer, or when
no available land is appropriate for a park site as determined by the city,
the city may require the subdivider or the developer to pay a cash
contribution partly or wholly in lieu of the land dedication. A cash
contribution in lieu of park site dedications shall be based on the fair
market value of the acres of land on site improved as specified herein that
otherwise would have been dedicated as a park site. Such improvements shall
include consideration of grading, streets, water and sewer systems, curbs and
gutters, sidewalks, electrical service, street trees and streetlights.



      (2)   It has been determined based on the market value study
placed on file with the City Clerk that the present fair market value of such
improved land suitable for park space in and around the city within the
planning jurisdiction of the city, including the one and one-half mile
extraterritorial planning jurisdiction outside the city’s boundaries at the
time of dedication, is $51,000 per acre and such figure shall be used in
making any calculations relating to this policy until evidence dictates
raising or lowering this amount based on a revision to the market study
approved by the Council; provided that, verified submission of a completed
sale contract value (plus improvement costs as determined by the city) of the
development site within the prior 24 months shall be accepted as an
alternative value. In the event that a subdivider or developer files a
written objection with the City Clerk objecting to said fair market value
figure, and in the event that negotiations fail to achieve an acceptable
alternative, the said fair market value of the development site dedication
shall be determined by three qualified appraisers, one of whom shall be
appointed by the City Council, or by its duly appointed committee or
commission, one of whom shall be appointed by the subdivider or developer,
and one of whom shall be mutually agreed upon by the said two appraisers so
chosen. The fees and costs of such appraisal shall be borne equally by the
city and the subdivider or developer.



   (B)   Dedications required. The dedications of land required by this
section shall be made prior to the final platting of 50% of the lots approved
in the preliminary plat, and cash contributions required by this section
shall be made on a pro rata basis at the time of application for building
permit for each lot in the development; provided that, if land dedication or
fee in lieu obligations are not satisfied in full on or before the date of
the approval of the first final plat, then such obligation shall be included
in and secured by the improvement guarantee held by the city. Further, the
dedications or contributions required under this section shall be applicable
and due when a division of property or development or redevelopment of
property occurs which creates lots or dwelling units in addition to the
number of lots or dwelling units existing as of the effective date of this
chapter and in such cases shall be paid upon application for building permit
for each additional dwelling unit. In the case of land dedication, the
developer shall agree to maintain the property in accordance with all the
laws of the city until such time as the land is formally accepted by the
city. Improvements to any dedicated land shall be secured by a bond or letter
of credit in an amount and form acceptable to the city at the time of final
plat.



   (C)   Review of present market value and density formula. The
present fair market value and density formula affecting this section shall be
reviewed by the City Council as needed to ensure the requirements continue to
reflect the requirements and policies of this subchapter. After said review,
any appropriate changes may be made to the formula by the City Council.



   (D)   Exception. This section is not intended to apply to lands of
subdividers or developers who have entered into an agreement with the city
for annexation of those lands, or for the use of those lands in a planned
development, where such agreement would be violated by imposition of this
section to such lands; provided that, this section shall be fully enforceable
against those lands where the annexation agreement or the planned unit
development agreement may have expired and become void because the lands
affected were not developed within the time provided for in said agreements.



   (E)   Title insurance, survey, assessment plats. Each deed or other
instrument conveying land to the city shall be accompanied by:



      (1)   A commitment for a standard Form B ALTA owner’s policy
of title insurance issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in the
state to ensure the intended grantee’s title to such real estate in an
amount equal to its value computed pursuant to this subchapter, subject only
to the general real estate taxes which are not due and payable at the time of
delivery of the deed, covenants, conditions and restrictions of record which
do not prohibit or materially interfere with the use of the subject real
estate for park and recreational use;



      (2)   A current land survey of the subject real estate with
all corners staked, prepared by a state registered land surveyor and
certified to the intended grantee as meeting or exceeding the minimum
requirements of both an American Land Title Association (ALTA) survey and the
state’s land survey standards; and



      (3)   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed
has assigned to it a permanent index number or numbers which do not cover any
other real estate, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form
acceptable to the appropriate county authorities so that the land to be
conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for
exemption purposes.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.060  LIMITATIONS; APPEALS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted, applied or enforced to
impose a taking of land without compensation or to cause any other violation
of law. In any circumstance where the dedication is either not consented to,
or constitutes and unreasonable burden, is not specifically attributable to
the park dedication or green space needs generated by the development, or is
otherwise claimed to be unlawful, the applicant shall file an appeal within
15 days of adoption of any such requirement before the city where the facts
of such claims shall be presented under such formal hearing process as is
otherwise provided for variance appeals. The applicant shall state the
specific basis and facts supporting the claim including such additional
relevant information as may be requested by the Hearing Officer. No decision
of the city shall be deemed ripe or final until 30 days after the decision by
the Hearing Officer on such claim, which shall be limited to a declaration as
to whether the requirement is lawful under the facts presented and a
recommendation as to final action. During the 30-day period, the City Council
shall have jurisdiction to repeal, modify or maintain the requirement by
enactment of an ordinance amending the specific ordinance imposing the
requirement to the applicant’s property, if so applicable.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 5:
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 154.075  WAIVER AND EXCEPTIONS.



   The City Council may grant an exception or deviation from any provision
herein and included in the Development Manual, except for lot area and
dimensions as set forth in the Development Manual. When a developer can show
that a provision of this chapter would cause unnecessary hardship, if
strictly adhered to, and when, in the opinion of the Commission or Council,
because of conditions peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without
destroying the general intent and spirit of this chapter, the Commission may
recommend and the Council may approve a waiver or modification. The developer
shall apply in writing for such waiver or modification. Final approval of the
waiver or modification shall only be as expressly set forth by the Council by
ordinance, usually as part of the ordinance approving the final plat of the
subdivision.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.076  APPEALS.



   (A)   Except as where otherwise provided, any  person aggrieved by
any decision so as to have standing in a court of law may appeal the decision
of the Director or other official relating to an application filed or permit
issued pursuant to or provided for in this chapter, to a Hearing Officer
appointed by the Mayor (“Hearing Officer”).



   (B)   The following procedures shall be applicable to all such
appeals.



      (1)   Verified application. The applicant shall submit a
written request with the City Clerk for review on a form approved by and
acceptable to the Hearing Officer no later than ten days following the
decision being appealed.



      (2)   Notice. Upon receipt of a complete appeal request and
fee for a hearing, the Hearing Officer shall give notice to the applicant,
include in its agenda and hold a hearing (or designate another body to do
so), after giving five days’ notice thereof. The Hearing Officer shall
render a decision within 30 days after the hearing.



      (3)   Hearing procedures; fees. The claims shall be presented
under such formal hearing process as is otherwise provided for variance
appeals as determined by the Hearing Officer and the city may set reasonable
fees for processing appeals and conducting hearings.



      (4)   Court filing. To the full extent permitted by applicable
law, no action may be filed in any court prior to compliance with the
requirements of this section and full exhaustion of the appeal remedy
provided herein.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.077  MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Minor subdivisions may be exempted from the procedures and
requirements for preliminary plats and the subdivider may proceed to filing
of the final plat for review. Final plat procedures and requirements shall be
as specified in §§ 154.022 and 154.023 of this chapter.



   (B)   Minor subdivisions consisting of two up to and including six
lots shall be submitted for review by an administrative team to be appointed
by the Mayor that shall include the Community Development Director and City
Engineer, and may include a member of the Planning Commission.



   (C)   Upon the recommendation of the review team, the minor
subdivision shall be voted on by resolution of the City Council. The plat and
resolution shall be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds. All other
provisions of this chapter shall apply.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.078  RECORDING.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall not accept a final plat for filing with
the County Recorder of Deeds unless the following conditions are met.



      (1)   The final plat conforms to all requirements specified by
the City Council as conditions of approval.



      (2)   The final plat meets the design standards and
engineering specifications set forth herein.



      (3)   The final plat meets all requirements of the laws of the
state.



      (4)   The subdivider or applicant posts a performance
guarantee with the city, in an amount approved by the City Engineer, to cover
the cost of all improvements intended to be dedicated to the city.



   (B)   No subdivision plat or re-plat shall be filed for record or
recorded in the county’s Office of the Recorder of Deeds unless and until
the approval of the City Council is endorsed thereon by the City Clerk. No
lot shall be sold for such subdivision plat or re-plat until it has been
approved by the City Council and filed for record in the county’s Office of
the Recorder of Deeds, as herein provided.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall file the approved final plat and order or
resolution with the County Recorder of Deeds, not more than 30 days from the
date of posting of, and not prior to the posting of, the performance
guarantee or bond as required by §§ 154.024 and 154.025 of this chapter;
two copies of such final plat and order or resolution shall be kept on file
by the City Clerk; one such copy filed with the Director; and one copy shall
be returned to the subdivider.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the County Recorder to accept for
recording any plat of a subdivision within the incorporated area of the city
or unincorporated lands lying within the area of jurisdiction of the city
until the plat has been approved as required herein and such approval has
been endorsed in writing on the plat.



   (E)   The City Council shall not permit any public improvements
under its jurisdiction to be constructed or maintained within an area that
has been subdivided after the adoption of this chapter unless such
subdivision has been approved in accordance with the requirements contained
herein.



   (F)   No building permit shall be issued by any governing official,
city or county, for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement to the land or any lot within the subdivision, as defined herein,
until all requirements herein have been fully complied with and all required
improvements have either been guaranteed or completed as provided herein;
but, provided that, no such permits shall be issued prior to final completion
and approval of all streets, all water, sewer and storm water infrastructure,
and general site grading.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.079  ENFORCEMENT: STOP-WORK ORDER, REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   In the event any person holding a site development permit or
infrastructure permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the
permit, or carries on site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood of the development site or so as to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood, the Director may suspend or revoke the site development
permit and the City Engineer may suspend or revoke the infrastructure permit.



   (B)   (1)   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written
stop-work order issued by the Director and delivered to the permittee or his
or her agent or the person performing the work.



      (2)   The stop-work order shall be effective immediately,
shall state the violations cited in terms that will reasonably apprise the
recipient of the violations and shall state the conditions under which work
may be resumed.



   (C)   This section shall not preempt and shall be in addition to any
other remedies or enforcement actions available to the city.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.080  VALIDITY.



   If any section, division, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or void, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. To that end, the
provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and
the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity
of the remainder. No obligation placed on the city by the provisions of this
chapter that is above and beyond the express requirements of state law shall
be considered mandatory, but shall be deemed directory or permissive in
nature in that those provisions merely direct a manner of conduct for the
guidance of the officials and/or a general time period for their performance
of their official duty; nor shall any failure of the city to comply with any
requirement of the city herein invalidate an action taken by the city unless
the action is expressly invalidated by the requirements of state law.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.081  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   All regulations in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed; the
terms and conditions under which preliminary plats approved prior to the
adoption of this chapter shall be binding and in effect; except that, the
rights and privileges conferred upon the developer in § 154.020 of this
chapter shall be applicable. This chapter shall not be construed to be in
conflict with any state or federal law intended to control erosion and
sedimentation. In those instances where state or federal law imposes a duty
or requirement with respect to a matter covered by this chapter, the more
environmentally stringent duty or requirement shall control.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.082  FEES.



   The City Council may adopt, by separate resolution, appropriate fees
for administration of applications for preliminary plats, final plats, site
development and infrastructure permits, and other permits provided subject to
this chapter, as well as subdivision inspection fees, utility service and tap
fees, and any additional costs, studies and fees as may be required
consistent with this chapter and the Development Manual. Such fees may be
established in such amount so as may fully reimburse the city’s costs in
administering this chapter, each application and any enforcement thereof.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.083  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect 15 days after its
passage and publication as provided by law.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 6:
AMENDMENTS




§ 154.095  GENERAL.



   The City Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or repeal
the regulations and provisions of this chapter including the Development
Manual set out in Ch. 155 of this code.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.096  PLANNING COMMISSION ADVISORY REPORT.



   Any such proposed amendment or change may be referred to the Planning
Commission for an advisory report thereon.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.097  AMENDMENTS OF REGULATIONS AND DISTRICTS; PUBLIC NOTICE.



   The regulations imposed under this chapter may be amended from time to
time by additional ordinances made by the City Council. If the proposed
regulation has been referred to the Planning Commission for an advisory
report, the Commission may hold a public hearing to afford all persons
interested an opportunity to be heard; the testimony presented by all persons
interested shall be presented under their oath. Notice of any public hearing
shall be given not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days, before the
hearing by publication of a notice thereof at least once in a newspaper
published in the city.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who constructs
any public improvement or portion thereof or constructs, enlarges, alters,
repairs or maintains any grading, excavation or fill, or causes the same to
be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms and provisions of this
chapter shall be, upon conviction, fined as determined by separate ordering
of City Council for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during, on, or which a violation occurs or continues.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall sell or offer for
sale, lease or offer for lease, while this chapter is in effect, any lot or
lots or block or blocks, within the area of jurisdiction of the city or any
addition thereto, or any re-subdivision of any lot or block therein, before
all of the requirements of this chapter have been complied with shall be
fined as determined by separate ordering of City Council for each lot, block
or part thereof so disposed of, offered for sale or lease.



   (B)   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. In
addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, firm,
partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to restore the site to the condition existing
prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of such
restoration.



   (C)   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation or otherwise,
failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter without the expressed
consent of the City Council, shall be subject to the penalty provision herein
or elsewhere provided even though the final plat plans have been approved by
the City Council or other expressly authorized official acting within that
official’s expressed authority.



   (D)   Notwithstanding anything herein, the city shall also have the
right to pursue other remedies available under the law, including seeking
injunctive relief, and all expenses of the city in seeking such relief,
including, but not limited to, actual attorneys’ fees and court costs,
shall be the responsibility of the person(s) alleged to have violated this
chapter.



   (E)   Performance guarantee funds can be used for costs of
enforcement of this chapter including actual attorneys’ fees.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



CHAPTER 155:  DEVELOPMENT MANUAL



Section




Article 1:
General Provisions




   155.001   Introduction




Article 2:
Minimum Standards of Design




   155.015   General statement



   155.016   Utility easements



   155.017   Blocks



   155.018   Lots




Article 3:
Minimum Standards of Improvements




   155.030   General statement



   155.031   Reference monuments



   155.032   Street access, standards and improvements



   155.033   Sanitary sewers



   155.034   Water



   155.035   Street markers and traffic signs



   155.036   Telephone and electric utilities



   155.037   Street lights



   155.038   Sidewalks and bikeways



   155.039   Drainage, storm sewers and other drainage appurtenances



   155.040   Hydraulics



   155.041   Storm water detention regulations



   155.042   Drainage planning submittal requirements




Article 4:
Soil Excavation and Erosion Control




   155.055   Findings



   155.056   Purpose



   155.057   General principles



   155.058   Site development permit



   155.059   Design and operation standards and requirements




Article 5:
Subdivision Street Tree Planting Requirements




   155.070   General standards



   155.071   Tree planting standards



   155.072   Location



   155.073   Species diversity



   155.074   Procedure and installation



   155.075   Pastoral subdivisions



   155.076   Landscape berms



   Appendix A:   Approved Street Tree List



   Appendix B:   Storm Inlet and Street Cross-Sections



Cross-reference:



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 154




ARTICLE 1:
GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 155.001  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   The following are the minimum development standards of the
city and shall apply to all developments subject to the city’s Subdivision
and Development Control Ordinance. Unless lawfully waived or varied in
writing, failure to conform any development or subdivision subject to the
Subdivision and Development Control Ordinance (“Ordinance”) to the terms
of this Development Manual (“Manual”) shall be unlawful and a violation
of this chapter punishable as set forth therein. This chapter establishes
minimum requirements to provide for the coordinated, efficient and economic
development of the city, to ensure the adequacy of street and utility
facilities, and to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to
implement the city’s Comprehensive Plan. If any other provision of law
relates to any matter covered herein, the regulation providing the higher,
stricter, standard shall apply.



   (B)   Terms used herein shall have the meaning set out in the
Definitions section of the city’s Zoning Code and/or Development Code or,
if not defined therein, shall have the customary and ordinary meaning in the
context.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 2:
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN




§ 155.015  GENERAL STATEMENT.



   The subdivider shall conform to the following principles and standards
of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof. No
preliminary plat shall be approved unless it conforms to the following
minimum standards of design. IDOT (Illinois Department of Transportation)
standards and polices shall be followed for all street design and
construction, except as modified by this chapter.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.016  UTILITY EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Easements of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided
on each side of all rear lot lines, and alongside lot lines where necessary
for storm and sanitary sewers, water and drainage swales. Separate rear and
side lot easements are required for other public utilities. Easements of
greater width may be required for adequate access along or across lots when
necessary for the extension of main sewers where both water and sewer lines
are located in the same easement, at the discretion of the City Engineer.
Easements of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided in front of all
lots for sanitary sewer, water and other utilities.



   (B)   Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall be
established along any natural drainage channel and in such other locations as
may be necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from
streets, alleys and all other portions of the subdivision. The location and
minimum widths of such easements shall be determined by the City Engineer.



   (C)   No private tree, shrub, fence, building, other structure or
sprinkler system shall be placed or erected in any easement for utility,
access or drainage purposes, except at the owner’s risk as to all costs for
demolition, removal and reconstruction. The proper authorities may have free
access to and use of the easements at any time. No fence or structure shall
impede the free flow of surface water across any lot with an easement.



   (D)   No brick mailboxes, decorative walls, sprinkler systems,
private landscaping or other permanent structure protruding above the natural
ground level shall be located within any easement or public rights-of-way
unless authorized by the City Engineer, and only at the owner’s risk as to
all costs for demolition, removal and reconstruction.



   (E)   All easements shall be aligned such that existing, and any
future, utilities or drainage facilities can be extended beyond the
boundaries of the subdivision.



   (F)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural watercourse,
drainageway, wetland, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement, conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse. It shall
include an additional width, adjoining both edges of the established area
that encompasses the 100-year floodplain. Required width shall be approved by
the City Engineer.



   (G)   All utility distribution lines for telephone and electric
service shall be installed underground within general utility easements and
dedicated public rights-of-way.



   (H)   Easements shall be clearly identified on all plats (e.g.,
drainage easement or utility easement). Easements shall be marked noting
location, width and nature of the easement.



   (I)   No utility pedestals or transformers shall be located within
15 feet of city utilities.



   (J)   All easements for city utilities shall be in such form as
approved by the city and shown as such on the plat. All other easements shall
include the city as a beneficiary and shall be shown on such plat in such
form as approved by the city.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.017  BLOCKS.



   (A)   No block shall be longer than 1,400 feet or shall be less than
500 feet in length and no block width shall be less than the minimum required
to meet the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance governing lot depth.



   (B)   All blocks, whenever it is deemed essential to provide access
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities,
shall have a crosswalk with a right-of-way of at least ten feet in width near
the center of the block, or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer.



   (C)   The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined
with due regard to building sites, land use, zoning requirements, access,
safety and convenience.



   (D)   Where a subdivision adjoins an arterial or collector, the
greater dimension of the block shall generally front or back upon such
arterial or collector to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.018  LOTS.



   (A)   Lot area and dimensions shall conform to the requirements of
the applicable district of the Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots
will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to
topography and the character of surrounding development.



   (C)   All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight
street right-of-way lines and radial to curved street right-of-way lines,
except where a variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot
design.



   (D)   All remnants of lots below minimum lot area size left over
after subdividing of a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots, rather
than allowing to remain as unusable land, except when designated for utility
purposes or accepted for public space for park or other public uses.



   (E)   Lots which cannot be served by a public or private sanitary
sewage collection system, and/or a public or private water distribution
system, shall comply with the applicable provisions of the applicable zoning
ordinance or shall be not less than one acre in size per lot or household
unit, whichever is greater. Such lots shall have a width of not less than 125
feet or a depth in excess of three times its width, unless otherwise
permitted and approved by the city.



   (F)   Double frontage lots should be avoided, except where they are
needed to provide for the separation of residential development from major
streets or to overcome specific disadvantages, topography or orientation.



   (G)   Whenever the back or side yards of a residential development
face non-subdivision streets a landscape berm as provided for in § 155.076
of this chapter is required.



   (H)   Corner lots and lots with double frontage shall have extra
dimension sufficient to permit the establishment of front building setback
lines on the adjoining streets.



   (I)   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each
lot with satisfactory access to a public street.



   (J)   No grading or excavation shall be permitted within the
floodplain or flood hazard areas without the following:



      (1)   Approval of applicable city, state and federal agencies;



      (2)   Adequate documentation showing that the floodplain
revisions will not cause an increase of flooding of property downstream by
showing that the floodplain storage through the project reach has remained
the same or increased for the ten- and 100-year frequency peak flood levels;
and



      (3)   The project floodplain revisions do not cause an
increase in flooding upstream of the proposed development by meeting the
State Department of Natural Resources created head requirements for property
upstream of the proposed project. The city also requires the developer
provide survey and hydraulic analyses, if necessary, showing that the
allowable increases do not cause an increase of flooding of structures or
collector roads (or higher category roads), or acquire flood easements from
the parties upstream whose structures and/or roads (collector level or
higher) will experience an increase of flooding.



   (K)   Any proposed lot which touches a portion of the floodplain, as
defined herein, shall have shown on the final plat a legal description of the
portion of each lot which is in the floodplain, as defined herein.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 3:
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF IMPROVEMENTS




§ 155.030  GENERAL STATEMENT.



   (A)   All development and subdivision of land within the city and
within the one and one-half mile area of extraterritorial subdivision
jurisdiction shall conform to the standards adopted within this chapter, as
well as the standards adopted herein by reference.



   (B)   The following standards are herein adopted by reference:



      (1)   Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) Standard
Specification for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois;



      (3)   IDOT Drainage Manual;



      (4)   Illinois Urban Manual, dated December 2002 or more
recent publication date. (The Illinois Urban Manual is a compilation and
updating of the Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control (the Yellow Book) published by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency; and



      (5)   Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control (the Green Book) prepared by the Northeastern
Illinois Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee.



   (C)   In the event there exist conflicts among or between any of
these adopted standards and/or the provisions of this chapter and Development
Manual, the stricter standard shall prevail. Three copies of each of these



standards have been on file in the office of the City Clerk for a period of
15 days prior to the ordinance adopting this Manual and shall remain on file
in the City Clerk’s office.



   (D)   The requirements set forth in this Development Manual shall be
considered as minimum requirements and nothing contained herein shall be
construed to mean that the subdivider cannot construct or provide
improvements of a higher type.



   (E)   All proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities shall comply
with the minimum requirements and recommendations of the Environmental
Protection Agency of the state, the City Engineer and the City Council. When
a proposed subdivision is reasonably accessible to a public sewer system
and/or water distribution system, the subdivider shall provide the
subdivision with a complete sanitary system and/or water distribution system
to be connected to the proper public system(s). An analysis of the demand for
water service and discharge into the sanitary sewer receiving system may be
required by the City Engineer to determine if there are any significant
system-wide impacts that may harm the city’s utility system or services.



   (F)   Upon the city’s review of any development and upon its
determination, communicated to the applicant in writing, that a traffic
safety or service level concern or any other such infrastructure service or
public safety concern may reasonably exist relating to the construction or
development to be permitted by the city, the city may subsequently require
the applicant, at applicant’s cost, to submit a traffic study or such other
study as may be needed to address the identified concern. The city may accept
such studies as presented by the developer, however, the city may require
additional studies to be prepared as necessary to ensure the standards herein
are conformed to and that the public safety and welfare is protected. The
city may, at its discretion, direct the conduct of such studies and may
require such studies to be paid for by the developer/subdivider.



   (G)   Minimum testing standards: The following table sets minimum
testing standards for infrastructure construction in development governed by
Ch. 154 of this code.



 




MINIMUM TESTING STANDARDS INFRASTRUCTURE


The developer shall provide written test reports for all tests required
herein. He or she shall also provide certification by the testing agency that
the tests sections selected were representative of the item constructed in
the field. The testing agency shall further certify that all tests were
completed in accordance with the specified standards and according to the
generally accepted standards of the industry.


Item
 
Test
 
Standard


Bituminous concrete pavement, BAM
 
Developer shall provide 4 density tests per mix per day for each lift, using
the nuclear method (ASTM D2950).
 
Compact all bituminous concrete binder and surface courses to an average
density of 93% of the theoretical density, with no individual tests less than
91%. Compact all BAM to a minimum of 90% of the theoretical density.


Earthwork
 
Developer shall provide representative ASTM D698 (Standard Proctor) tests for
each type of material to be field tested for compaction.
 
Compact all fill within the building pad or within the proposed roadway to at
least 95% of the maximum dry density in accordance with ASTM D698, in lifts
not exceeding 8-inch loose thickness.


Developer shall provide 1 compaction test per 1,000 s.y. of surface area for
each lift, using the nuclear method (ASTM D2922 and D3017).


Portland cement concrete curbs
 
Developer provides the following tests:  slump (ASTM C143); air entrainment
(ASTM C231); compressive strength (ASTM C39 and C31). Concrete shall be Class
S1 per IDOT standard specifications Art. 606 and 1020. Minimum concrete
compressive strength shall be 3,500 psi at the age of 14 days.
 
Air entrainment and slump: once each per day min. and once per 50 c.y.
concrete. Compressive Strength:  Cast 3 6-inch dia. x 12-inch cylindrical
test specimens per day min. or 3 per each 50 c.y. of concrete each day. Cast
all 3 specimens from a single batch of concrete. Test the first concrete
specimen at the age of 7 days. Test the second concrete specimen at the age
of 14 days. Test the third concrete specimen in the event the 14-day test
does not indicate compliance with specified strength requirements or as
directed by the City Engineer. 6.4 bag mix is required.


Portland cement concrete pavement
 
Developer provides the following tests:  slump (ASTM C143); air entrainment
(ASTM C231); compressive strength (ASTM C39 and C31). Concrete shall be Class
S1 per IDOT standard specifications §§ 420 and 1020. Minimum concrete
compressive strength shall be 3,500 psi at the age of 14 days.
 
Air entrainment and slump: once each per day min. and once per 50 c.y.
concrete. Compressive Strength:  Cast 3 6-inch dia. x 12-inch cylindrical
test specimens per day min. or 3 per each 50 c.y. of concrete each day. Test
concrete specimens as prescribed for PCC Curbs. 6.4 bag mix is required.


Sanitary sewers
 
Developer shall provide the following tests upon completion of construction:
exfiltration of air under pressure; deflection of thermoplastic piping;
manhole vacuum test; and lamping. Areas not passing tests shall be corrected
and retested. City Engineer may increase required frequency of tests if
initial tests fail minimum requirements.
 
Frequency and technique per the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois, Art. 31-1.11, utilizing methods C, D and E.




 



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.031  REFERENCE MONUMENTS.



   (A)   Permanent monuments of stone or reinforced concrete with a
one-quarter inch iron rod cast in the center and of suitable size set in such
a manner that they will not be moved by frost shall be placed in the field as
required by the statutes of the state as revised and are in effect at such
time.



   (B)   All lot corners shall be marked by one-half inch iron pins not
less than 24 inches in length and driven into the ground and shall not
protrude above the ground surface more than one and one-half inch. The lot
corners shall be installed and certified by a professional land surveyor
prior to the release of the letter of credit.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.032  STREET ACCESS, STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The street and alley arrangement shall be such as to not
impose undue hardship upon the owners of adjoining property when they plat
their own land and seek to provide for convenient access thereto. Reserve
strips controlling access to streets are prohibited except where their
control is placed with the City Council.



   (B)   The arrangement of rights-of-way in a subdivision shall
provide for the continuation of the existing streets or rights-of-way in
adjoining areas, unless the city deems such continuation undesirable for
reasons of topography or design. Where subdivision streets or rights-of-way
are continuations or extensions of existing streets or rights-of-way, the
width thereof shall be of the same or greater width as the existing street or
right-of-way; except that, in no case shall the street or right-of-way in the
subdivision be of less width than hereinafter provided by the typical
cross-section shown on typical cross-sections hereto attached.



   (C)   Where, in the opinion of the city, it is desirable to provide
future street access to adjoining areas, the streets and rights-of-way in the
subdivision shall be extended to the property line. If deemed necessary by
the city, any temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a temporary
turn-around. Access shall not be denied to any parcel or part of a parcel of
ground by the subdividing of land. When cross-access between properties is
provided or required, it shall be noted on the plat, and recorded
ingress-egress easements shall be provided to the city.



   (D)   Streets shall intersect, as nearly as possible, at right
angles.



   (E)   Local and collector street curb intersections shall be rounded
by radii of at least 25 feet.



   (F)   Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125
feet are prohibited, unless otherwise permitted and approved by the city.



   (G)   Dead-end streets shall have a length no greater than 800 feet,
except as provided herein. If topography justifies a need for a greater
length, dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs designed to be so permanently, may be
longer than 800 feet and will terminate in a circular open space having a
radius at the outside of the pavement of at least 40 feet and a diameter at
the outside of the right-of-way of at least 100 feet. Temporary dead-end
streets may be permitted at a greater length if the city determines that a
through connection is feasible and likely in the near future and other design
requirements are met. Unless otherwise approved, the developer shall install
at the entrance of all dead-end streets for which the terminus is not visible
from the entrance a “no outlet” sign or other approved signage indicating
that the street has no outlet.



   (H)   Local streets shall be designed so as to discourage through
traffic.



   (I)   No local street grade shall be in excess of 8% and no
collector street grade shall be in excess of 5%, except as otherwise approved
by the city due to the adverse topographic conditions for adequate drainage.
The minimum grade of any new street shall not be less than 1%, except where
vertical curves in the grade line of the street make this provision
inapplicable. A minimum of 500 L.F. of the existing street grade shall be
shown from the point of extension for the new street to aid in evaluating the
vertical alignment.



   (J)   The city shall not approve streets which will be subject to
frequent inundation or flooding, per IDOT standards, or as otherwise
specified herein.



   (K)   Alleys may be required in multiple-family districts and
commercial or industrial districts unless other definite and assured
provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading
and parking consistent and adequate for the use proposed.



   (L)   Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted, except where provided
with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, or where such dead-end
alleys provide the only access to off-street parking.



   (M)   Alleys, where provided, shall have a right-of-way of not less
than 20 feet.



   (N)   The minimum right-of-way of local, collector and arterial
streets shall be in accordance with the typical cross-sections hereto
attached.



   (O)   Intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be
avoided.



   (P)   Where the subdivision abuts on or contains an existing or
proposed arterial street, the city may require that marginal access streets
be provided in order that no lots front on such existing or proposed arterial
street.



   (Q)   Dedication of half-streets shall be discouraged, but may be
permitted whenever there is no other logical method of platting. However,
wherever there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to
the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be
platted, unless otherwise permitted by the city.



   (R)   (1)   All new streets, which are created and dedicated for
use within a subdivision, shall be graded, drained and surfaced in accordance
with the minimum requirements herein below set forth and in a manner which
will provide complete and adequate drainage of all the streets, alleys and
public grounds in the entire subdivision, including any such work which may
be necessary in order to provide adequate and satisfactory drainage along the
side of any existing public street which lies adjacent to the subdivision.



      (2)   In general, all such new streets within the subdivision
and all work to be undertaken thereon shall be designed and constructed
according to the specifications and policies adopted by the Division of
Highways of the Department of Transportation of the state, as the same are in
effect at the time the preliminary plat and plans for such improvement work
are submitted for approval.



   (S)   The roadway shall be considered to be that part of the
improvement which lies between the right-of-way lines, which roadway shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and typical cross-sections as
set out in App. B of this chapter.



   (T)   Combination concrete curb and gutters shall be built in
accordance with the detail shown in this Manual. The minimum distance from
back of curb to back of curb shall be as shown in the street cross-sections
in App. B of this chapter, and all curbs at driveways shall be mountable.



   (U)   All streets within the jurisdictional authority of the city,
other than county and state highways, shall be designed as provided for in
this Manual, or as determined by specific needs and designed accordingly. All
streets shall be improved with pavements bounded by integral concrete curbs
and gutters in accordance with the minimum criteria set forth in this Manual
and shall be laid out and constructed substantially in accordance with the
standards hereto attached.



   (V)   All new residential driveway aprons must be six-inch PCC
concrete. All other driveway entrances, including multi-family three-units
and above, shall be constructed to the same pavement thickness as the street
it accesses.



   (W)   The earth sub-base shall have not less than 95% of compaction
and shall extend across the entire width of the roadway and two feet behind
the back of curb. In some instances, it might be necessary that the subgrade
be disked or tilled to dry it to the proper moisture content for construction.



   (X)   The developer shall daily clean all mud and dirt from the
pavement surface that has accumulated due to construction work or as a result
of storm water erosion within the subdivision. No materials, debris, field
trailers and the like shall be stored on the completed pavement or within the
recorded right-of-way lines.



   (Y)   Underground utility lines in street or alley rights-of-way
shall be installed prior to the construction of such streets and/or alleys.
All trenches for utility lines made in the subgrade, and all trenches made
outside the subgrade where the inner edge of the trench is closer than two
feet to the edge of any pavement, shoulder, curb or sidewalk shall be
backfilled full depth to the subgrade elevation with coarse aggregate CA-6 or
CA-11. The backfill shall be compacted by tamping it in eight-inch lifts.
Jetting to achieve compaction will not be allowed.



   (Z)   The city shall have the authority to permit the type, number
and location of all entrances, exits and circulation patterns located on or
accessing any development site or any public or private street within the
city’s jurisdiction.



   (AA)   Where appropriate and as directed by the City Engineer,
traffic-calming measures shall be incorporated to expedite the safe movement
of traffic. (Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.033  SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   Each lot in the subdivision shall be provided at the property
line with a connection to a public sanitary sewer system. The termination or
termini of the subdivision sewerage system shall be located at a point
acceptable to the City Engineer. The construction of the sewer system shall
conform to the approved plans and specifications and all work should be
properly inspected and approved by the City Engineer. Trenches shall be
backfilled per the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Where connection to a public sanitary sewer system is not
feasible, subdivisions with lots greater than 40,000 square feet may be on a
temporary septic system where standard seepage test or other investigations,
conducted by the Madison or St. Clair County health officials or their
representatives, indicated that the ground in the subdivision is suitable for
individual sewage disposal facilities dependent upon seepage of the effluent
into the soil. These temporary systems may remain until such time that a
public sewerage system can take and treat the wastes. Nothing in this
division (B) shall waive the requirement in division (A) above to construct
the on-site collection system in anticipation of public sewers.



   (C)   Sewer systems and sewage treatment facilities shall meet the
requirements set forth by the State Environmental Protection Agency,
Department of Public Health of the state, applicable public sewer system and
the city. No oxidation ponds, seepage lagoons or holding lagoons, will be
permitted. Sanitary and storm sewer systems shall not be combined. “Package
plants” or other private multi-user treatment facilities are prohibited
with the one and one-half mile extraterritorial subdivision review
jurisdiction area.



   (D)   Sewer mains with house service stubs to each lot shall be
installed prior to the construction of street pavements. Service stubs shall
be installed at the centerline of each lot and shall extend to within one
foot of the front lot line. Sewer laterals may not share a common trench.



   (E)   Design of public sewers shall follow the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, the
city’s standard specifications, and 35 Ill. Admin. Code subtitle C, chapter
2, part 370: Illinois Recommended Standards for Sewage Works.



   (F)   In subdivisions not required to install community sewage
collection systems under this section, individual sewage disposal systems may
be permitted.



   (G)   Regardless of locations, lot size or number of lots, a
subdivision shall be disapproved where the city or Madison or St. Clair
Counties’ Department of Public Health official finds that the drainage,
soil conditions, disposal facilities or other conditions will tend to produce
health problems.



   (H)   Sanitary sewers shall be extended through the end of all stub
streets and capped. They shall also be extended in such other areas as
necessary to facilitate future extensions for anticipated development.



   (I)   Sanitary sewers shall be noted on dedicated plan and profile
sheets or on a utility plan. Plans shall also include details for manholes,
laterals, trench excavation and any specialties. Profiles shall include
grades and pipe size including manhole tops and inverts. Grading plan shall
include finished floor and basement floor elevations to facilitate review of
freeboard requirements. Where lift stations are included, these shall be
detailed with all relevant piping, structures, pumps and site information.



   (J)   Lift station and force main calculations are required with
sanitary sewer plans and shall be constructed in accordance with city’s
standard specifications and the requirements of this Manual.



   (K)   Detailed calculations for gravity sewer design as well as
copies of the IEPA permit applications shall be submitted for every
development within the city limits or its one and one-half mile jurisdiction.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.034  WATER.



   (A)   Each subdivision shall have an interconnected public water
distribution system supplying all lots with water from a source approved by
the city and the State Environmental Protection Agency.



   (B)   Each lot in the subdivision shall be provided at the property
line with a connection, including yolk and meter tile, to a water system
approved by the city. The construction of the water system shall conform to
the approved plans and specifications and all work shall be properly
inspected and approved by the City Engineer. Water mains shall be constructed
prior to the construction of street pavements. Trenches shall be backfilled
as per the requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider as part of
the water distribution system. Single-family residential developments shall
have fire hydrants spaced at no more than 600 feet from hydrant to hydrant,
measured along the street centerline, or as special site conditions may
dictate. Multi-family residential development hydrant spacing shall not
exceed 400 feet, and high hazard development hydrant spacing shall not exceed
300 feet. No fire hydrant shall be placed on a main smaller than six inches
in diameter.



   (D)   Where fire hydrants or Fire Department connections are located
in an area where vehicles may be parked or standing, said parking or standing
shall be restricted for ten feet in each direction from the hydrant or
connection.



   (E)   The minimum fire flow from a single fire hydrant in any use
group shall be 1,000 gallons per minute at 20 psi residual pressure unless
the new hydrant is ordered on a pre-existing main.



   (F)   The minimum fire flow from the next two fire hydrants in any
use group shall be a cumulative 1,000 gallons per minute at 20 psi residual
pressure.



   (G)   Fire flow on all new fire hydrant installations shall be
tested by the developer or contractor and witnessed by a representative of
the Engineering Department.



   (H)   Additional private fire hydrants shall be required on
developed property, private streets and/or parking lots, at a spacing between
fire hydrants as required by the use group as set forth in this Manual. All
private hydrants must meet the city’s standard specifications, testing
requirements and fire flow requirements of public fire hydrants.



   (I)   The Public Works Department shall approve all designs and
shall alter the design requirements as necessary to meet the city’s water
system plan. The city shall specify the type, kind and quality of pipe, fire
hydrants, valves, valve boxes and appurtenances. The contractor shall furnish
and install these items. The work shall be inspected by the city.



   (J)   Water mains, hydrants and taps shall be constructed in
compliance with the current adopted ICC Fire Prevention Code Appendices B, C
and D, Illinois Plumbing Code, Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and
the city’s standard specifications.



   (K)   All commercial developments shall be served by a minimum
eight-inch main. Residential subdivisions shall be served by a minimum
six-inch main.



   (L)   Water mains shall be extended through the end of all stub
streets and in such other areas as necessary to facilitate future extensions
for anticipated development to include frontage along roads. At the direction
of the city, additional water mains shall be required to establish needed
loops and connection to ensure adequate connectivity volumes and supply.



   (M)   Fire hydrants and water mains shall be placed along the full
length of the property to be developed that abuts an existing and/or proposed
improved public way. The developer shall be responsible for the cost of said
hydrants and water main in sufficient size to serve the development. The city
may pay for an upgrade of the main to a larger size to coincide with the
overall distribution system plan and the main may be laid on the opposite
side of the street to coincide with the location of other existing or
proposed mains.



   (N)   Every community water supply system shall have adequate pipe
sizes, water pressure, supply and sufficient fire hydrants to provide fire
protection to meet local neighborhood needs in accordance with the standards
of the city. The City Engineer may require construction of water utilities
consistent in a manner necessary to accommodate a system of minimum of
12-inch mains generally located on a one square mile grid.



   (O)   No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which
the plumbing does not comply with this chapter. Plumbers and contractors are
prohibited from turning the water on to any service pipe, except upon the
order or permission of the City Engineer.



   (P)   No more than one building shall be supplied from one service
pipe. Whenever possible, the service pipe shall enter the building in a
direct line with the corporation stop and tap.



   (Q)   The operation of utility valves shall be limited to Department
of Public Works personnel. No valves shall be operated by any contractor
without the prior approval of the City Engineer.



   (R)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city
to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the city waterworks or supply
system, or any meter.



   (S)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited, except when and where approved cross-connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure
proper operation on a continuing basis.



   (T)   All waterlines shall be noted on dedicated plan sheets or on a
utility plan. Plans shall include details for valves, fire hydrants and
trench excavation and backfill. Trench detail shall clearly note minimum bury
depth.



   (U)   Pressure calculations as well as copies of the State
Environmental Protection Agency permit applications shall be submitted for
every development within the city limits and its one and one-half mile
jurisdiction.



   (V)   All waterlines constructed within the city and within its one
and one-half mile extraterritorial review authority shall comply with the
city’s standards and water system requirements.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.035  STREET MARKERS AND TRAFFIC SIGNS.



   A permanent street marker shall be provided by the developer and placed
at each intersection designating the names of the streets entering said
intersection and shall comply with the specifications as provided by
ordinance of the city. Additionally, all traffic signs, regulatory and
information signage shall be provided and placed by the developer at all
locations as directed by the city.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.036  TELEPHONE AND ELECTRIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   All telephone, electric and cable television lines shall be
placed underground throughout a subdivided area. Said conduits or cables and
gas lines shall be placed within designated easements or public right-of-way
in a manner that will not conflict with other utilities and as approved by
the City Engineer. Where telephone and electric service lines are placed
underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, said conduits or cables
shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which
will not conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer
boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.



   (B)   The installation of all telephone, electric and cable
television facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders,
rules and regulations of the State Commerce Commission now or hereinafter
effective. The developer shall be responsible for compliance with the rules
and regulations, now and hereinafter effective and filed with said Commission
pursuant to the State Public Utilities Act, being ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5.



   (C)   The developer or contractor shall be responsible for locating
of all existing private and public utilities. Any relocation, bracing,
coordination and associated costs shall be borne by the developer or
contractor.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.037  STREET LIGHTS.



   (A)   Street lights shall be installed and in good working order
immediately upon completion of the roadway base course.



   (B)   Street light style, spacing and location will be specified by
the City Engineer. The developer shall be responsible for purchase,
installation and commissioning of the appropriate street lights.



   (C)   The developer shall arrange with the appropriate electric
company to energize the street light system as soon as possible. The
developer shall be responsible for all connection fees.



   (D)   The city shall be billed for energy usage. Maintenance of the
street light network within the development shall be the developer’s
responsibility until formal acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the
city.



   (E)   Reports of outages made to the city in the interim will be
addressed by the City Public Works Department or a hired contractor at the
expense of the developer.



   (F)   No private parking lot lighting or other lighting shall be
mounted in public right-of-way or utility easements on utility poles or
street lights. All such lighting shall be restricted to the private
residential, commercial, institutional or industrial parcel on which lighting
is sought.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.038  SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS.



   (A)   Concrete sidewalks not less than four inches in thickness and
four feet in width shall be constructed within the street right-of-way and
adjacent to the property line.



   (B)   All sidewalks shall be a concrete section across the entire
breadth and width at driveways or entryways and shall be of a thickness
equivalent to the street cross-section. Minimum thickness shall be six
inches. Six-bag mix with two-inch clean limestone rock sub-base on compacted
subgrade, per IDOT standards, is required.



   (C)   All sidewalks shall be accessible to the handicapped in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Illinois
Accessibility Code. At locations where the sidewalk crosses a driveway
entrance, the driveway must conform to ADA requirements. In the case of
conflict, the more stringent requirements shall apply. Curb ramps accessible
to the disabled shall be provided in accordance with the current edition of
IDOT Standard  424001.



   (D)   (1)   In those subdivisions where a bikeway or trail is
required per the city’s Official Map and Comprehensive Plan, including any
bicycle master plan, they shall be designed and constructed by the developer
in accordance with the applicable IDOT and city standards. The bikeway
improvements within any development shall be located and designed to
facilitate maximum connectivity of dwellings or other uses within the
development to the bikeway network.



      (2)   Where the bikeway is to be located in a location where a
sidewalk is otherwise required, the city may allow the installation of the
bikeway in lieu of the installation of a sidewalk in that location.



      (3)   The bikeway shall be located in a public easement,
right-of-way or other interest allowing for public ingress and egress to and
from the development as approved by Council on the final plat.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.039  DRAINAGE, STORM SEWERS AND OTHER DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES.



   (A)   In addition to the installation of curbs or gutters along the
streets as required by this Manual, storm sewers and other drainage
appurtenances shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision to carry
off water from all inlets and catch basins, and be connected to an adequate
outfall. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of
the sanitary sewer system and shall be in accordance with drainage laws of
the city and the state. Specifically, the flow rate and velocity of
post-development storm water runoff from the site shall not exceed the flow
rate and velocity of pre-development run-off from the site. Storm water
detention, retention or other BMP structures shall be designed, constructed
and maintained to achieve this.



   (B)   During the final improvement plan phase, the entire
subdivision shall be analyzed for the effects of the 100-year storm to assure
that buildings are properly elevated (lowest structure opening one foot above
the 100-year storm hydraulic gradeline) above the floods occurring beyond the
design capabilities of the storm water structures. Trenches shall be
backfilled as required herein.



   (C)   The developer shall be responsible for constructing adequate
facilities for the control, collection, conveyance, acceptable discharge of
storm water, other surface water and subsurface water which may be
detrimental to the safe and convenient use of any portion of the area. The
storm drainage system shall provide for runoff from the entire area of the
subdivision. It shall take into account land outside the subdivision limits,
which normally drains across the area of the subdivision as well as the
effects of the subdivision upon downstream drainage systems. As primary
focus, the drainage system for the subdivision shall make use of, protect and
improve, as needed, the natural drainage system. Drainage facilities shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and procedures
specified in these regulations.



      (1)   Design storm. All storm drainage facilities shall be
designed with sufficient capacity and freeboard where necessary to convey the
peak rates of runoff from storms with the average return frequencies listed
below.



         (a)   Two-year. Water quality BMPs which will be
required in the future to comply with the city’s NPDES storm water Phase II
permit requirements.



         (b)   Ten-year. All drainage facilities within road and
easements from catch basins grates to outlet structures. Pavement
encroachment, or maximum in-street spread, for drainage should be designed
according to § 1-303.01 of the Illinois Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual.



         (c)   Twenty-five year. All cross culverts under drives,
minor and local streets, as well as improved streams, swales and ditches.
Pavement encroachment, or maximum in-street spread, for drainage should be
designed according to § 1-303.01 of the Illinois Department of
Transportation Drainage Manual.



         (d)   Fifty-year. All cross culverts and bridges
constructed under residential collector and arterial streets.



         (e)   One hundred year. All detention/retention basins
and bridges.



            1.   The lowest opening elevation in all habitable
buildings shall be the 100-year hydraulic gradeline (HGL) elevation, plus one
foot.



            2.   Drainage ditches, open channels and natural
drainageways shall have zero created head compared with predevelopment
conditions at the upstream property line along said drainageway up to the
100-year flood frequency if any increase in flooding up to the 100-year
frequency storm affects upstream structures or collector roads (or higher
category roads), unless the developer acquires permanent flood easements to
cover the area with increased flooding levels up to the 100-year flood event
from the parties upstream whose structures and/or roads (collector level or
higher) will experience an increase of flooding.



            3.   Drainage ditches, open channels and natural
drainageways which have no potential to increase flooding upstream of
structures or collector roads (or higher category roads) up to the 100-year
event, shall not have a created head greater than 0.1 feet at the upstream
property line of the project property along said drainageway unless easements
are obtained from the upstream property owner to cover the increases of
flooding up to 100-year event, or unless there is a storm sewer, culvert,
bridge, dam or other drainage structure within 200 feet downstream of the
upstream property line on said drainageway in which case the created head
shall not be greater than 0.5 feet at the upstream property line of the
project property along said drainageway unless easements are obtained from
the upstream property owner to cover the increases of flooding up to 100-year
event.



      (2)   Storm water discharge.



         (a)   The discharge of all storm water shall be into an
established wetlands, watercourse or drainage structure as approved by the
city. Where the discharge shall be into or through private property, proper
easements or drainage rights in a form acceptable to the City Attorney shall
be secured by the developer for the city.



         (b)   Permanent easements, at least 20 feet in width,
shall be provided in all cases where storm drainage facilities are installed
in land other than the street right-of-way. The centerline of pipes shall be
no closer than five feet and the top of the slope for channels shall be no
closer than five feet to the boundaries of the drainage easements. Easements
shall also be provided for storm drainage facilities that may need to be
installed in the future to serve underdeveloped land within the watershed
that normally drains across the area of a proposed development. All easements
shall be clearly delineated and described on the final plat.



      (3)   Other requirements.



         (a)   In all instances, unless otherwise waived, a
drainage analysis map shall be submitted showing the tributary watershed
area, sub-drainage basins, and the downstream area affected by runoff.
Drainage computations shall consider the entire tributary area (on-site and
off-site) of those drainage basins contributing runoff to all design points.
See also § 155.035 of this chapter.



         (b)   Roadway underdrains shall be required where a
soils report states this is needed, and their installation shall be performed
by the developer and as directed by the city or its duly authorized agent, to
protect the stability of the roadway.



         (c)   Suitable head wall or precast end sections shall
be provided at the open end of any pipe. Culverts under streets shall have a
minimum cover of 30 inches and shall be extended to a minimum of ten feet
from the edge of pavement, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.



         (d)   Catch basins shall be provided so that no portion
of any road shall drain in one direction more than 300 feet without catch
basins on both sides of the road, unless otherwise approved by the City
Engineer.



         (e)   The hydraulic capacity and the required size and
slope of storm sewer pipes and channels shall be established by using the
Manning equation. The hydraulic capacity of driveway and roadway cross
culverts shall be established only after considering both the inlet and
outlet control conditions. The lower of the two flow rates obtained shall be
the actual rated capacity. The upstream backwater shall not encroach onto
adjacent properties unless backwater is contained within existing watercourse
or wetland limits, does not encroach upon roadway beyond existing IDOT
standards or driveway areas, and the necessary drainage easements are secured
from those affected property owners.



         (f)   House and foundation drains shall in no case be
permitted to discharge onto a roadway surface. Discharge to existing
wetlands, watercourses and storm drainage facilities shall be made. All such
drainage connections shall be made prior to construction of, or be made so as
not to cause damage to, pavement surface. Any damage to roadway or its
appurtenances will be the responsibility of the property owner from whose
property the drain is discharging.



         (g)   All pipes and drainage structures shall be
thoroughly cleaned by the developer before acceptance by the city and again
following final construction of homes or structures within the subdivision.
The developer shall supply a letter of credit to secure such cleaning.



         (h)   Existing wetlands/watercourses proposed to receive
storm drainage discharge shall be analyzed to determine the downstream
effects on any watercourse or existing storm drainage system for its adequacy
to receive the proposed drainage discharge. The extent to which downstream
studies are conducted shall be commensurate with the probable impact of the
proposed development. Where it is anticipated that the additional discharge
resulting from the proposed subdivision will overload the existing downstream
drainage system, the city may deny the subdivision until the applicant has
adequately provided for improvements to the drainage system.



         (i)   Each lot on any final plat or final development
plan shall have identified on the plat of record an elevation height that
shall be the minimum elevation of the lowest opening (first floor, walkout
basement or basement window) to adjacent grade. This elevation shall be
determined and established by the elevation of the 100-year storm in any
drainageway or structure adjacent to that lot or surrounding area that may
subject that lot to potential flooding from any of those drainageways. That
elevation will then be required to have one foot of freeboard. All lots shall
be noted on the plat of record as either suitable or unsuitable for walkout
basements.



         (j)   When the street side of any principal structure
will be constructed below roadway elevation, the developer shall submit
documentation from an engineer showing how they propose to protect the
structures from storm water runoff in excess of the design capacity of the
roadway.



         (k)   Detention basins shall be located on outlots
maintained by the homeowner’s association. A special service area may be
created for potential maintenance by the city should the homeowner’s
association become defunct, unable or unwilling to provide sufficient
maintenance of the detention basins.



         (l)   Additional design standards, as appropriate, may
be required by the City Engineer.



         (m)   Scour protection shall be provided for all ditches
and storm sewer discharges. The amount of scour protection shall be
determined by the flow rate and velocity of the storm water in the drainage
structure.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.040  HYDRAULICS.



   Hydraulic calculations for pipes, culverts and open channels are to be
as follows.



   (A)   Gravity versus pressure flow for enclosed systems.



      (1)   Two design philosophies exist for sizing storm drains
under the steady uniform flow assumption. The first is referred to as open
channel, or gravity flow design, in which the water surface within the
conduit remains open to atmospheric pressure. Pressure flow design, on the
other hand, requires that the flow in the conduit be at a pressure greater
than atmospheric. For a given flow rate, design based on open channel flow
requires larger conduit sizes than those sized based on pressure flow. While
it may be more expensive to construct storm drainage systems designed based
on open channel flow, this design procedure provides a margin of safety by
providing additional headroom in the conduit to accommodate an increase in
flow above the design discharge. However, there may be situations where
pressure flow design is desirable. For example, on some projects, there may
be adequate headroom between the conduit and inlet/access hole elevations to
tolerate pressure flow. In this case, a significant cost savings may be
realized over the cost of a system designed to maintain open channel flow.
Also, in some cases it may be necessary to use an existing system which must
be placed under pressure flow to accommodate the proposed design flow rates.
Under most ordinary conditions, it is recommended that storm drains be sized
based on a gravity flow criteria at full flow or near full. Pressure flow
design may be justified in certain instances. As hydraulic calculations are
performed, frequent verification of the existence of the desired flow
condition should be made. Storm drainage systems can often alternate between
pressure and open channel flow conditions from one section to another. (From
Urban Drainage Design Manual, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 22, U.S.
Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration.)



      (2)   For gravity flow conditions, Manning’s formula shall
be used as described below.



         Q = (1.486)* A * (R2/3)* (S1/2)



                 n



   Where:



   Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second



   A = Cross-sectional area of flow in square feet



   n = Roughness Coefficient (see Table A)



   R = Hydraulic radius (R = A/P) in feet



   S = Slope in feet per foot



   P = Wetted perimeter in feet



   The hydraulic grade line shall be at least one foot below the throat of
a curb inlet, and shall be below the throat of an area inlet, as long as this
inlet is located on grade and has an overflow path to another area inlet. If
no overflow path is available for the area inlet, the hydraulic grade line
shall be at least 1 foot below the throat of the area inlet.



      (3)   In closed conduits flowing under pressure flow, the
hydraulic grade line shall be calculated using the following equation:



         p1/g + z1  = p2/g + z2 + hf +hm



   Where:



   p1/g = pressure head in the upstream system segment in feet



   z1  = elevation of the system invert in the upstream system segment in
feet



   p2/g = pressure head in the downstream system segment in feet



   z2  = elevation of the system invert in the downstream system segment
in feet



   hf = friction loss in the downstream system segment in feet



   hm = minor system losses in the downstream segment in feet



   (B)   Pipe friction losses, hf, may be calculated by the Darcy
Formula, the Hazen-Williams formula or the friction slope method.



      (1)   Darcy Formula. The most common expression for
calculating head loss due to friction is the Darcy formula:



         hf  = f * L * v2



                 D * 2g



   Where:



   f = the friction factor, determined from the Moody friction factor chart



   L = length of pipe in feet



   v = velocity of flow at point of interest in feet per second



   D = diameter of pipe in feet



   2g = 64.4 feet per second per second



      (2)   Hazen-Williams Formula. Another method for finding the
friction head loss is the Hazen-Williams formula. The Hazen-Williams formula
gives good results for liquids that have kinematic viscosities around 1.2
EE-5 ft2/sec (corresponding to 60°F water). The Hazen-Williams formula
should be used only for turbulent flow. The Hazen-Williams head loss is:



         hf  = 3.022 * v1.85  * L



                 (C1.85 * D1.165)



   Where:



   C = Loss coefficient, determined from H-W chart for various pipe
materials



      (3)   Friction Slope Method. This formula is from the FHWA’s
Urban Drainage Design Manual, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 22.



            hf = Sf * L = ((Q * n)/(1.486 * A * R 2/3))2 * L



   Where:



   Sf = friction slope, ft/ft, which is also the slope of the HGL



   Minor losses, hm, shall be calculated by:



            hm = k * v2



                    2g



   Where:



   k = Coefficient as shown in Table B



      (4)   Manual calculation. A step-by-step procedure for manual
calculation of the EGL using the energy loss method is presented in § 7.5 of
the Urban Drainage Design Manual, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 22, U.S.
Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration. For most
drainage systems, computer methods such as HYDRA or SWMM are the most
efficient means of evaluating the EGL and designing the system elements.



   (C)   Culverts. Classified as having either entrance or outlet
control. Either the inlet opening (entrance control) or friction loss within
the culvert or backwater from the downstream system (outlet control) will
control the discharge capacity.



      (1)   Entrance control. Entrance control occurs when the
culvert is hydraulically short (when the culvert is not flowing full) and
steep. Flow at the entrance would be critical as the water falls over the
brink. If the tailwater covers the culvert completely (i.e., a submerged
exit), the culvert will be full at that point, even though the inlet control
forces the culvert to be only partially full at the inlet. The transition
from partially full to full occurs in a hydraulic jump, the location of which
depends on the flow resistance and water levels. If the flow resistance is
very high, or if the headwater and tailwater levels are high enough, the jump
will occur close to or at the entrance.



      (2)   Outlet control.



         (a)   If the flow in a culvert is full for its entire
length, then the flow is said to be under outlet control. The discharge will
be a function of the differences in tailwater and headwater levels, as well
as the flow resistance along the barrel length.



         (b)   Alternatively, refer to the Federal Highway
Administration website for these charts (www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/hec05.pdf).
Download applicable design manuals, reports and FHWA hydraulics engineering
such as Bridge Waterways Analysis Model (WSPRO), FHWA Culvert Analysis, and
HDS 5 Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts from
www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/hydsoft.htm. These are applicable when flow in the
upstream channel is subcritical.



      (3)   Open channels/bridges.



         (a)   Proper evaluation of the velocity, depth and width
of flow requires analyses of the structures and conditions that impact the
flow. Boundary flow conditions upstream and downstream from the open channel
system must be established. The standard-step backwater method, using the
energy equation, can be used to determine the depth, velocity and width of
flow. Major stream obstructions, changes in slope, changes in cross-section
and other flow controls can cause significant energy loss. In these cases,
the energy equation does not apply and the momentum equation must be used to
determine the depth, velocity and width of flow.



         (b)   Hydraulic calculations for open channels may also
be made by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer’s ‘HEC-2 Water Surface
Profiles’ or ‘HEC-RAS River Analysis System’ computer programs. The
HEC-2 program computes water surface profiles for one-dimensional steady,
gradually varied flow in rivers of any cross-section. HEC-RAS is an
integrated system of software, designed for interactive use in a
multi-tasking, multi-user network environment. The system has separate
hydraulic analysis components, data storage and management capabilities,
graphics and reporting facilities. The HEC-RAS system is intended for
calculating water surface profiles for steady gradually varied flow. The
system can handle a full network of channels, a dendritic system or a single
river reach. Like HEC-2, HEC-RAS is capable of modeling subcritical,
supercritical and mixed flow regime water surface profiles. (From
www.hec.usace.army.mil).



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.041  STORM WATER DETENTION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   If detention basins are necessary, they must be designed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and currently accepted
engineering design practices.



   (B)   Included in the design submission must be the following:



      (1)   Map showing site, its location within the watershed and
the watershed limits. All detention facilities shall be analyzed with
hydrograph and storage routing techniques;



      (2)   Examination must be made of the routing of storm water
through the site and its flow path as it is discharged from the site.
Sub-drainage basin limits within the watershed must be delineated;



      (3)   Designation of the location(s) of the proposed detention
basin(s). Provide analysis for the storm water runoff from those areas
tributary to the proposed detention facility. Existing and proposed
conditions must be evaluated. Peak storms with return frequencies for the
ten-, 25- and 100-year events shall be analyzed as follows.



         (a)   1.   For detention basins with drainage areas
less than 200 acres, the engineer shall use the Rational Method for Detention
Storage (a.k.a., the Modified Rational Method, or the Chicago Method) as
described in the Illinois Department for Transportation Drainage Manual under
Chapter 4, Hydrology, and Chapter 12, Detention Storage, and as further
defined below.



               a.   Existing and proposed “C” factors
for agricultural, pastures or wooded areas shall be 0.20 or less unless an
extensive survey of soil types and land slopes is presented to verify that a
higher value is justified.



               b.   Existing and proposed “C” factors
for paved and building areas shall be 0.90 or more. This excludes aggregate
surfaces which should be evaluated based on the condition and slope of the
aggregate surface.



               c.   Existing and proposed “C” factors
for lawns shall be 0.20 or more unless an extensive survey of soil types and
land slopes is presented to verify that a lower value is justified.



               d.   For commercial developments, “C”
factors for the proposed development shall be calculated by a full tabulation
of the proposed surface areas in the development when known, or by
calculating the road “C” factor within the right-of way and by
calculating a composite “C” factor based on the maximum allowed coverage
(pavement and building area) per lot for the development.



               e.   For residential developments, “C”
factors for the proposed development shall be calculated by a composite
section of the typical road and lot configuration showing the average amount
of paved and building areas per lot, and a full tabulation of the park, other
green spaces and lakes within the development.



            2.   Please note that the engineer may also use
one of the unit hydrograph methods as described below for drainage areas
under 200 acres if he or she can demonstrate that sub-watersheds have
significantly non-homogeneous land use or significantly different
sub-watershed timing that effect the proper design of said detention
facilities.



         (b)   For detention basins with drainage areas greater
than 200 acres, the engineer shall use a unit hydrograph routing method that
is generally accepted to the Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office
of Water Resources such as the Clark or TR-20 unit hydrograph methodologies
inside computer programs such as HEC-1 or HEC-HMS or other computer programs
accepted by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water
Resources, and as further defined below:



            1.   Rainfall data and distributions should be
utilized as described in Bulletin 70 and Circular 173 as published by the
State Water Survey. Enough durations of each required frequency must be run
to determine the peak storm duration for each frequency.



            2.   Time of concentrations may be determined as
described in either TR-55 or the IDOT Drainage Manual. Lag time if utilized
may be assumed to be equal to 0.6 times the time of concentration.



            3.   The selected curve numbers or other runoff
coefficients must be calibrated to surveys of existing flood frequencies in
other local watersheds which have already been modeled. This information
shall be provided to the city. If the engineer does not have calibrated curve
numbers for a similar watershed, the city will provide curve numbers with
such a basis.



      (4)   The detention basin may be designed to drain dry or to
retain water for extended periods after rain events. All detention/retention
basins must be properly maintained and kept free of algae growth, trash and
other debris.



      (5)   The depth-area-volume relationship of the basin is
dependent on the storage volume needed to reduce the peak inflow rate to some
desired peak outflow rate. As the natural contours in the site dictate,
ponding depths should be kept as shallow as possible. However, where storm
water storage depths exceed four feet, a bench width of six feet should be
provided around the entire perimeter of the basin (exclusive of bermed
areas). Outlets from normally dry detention basins can take on a number of
forms, limited only by safety and maintenance considerations. Outlet pipe
must be at least 12 inches in diameter to facilitate maintenance. If less
capacity is required than a 12-inch pipe would provide, flow should be
throttled at the pipe entrance. Trash racks or perforated risers are required
at inlets to help guard against plugging of the pipe.



      (6)   The side slope of the basin should be no steeper than
four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) for the safety of mechanical mowing
equipment and the safety of people during those times when water is being
stored. All grades on the bottom of this basin should be at least 2% so that
the bottom will drain quickly and leave no wet spots. A low flow concrete
channel shall be provided in the basin.



      (7)   An emergency spillway outlet shall be provided for
discharge of flows in the event the storage capacity is exceeded or the
primary outlet is non-functional. The emergency spillway shall be designed
for the 100-year storm frequency event assuming the basin is dry, or at
normal pool for a wet basin, and the primary outlet is non-functional
(plugged) at the start of the rainfall event.



      (8)   Easements should be included if necessary and access
roads provided to allow vehicles and other equipment the access needed for
maintenance of the basin.



      (9)   If detention is to be of the wet basin, (retention
type), the volume needed for temporary storage must be provided above the
normal pond elevation.



      (10)   The outlet structure of wet basins (retention type)
must be constructed such that the pond level is maintained. The side slopes
beneath the water surface of the pond should be two horizontal to one
vertical (2:1), to a depth of three or four feet to discourage the growth of
aquatic plants unless a wetland system is developed along the shoreline of
the pond. If fish are to be stocked in the pond, at least 25% of the ponds
area should be at least ten feet deep.



      (11)   An as-built survey of detention basin grades and
outlets with an accompanying storage calculation will be required upon
completion of the proposed detention basin. Any completed basin below 95% of
the design storage shall be regraded and reseeded to obtain the original
design storage.



      (12)   Detention dams which meet the criteria as a regulated
dam as described in the most recent version of Rules for Construction and
Maintenance of Dams by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office
of Water Resources, require an IDNR, Office of Water Resources, permit prior
to city approval for construction



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.042  DRAINAGE PLANNING SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Phase I drainage report requirements. This report will review
at a conceptual level the feasibility and design characteristics of the
proposed subdivision. The Phase I drainage report shall be submitted with the
preliminary plan and shall be in accordance with the following outline and
contain the applicable information listed.



      (1)   Report contents.



         (a)   General location and description.



            1.   Location.



               a.   Township, range, section, one-quarter
section;



               b.   City, county, state highway and local
streets showing R.O.W. widths within and adjacent to the subdivision, or the
area to be served by the drainage improvements, within one-fourth mile;



               c.   Names of surrounding developments, land
uses and identification of present zoning; and



               d.   Area in acres.



            2.   Description of property.



               a.   Ground cover (type of trees, shrubs,
vegetation, general soil conditions, topography and slope);



               b.   All drainageways;



               c.   Existing slopes and rock outcroppings;
and



               d.   General project description.



            3.   Existing irrigation facilities. Existing
irrigation facilities such as ditches and canals within or near project (note
if still in use).



            4.   Existing proposed land use. Existing or
proposed land use with approximate area breakdown and intent for complete
over lot grading or other approach.



         (b)   Drainage basins and sub-basins.



               1.   Major basin description.



               a.   Reference to all drainageway planning
studies such as flood hazard delineation report, drainageway planning reports
and flood insurance rate maps;



               b.   Existing major basin drainage
characteristics; and



               c.   SCS Soils Classification Map.



            2.   Sub-basin description.



               a.   Historic drainage patterns of the
property in question; and



               b.   Off-site drainage flow patterns from
tributary areas and impact on development under existing and fully developed
basin conditions as defined by the Engineering Department.



         (c)   Drainage facility design.



            1.   General concept overview.



               a.   Concept and typical drainage patterns;



               b.   Compliance with off-site runoff
considerations;



               c.   Anticipated and proposed drainage
patterns; and



               d.   Storm water runoff quality aspects of
the drainage design.



            2.   Specific details overview.



               a.   Drainage problems encountered and
solutions at specific design points;



               b.   Detention storage and outlet design
(design calculations not required in this phase);



               c.   Maintenance and access aspects of the
design;



               d.   Easements and tracts for drainage
purposes; and



               e.   Any variances from these regulations
and justification for variance request.



         (d)   References. Reference all criteria, master plans
and technical information used in support of concept.



      (2)   Drawing contents.



         (a)   General location map. A map shall be provided in
sufficient detail to identify drainage patterns entering and leaving the
development and general drainage patterns. The map should be at a scale of
one inch equals 2,000 feet and show the pattern of all drainage for all
basins which affect, or are affected by, the property in question. (U.S.G.S.
Quad Sheets are ideal for this purpose.) Compliance with copyright law is the
responsibility of the Consultant Engineer, from the upper end of said basins
to defined major drainageways. The map shall identify any major facilities
form the property (i.e., development, irrigation ditches, existing detention
facilities, culverts and storm sewers) along the flow path to the nearest
drainageway. Basins and divides are to be identified and topographic contours
are to be included.



         (b)   Floodplain information. A copy of the applicable
FIRM panel. One hundred-year floodplain boundaries shall be shown on the
preliminary plat and final plat.



         (c)   Drainage plan. Map(s) of the proposed development
at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet to one inch equals 200 feet on a
24-inch by 36-inch drawing shall be included. The plan shall show the
following:



            1.   Existing (dashed lines) and, if available,
proposed (solid-line) topographic contours at two-feet maximum intervals. In
terrain where the slope exceeds 15%, the maximum interval is ten feet. The
contours shall extend a minimum of 100-feet beyond the property lines, unless
otherwise authorized by the Director;



            2.   Property lines and easements with purposes
noted;



            3.   All existing drainage facilities;



            4.   Approximate flooding limits based on
available information;



            5.   Conceptual major drainage facilities
including detention basins, storm sewers, sewers, riprap and outlet
structures in the detail consistent with the proposed development plan;



            6.   Major drainage boundaries and sub-boundaries;



            7.   Any off-site feature influencing development;



            8.   Proposed flow directions and, if available,
proposed contours;



            9.   Streets with R.O.W. width if available;



            10.   Legend to define map symbols;



            11.   Title block in lower right corner; and



            12.   North arrow, graphic and written scale and
written contour interval.



   (B)   Phase II drainage report.



      (1)   The purpose of this report is to finalize all design
details which were either not covered in the Phase I drainage report, or
which require adjustments resulting from the completion of the construction
plans. All aspects of this design for all drainage facilities must be shown
and supported in detail. Phase II reports are typically required at final
plan stage.



      (2)   In addition to the Phase I drainage report requirements,
the following will be required in the Phase II drainage report.



         (a)   Report contents.



            1.   Drainage design criteria. The optional
provisions selected or the deviation from the regulations, if any, and its
justification;



            2.   Development criteria reference and
constraints.



               a.   Previous drainage studies (i.e.,
project master plans) for the site in question that influence or are
influenced by the drainage design and how the pan will affect drainage design
for the site;



               b.   The effects of adjacent drainage
studies; and



               c.   The drainage impact of site constraints
such as streets, utilities, rapid transit, existing structures and
development or site plan.



            3.   Hydrological criteria.



               a.   Identify design rainfall;



               b.   Identify runoff calculation method; and



               c.   Identify detention discharge and
storage calculation method.



            4.   Identify design storm recurrence intervals.
Discussion and justification of other criteria or calculation methods used
that are not presented in or referenced by the regulations;



            5.   Hydraulic criteria.



               a.   Identify various capacity references;
and



               b.   Other drainage facility design criteria
used that are not presented in the regulations.



            6.   Variances from criteria.



               a.   Identify provisions by section number
for which a variance is requested; and



               b.   Provide justification for each variance
requested.



         (b)   Conclusions.



            1.   Compliance with standards.



               a.   Regulations;



               b.   Major drainageway planning studies; and



               c.   Development Manual.



         (c)   Appendices.



            1.   Hydrologic computation.



               a.   Land use assumptions regarding the
project and adjacent properties;



               b.   Table including basin ID, basin
acreage, weighted runoff coefficient, basin length, time of concentration,
minor and major rainfall intensity, minor and major rational runoff, and
routed runoff (for major basins if applicable);



                  c.   Supporting calculations for the
weighted runoff coefficients and times of concentration (vertical flow path
shown on map); and



               d.   Rational runoff calculations.



            2.   Hydraulic computations.



               a.   Gutter capacities with inlet design and
spacing;



               b.   Storm water collection pipe design
(based on sub-basin rational flows and HGL/EGL calculations);



               c.   Storm water trunk line design (based on
major basin routed flows and HGL/EGL calculations);



               d.   Energy dissipation and permanent
erosion control devices;



               e.   Culvert capacities;



               f.   Open channel design;



               g.   Check and drop structure design;



               h.   Detention pond volume and discharge
design including emergency spillway; and



               i.   Downstream outfall capacity to major
drainageway.



      (3)   All calculations required to achieve the final results
must be shown in the appendices. All tables, charts and nomographs used in
the preparation of this report must also be included in the appendices, each
following the computation where first utilized. The hydraulic and energy
grade lines must be shown on all construction plan storm profiles. Velocity
for storm sewers that discharge to open channels or detention ponds.



   (C)   Drawing contents. Map(s) of the proposed development at a
scale of one inch equals 20 feet to one inch equals 200 feet on a 24-inch by
36-inch drawing shall be included. In addition to the Phase I drawing
requirements, the plan shall show the following:



      (1)   Streets, if available, indicating name, R.O.W. width,
flow line width, sidewalk and the like;



      (2)   Existing drainage facilities and structures, including
irrigation ditches, roadside ditches, drainageways, gutter flow directions
and culverts. All pertinent information such as material, size, shape, slope
and location shall also be included;



      (3)   Overall drainage area boundary and drainage sub-area
boundaries. Generally, off-site basins may be shown on the general location
map. In some instances, the City Engineer may require that all affected
basins be shown on the drainage plan, in their entirety. A pre-submission
conference should be held with the City Engineer prior to submittal;



      (4)   One hundred-year floodplain for open channels, streams
or other natural watercourses not included in the FIRM mapping;



      (5)   Proposed type of street flow (i.e., vertical or
combination curb and gutter), gutter slope and flow directions, and cross
pans, if available;



      (6)   Proposed storm sewers and open drainageways, if
available, including inlets, manholes, culverts, other appurtenances and
riprap protection; location and (if known) elevation of all existing and
proposed utilities affected by or affecting the drainage design; and
definition of flow path leaving the development through the downstream
properties ending at a major drainageway;



      (7)   Routing of off-site drainage flow from tributary areas
through the development;



      (8)   Proposed outfall point for runoff from the developed
area and facilities to convey flows to the final outfall point without damage
to downstream properties;



      (9)   Routing and accumulation of flows at various critical
points for the initial storm run-off and significant changes in flow, and all
drainage structures including manholes, inlets, junction boxes, culverts and
bridges;



      (10)   Volumes and release rates for detention storage
facilities and information on outlet works and 100-year water line; and



      (11)   Location and elevations of all existing floodplains
affecting the property.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 4:
SOIL EXCAVATION AND EROSION CONTROL




§ 155.055  FINDINGS.



   (A)   Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing
development for certain non-agricultural uses including, but not limited to,
the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial
plants, the building of roads and highways, the modification of stream
channels and drainageways and the creation of recreational facilities.



   (B)   The washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and
upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof, by decreasing
vision and reducing traction of road vehicles.



   (C)   Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys,
washed-out fills and embankments.



   (D)   Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches
and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes, wetlands and reservoirs.



   (E)   Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most
beneficial purposes, promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds,
destroys fish and other desirable aquatic life and is costly and difficult to
remove.



   (F)   Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the
storage capacity of floodplains and natural depressions, resulting in
increased chances of flooding at risk to public health and safety.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.056  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these requirements is to safeguard persons, protect
property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by
guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in or
around the city. It is the intention of these requirements that the delivery
of sediment from sites affected by land disturbing activities be limited, as
closely as practicable, to that which would have occurred if the land had
been left in its natural undisturbed state.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.057  GENERAL PRINCIPLES.



   (A)   It is the objective of these requirements to control soil
erosion and sedimentation caused by development activities, including
clearing, grading, stripping, excavating and filling of land, in and around
the city. Measures taken to control soil erosion and off-site sediment runoff
should be adequate to assure that sediment is not transported from the site
by a storm event of ten-year frequency or less. The following principles
shall apply to all development activities within and around the city and to
the preparation of the submissions required herein.



   (B)   Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control (prepared by the Northeastern Illinois Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Steering Committee, in cooperation with area Soil and
Water Conservation Districts and the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, and
known as the Green Book) are designed to provide protection against sediment
leaving the site during a ten-year storm.



   (C)   Development should be related to the topography and soils of
the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep
slopes where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever
possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.



   (D)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds
and wetlands should be left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary
crossings of watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate
stabilization measures. Floodplain and wetland protection will be included in
site development plans, a minimum 25-foot buffer strip shall be preserved
along waterbodies and wetlands.



   (E)   Special precautions should be taken to prevent damages
resultant from any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any
stream, lake, pond or wetland. Preventative measures should reflect the
sensitivity of these areas to erosion and sedimentation.



   (F)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the
shortest practical time during development.



   (G)   Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions and any
other appropriate sediment or runoff control measures shall be installed
prior to site clearing and grading and maintained to remove sediment from
run-off waters from land undergoing development.



   (H)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures
should be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other
events likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs
and benefits involved.



   (I)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices,
aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be
considered.



   (J)   Provision should be made to accommodate the increased run-off
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the
resultant velocities and rates of discharge will not create additional
erosion on-site or downstream.



   (K)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and
functional as soon as practical during development.



   (L)   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to
other land uses should be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover
prior to development.



   (M)   All waste generated as a result of site development activity
should be properly disposed of and should be prevented from being carried off
the site by either wind or water.



   (N)   All construction sites should provide measures to prevent
sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.058  SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required. As required in Ch. 154 of this code, no
person shall commence or perform any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating
or filling of land which meets the following provisions without having first
obtained a site development permit from the Director, Community Development
Department, for the city, except as provided therein.



   (B)   Application for permit.



      (1)   Application for a site development permit shall be made
by the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent to the City
Community Development Department on a form furnished for that purpose. Each
application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer
of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together
with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at such firm, and shall
be accompanied by a filing fee paid to the City Clerk at a rate or rates
established by written order of resolution of the City Council. Each
application shall include certification that any land clearing, construction
or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with
the plans approved upon issuance of the permit.



      (2)   In making an application covered by this chapter, the
applicant or the landowner desiring performance of or allowing the work
consents to the city’s right to enter the site for the purpose of
determining the adequacy of any plan, inspecting compliance with the approved
plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance
with the approved plan.



   (C)   Submissions. Each application for a site development permit
shall be accompanied by the following information, sealed by a professional
engineer:



      (1)   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy
location in the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and
including the boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing
zoning and a legend and scale;



      (2)   A development plan of the site showing:



         (a)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land
within approximately 100 feet of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than
two-foot contour intervals (one-foot contours, if ground slope less than 3%)
and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern of the area.
These are different requirements than mapping for the drainage planning
submittal;



         (b)   The location of existing buildings, structures,
utilities, streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands and depressions, drainage
facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas and other significant natural or
human-made features on the site and adjacent land within 100 feet of the
boundary;



         (c)   A general description of the predominant soil
types on the site, their location and their limitations for the proposed use;
and



         (d)   Proposed use of the site, including present
development and planned utilization; areas of clearing, stripping, grading,
excavation and filling; proposed contours, finished grades and street
profiles; provisions for storm drainage, including storm sewers, swales,
detention basins and any other measures to control the rate of runoff, with a
drainage area map, indications of flow directions and computations; kinds and
locations of utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered,
sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed.



      (3)   An erosion and sediment control plan showing all
measures necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all
phases of construction and permanently after completion of development of the
site, including:



         (a)   Location and description, including standard
details, of all sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment
basins and traps, including outlet details;



         (b)   Location and description of all soil stabilization
and erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of
sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of
lime and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both
temporary and permanent vegetative control measures, and types of
non-vegetative stabilization measures;



         (c)   Location and description of all runoff control
measures, including diversions, waterways and outlets;



         (d)   Location and description of methods to prevent
tracking of sediment off-site, including construction entrance details, as
appropriate;



         (e)   Description of dust and traffic-control measures;



         (f)   Locations of stockpiles and description of
stabilization methods;



         (g)   Description of off-site fill or borrow volumes,
locations and methods of stabilization;



         (h)   Provisions for maintenance of control measures,
including type and frequency of maintenance, easements and estimates of the
cost of maintenance; and



         (i)   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of
the person(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance
of erosion control structures and measures during development and after
development is completed. The maintainers of permanent erosion control
devices shall be identified as precisely as possible in the plan.



      (4)   The proposed phasing of development of the site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final
grading and landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which
clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and
the sequence of installation of temporary sediment control measures
(including perimeter controls), clearing and grading, installation of
temporary soil stabilization measures, installation of storm drainage, paving
streets and parking areas, final grading and the establishment of permanent
vegetative cover, and the removal of temporary measures. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to notify the Director or City Engineer of
any significant changes which occur in the site development schedule after
the initial erosion and sediment control plan has been approved. These
submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the standards and requirements contained in the Illinois Urban
Manual, dated December 2002 or more recent publication date. (The Illinois
Urban Manual is a compilation and updating of the Standards and
Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (the Yellow Book)
published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois
Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(the Green Book) prepared by the Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Steering Committee); and



      (5)   A completed notice of intent (NOI) to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA), the general permit application to
discharge storm water due to construction site activities.



   (D)   Review and approval. Each application for a site development
permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures.



      (1)   The Director will review each application for a site
development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Director may also refer any application to the St. Clair or
Madison County Soil and Water Conservation District and/or any other local
government or public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for
review and comment. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the
Director shall, in writing:



         (a)   Approve the permit application if it is found to
be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and issue the permit;



         (b)   Approve the permit application subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions;
or



         (c)   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.



      (2)   No site development permit shall be issued for an
intended development site unless:



         (a)   The development, including, but not limited to,
subdivisions and planned unit development, has been approved by the city
where applicable;



         (b)   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a
valid building permit issued by the city;



         (c)   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any
overall development program previously approved by the city for the area in
which the site is situated; and



         (d)   All relevant federal and state permits (i.e., for
floodplains and wetlands) relevant to soil erosion and sediment control have
been received for the portion of the site subject to soil disturbance.



      (3)   Failure of the Director to act on an original or revised
application within 30 days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to
proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by
agreement between the Director and the applicant. Pending preparation and
approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to
proceed in accordance with conditions established by the Director.



   (E)   Expiration of permit. Every site development permit shall
expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not
been commenced within 120 days, or is not completed by a date which shall be
specified in the permit; except that, the Director may, if the permittee
presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work
being commenced or completed within the specified time limits, grant a
reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. The Director may require modification of the
erosion control plan to prevent any increase in erosion or off-site sediment
runoff resulting from any extension.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.059  DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Applicability. All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating
and filling which is subject to the permit requirements of this chapter shall
be subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this
section. Development which is exempted from the permit requirements of this
chapter are still required to take actions to control erosion and
sedimentation leaving that development site, and that those actions shall be
generally consistent with this section.



   (B)   Responsibility. The permittee shall not be relieved of
responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law,
and the city or its officers or agents will not be made liable for such
damage, by:



      (1)   The issuance of a permit under this chapter;



      (2)   Compliance with the provisions of that permit or with
conditions attached to it by the Director;



      (3)   Failure of city officials to observe or recognize
hazardous or unsightly conditions;



      (4)   Failure of city officials to recommend denial of or to
deny a permit; or



      (5)   Exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Site design requirements.



      (1)   On-site sediment control measures, as specified by the
following criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating
clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site.



         (a)   For disturbed areas draining less than one acre,
filter barriers (including filter fences, straw bales or equivalent control
measures) shall be constructed to control all off-site runoff as specified in
referenced handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of 25
feet, may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is
expected.



         (b)   For disturbed areas draining more than one, but
less than five, acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be
constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area.



         (c)   For disturbed areas draining more than five acres,
a sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the
downslope point of the disturbed area.



         (d)   Sediment basins and sediment traps designs shall
provide for both detention storage and sediment storage. The detention
storage shall be composed of equal volumes of “wet” detention storage and
“dry” detention storage and each shall be sized for the two-year, 24-hour
runoff from the site under maximum runoff conditions during construction. The
release rate of the basin shall be that rate required to achieve minimum
detention times of at least ten hours. The elevation of the outlet structure
shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention storage.



         (e)   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the
estimated sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the
construction period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of
sediment generated in one year. For construction periods exceeding one year,
the one-year sediment load and a sediment removal schedule may be substituted.



      (2)   Storm water conveyance channels, including ditches,
swales and diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be
designed and constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the
ten-year frequency storm without erosion. All constructed or modified
channels shall be stabilized within 48 hours, consistent with the following
standards:



 


Design Flow Velocity (feet per second)

 

Lining Material



Less than 3
 
Seeded


0 to 5
 
Sod, staked


0 to 7
 
Erosion control blanket as approved by the City Engineer


0 to 10
 
Rip-rap


0 to 15
 
Grouted rip-rap


Over 15
 
Paved concrete or sound in-situ bedrock



 



      (3)   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or
permanent measures within seven calendar days following the end of active
disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:



         (a)   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization
measures shall include seeding, mulching, sodding and/or non-vegetative
measures.



         (b)   Areas having slopes greater than 20% shall be
stabilized with sod, mat or blanket in combination with seeding, or
equivalent.



      (4)   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be
avoided, where possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the
following requirements shall be met.



         (a)   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the
stream channel to the maximum extent practicable. Where construction
crossings are necessary, temporary crossings shall be constructed of
non-erosive material, such as riprap or gravel.



         (b)   The time and area of disturbance of stream
channels shall be kept to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and
banks, shall be restabilized within 48 hours after channel disturbance is
completed, interrupted or stopped.



         (c)   Channel relocation should be avoided whenever
possible. Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be
constructed in the dry and fully stabilized before flow is diverted.



      (5)   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by
sediment traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and
specifications, but implemented in a manner which will avoid unacceptable
flooding of pubic streets.



      (6)   Soil storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards
of material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less
than 25 feet to a roadway or drainage channel. Filter barriers, including
straw bales, filter fence or equivalent, shall be installed immediately on
the downslope side of the piles.



      (7)   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations
shall be protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed
through appropriately designed sediment traps or basins or equivalent.



      (8)   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance
roads, access drives and parking areas of sufficient length and width to
prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any
sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or
street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported
to a controlled sediment disposal area.



      (9)   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control
practices must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective
performance.



      (10)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures
shall be disposed of within 30 days after final site stabilization is
achieved with permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and
other disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures
should be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.



   (D)   Maintenance of control measures.



      (1)   All soil erosion and sediment control measures necessary
to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained periodically by
the applicant or subsequent land owner during the period of land disturbance
and development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate
performance.



      (2)   Effective maintenance of control measures is critical to
their success and shall be budgeted into the erosion and sediment control
plan.



      (3)   Particular emphasis shall be placed on the following
types of maintenance needs: repair and replacement of sediment barriers, such
as straw bales; removal of excess accumulated sediment from traps, basins and
channels; irrigation, fertilization or reseeding of vegetatively stabilized
areas; repair of scour or gully development on slopes and in channels;
removal of sediment from roadways; and control of dust.



   (E)   Inspection.



      (1)   (a)   The Director, City Engineer or their designees
shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that
portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work
fails to comply with the site development or erosion and sedimentation
control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating and
filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the Director shall be
maintained at the site during progress of the work.



         (b)   In order to obtain inspections and to ensure
compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, the site
development or building permit and this chapter, the permittee shall notify
the Director within two working days of the completion of the construction
stages specified below:



            1.   Upon completion of installation of sediment
and runoff control measures (including perimeter controls and diversions),
prior to proceeding with any other earth disturbance or grading;



            2.   After stripping and clearing;



            3.   After rough grading;



            4.   After final grading;



            5.   After seeding and landscaping deadlines; and



            6.   After final stabilization and landscaping,
prior to removal of sediment controls.



      (2)   (a)   If stripping, clearing, grading and/or
landscaping are to be done in phases or areas, the permittee shall give
notice and request inspection at the completion of each of the above work
stages in each phase or area.



         (b)   If an inspection is not made and notification of
the results given within five working days after notice is received by the
city from the permittee, the permittee may continue work at his or her own
risk, without presuming acceptance by the city.



         (c)   Notification of the results of the inspection
shall be given in writing at the site.



   (F)   Special precautions.



      (1)   (a)   If at any stage of the grading of any
development site the Director determines by inspection that the nature of the
site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to
imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland or drainage
structure, the Director or City Engineer may require, as a condition of
allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be
taken as is considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril.



         (b)   “Special precautions” may include, but shall
not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional
drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation
of plant materials for erosion control and recommendations of a registered
soils engineer and/or engineering geologist which may be made requirements
for further work.



      (2)   (a)   Where it appears that storm damage may result
because the grading on any development site is not complete, work may be
stopped and the permittee required to install temporary structures or take
such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the
public safety.



         (b)   On large developments or where unusual site
conditions prevail, the Director may specify the time of starting grading and
time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in
specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices
prior to the advent of seasonal rains.



   (G)   Amendment of plans.



      (1)   Major amendments of the site development or erosion and
sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the Director or City
Engineer and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same
manner as the original plans.



      (2)   Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized
by the Director by written authorization to the permittee.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)




ARTICLE 5:
SUBDIVISION STREET TREE PLANTING REQUIREMENTS




§ 155.070  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   All subdivisions and developments shall submit a tree planting plan,
unless excepted by the City Council, that:



   (A)   Supports functional purposes on the site such as creation of
privacy, drainage, visual screening, spatial definition and the like;



   (B)   Enhances the appearance of the development and neighborhood;



   (C)   Enhances the driving environment;



   (D)   Enhances the pedestrian environment;



   (E)   Identifies all landscape areas;



   (F)   Identifies landscaping elements within landscaped areas; and



   (G)   Meets or exceeds the standards of this program.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.071  TREE PLANTING STANDARDS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   (a)   All developments shall establish belts or
groves of trees along all city streets, unless otherwise provided by the City
Council.



         (b)   These standards are minimums and are not intended
to limit additional tree plantings as may be approved by the City Engineer.



         (c)   All street tree plantings will be designed and
installed according to the following guidelines.



         (d)   Where the immediate planting of required trees in
the right-of-way may not be in the best interest of the public, the City
Council in lieu of such street tree planting requirement may in the final
plat ordinance and at its discretion:



            1.   Require an escrow of the costs for future
planting of such trees in that subdivision or a fee; or



            2.   Require not less than two trees per lot
frontage to be placed within the lot on private property.



      (2)   The escrow or fee shall be in the amount determined by
the city necessary for the city to purchase and install the number of street
trees of a type on the approved city list equal to two trees for every 50
feet of frontage within the subject subdivision.



   (B)   Intent and purpose. Tree-lined streets encourage walking,
promote interaction between neighbors, slow vehicle speeds and moderate
climatic effects.







 



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.072  LOCATION.



   The intent of this section is to help create a community environment
that is aesthetically pleasing for drivers and pedestrians and promotes a
healthy and thriving green space.



   (A)   Except as where an alternative design is approved, canopy
shade trees will be planted in the parkway between the sidewalk and the
street on average every 50 feet apart on center within the parkway. Note: 
ordinance requires all parkways to be designed at seven feet wide.



   (B)   As a general rule, the canopies of large deciduous trees at
maturity should nearly touch.



   (C)   Street trees will not be located* within:



      (1)   Twenty feet of a streetlight;



      (2)   Six feet of a water, sewer or gas line;



      (3)   Ten feet of a fire hydrant, manhole or sewer inlet;



      (4)   Thirty feet of an intersection;



      (5)   An area blocking the view of traffic signs;



      (6)   Ten feet of a driveway; and



      (7)   The valley of a drainage swale.



*exception to the above standards will occur within cul-de-sacs, elbows and
the like, with approval from the city



   (D)   Ornamental trees shall be planted in substitution for the
canopy shade trees where overhead lines and fixtures would interfere with the
normal maturing of canopy trees.



   (E)   Unless otherwise approved, trees shall be placed at the
following set intervals:



 


Type of Tree

 

Interval*



Canopy shade trees (50' or taller)
 

35' -  50' on center



Coniferous evergreens (for use on berms)
 

25' -  40' on center (staggering is permitted)



Ornamental trees
 





   Medium: 35' - 50' tall;

 





   Small: 25' - 35' tall

 

25' -  35' on center



NOTE TO TABLE:

*Exact locations and spacing may be adjusted at the option of the applicants
with approval from the city.



 



   (F)   The developer shall design a street tree plan which
corresponds to the character of the subdivision. In subdivisions that are
grid-like and more traditional, the developer should plant trees in a formal
and consistent manner, using trees of similar size and shape with regular
intervals. In subdivisions with curvilinear streets, the developer should
plant a diversity of species both in size and shape in informal patterns to
mimic randomness in nature.



   (G)   Smaller or under-story trees may be planted between or among
larger canopy trees to create diversity in scale and to counteract gaps in
density when streetlights, utilities or driveways create voids.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.073  SPECIES DIVERSITY.



   (A)   All developments will adhere to the following guidelines to
prevent uniform insect or disease damage to the extensive landscape being
installed. This species diversity standard is set as a minimum only.
Extensive monocultures are prohibited.



   (B)   In general, a single species should not make up more than 20%
of the city’s street tree population.



   (C)   Depending on the number of trees planted in the entire
development, the following maximum percentage of any one species will be used.



 

Number of Trees
 
Maximum %
 
Minimum Number of Species


10-29
 
50%
 
2 species


30-59
 
33%
 
3 species


60 or more
 
25%
 
4 species



 



   (D)   A single species will be placed in no more than four
consecutive locations on any one side of the street.



   (E)   Species will be determined from the approved street tree list
found in App. A, attached at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.074  PROCEDURE AND INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The following ensures that the environment desired by the
community is created efficiently.



   (B)   These guidelines will prevent costs to the developer for
removal, replacement or relocation of trees and prevent costs to the
homeowner or city for future maintenance or repair of avoidable damages.



      (1)   Detailed landscape plans shall be submitted with the
final plat or final construction plans. The landscape plan shall be one
consolidated sheet showing the locations of street trees, utilities,
manholes, fire hydrants, light posts and the like. During the plat design
process, landscape and utility plans should be coordinated. Approval will be
made during the final plat review for the location and type of street trees.
Note: tree/utility separations shall not be used as a means of avoiding the
planting of required street trees.



      (2)   At the time of final plat or plan approval, the
developer is required to provide a bond or letter of credit (LOC) to the city
for any and all street trees installed within the subdivision. The bond or
LOC will last the duration of two years from the date the sidewalks and trees
are accepted by the city.



      (3)   Planting time, in general, is from October to December
and March to May.



      (4)   Immediately prior to planting, the developer will mark
all street tree locations on site, also identifying the species of tree.



      (5)   The city will inspect the locations and species
variation on site to affirm  adherence to the approved street tree plan in
addition to approving any alterations or departures from the original tree
plan. The city will also inspect all trees prior to planting to ensure
acceptable tree quality and size according to the American Standard for
Nursery Stock, published by the American Association for Nurserymen.



      (6)   Each street tree will be centered in the parkway (e.g.,
three feet, six inches from curb in a seven- foot parkway), unless the
parkway is used as a vegetated drainage swale. If a swale is indicated, the
species and location will be determined by the city.



      (7)   Each tree will be installed with a root barrier to
prevent excessive root growth into neighboring utilities or
roadways/sidewalks. The following diagrams are two models of acceptable root
barrier methods. Examples are taken from www.DeepRoot.com.




Surround Root Barrier
















Linear Root Barrier















      (8)   Trunk protectors will be installed around the trunk
flares or bases of all trees to avoid damage from weed eaters, lawnmowers and
the like.



      (9)   Trees will be planted with the following minimum sizes
(measured at four-foot height):



 

Type of Tree
 
Minimum Size


Canopy shade tree
 
2" caliper, balled and burlapped


Evergreen tree
 
6' in height, balled and burlapped


Ornamental tree
 
1.5" caliper, balled and burlapped



 



      (10)   The city will perform a post-planting inspection for
proper tree installation according to American Standard for Nursery Stock.



      (11)   Following tree and sidewalk acceptance by the city, the
city will be responsible for the maintenance of the tree. The homeowner will
be responsible for the area around and beneath the canopy including
collection and disposal of leaves, twigs, branches and other tree litter.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.075  PASTORAL SUBDIVISIONS.



   Any subdivision which contains lots greater than one acre on average
may have the preceding guidelines and requirements waived by the city. The
developer will then have the option of following these guidelines or creating
an alternative street tree planting scheme as approved by the city. If the
developer of such subdivision does not  plant trees in the right-of-way or
within an approved planting scheme, the developer is required to donate the
equivalent number of trees to the city or to pay a cash contribution in lieu
of the tree dedications. The equivalent number of trees shall be determined
as two trees for every 50 feet of frontage within the subdivision. The cash
contribution shall be based on the fair market value of the trees in place as
permitted in the Approved Street Tree List (App. A of this chapter).



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



§ 155.076  LANDSCAPE BERMS.



   (A)   Required berms. A minimum 30-foot wide natural landscape
buffer a minimum of four feet in height with a maximum slope of three to one
(3:1) (to include a berm that will provide visual protection to the property
owner from the roadway) is required whenever the back or side yards of a
residential development face non-subdivision streets or whenever a landscape
berm is otherwise required on the plat. There shall be no right of access
across a landscape easement. Where fencing is to be constructed along a
landscape buffer and is visible from the public roadway, a permanent
ornamental fence of a height and design that is consistent and that will be
harmonious with the neighborhood and residential character is required in
these situations. This can be achieved through either construction by the
developer or required in the covenants of the subdivision and deed restricted
against the applicable lots. No fence or structure shall be constructed
within the landscape buffer without express written authorization of the city.



   (B)   Buffers. Areas consisting of berms, evergreens and other
landscaping which act as a buffer between the development and major
thoroughfares shall be laced in a landscaping easement that will be
maintained by the adjacent property owner, or on outlots to be maintained by
a homeowner’s association. Berms shall not be placed over utilities. Fences
will not be allowed in landscape easements.



   (C)   Berms. Required landscape berms shall be placed in common
ground for permanent maintenance, or if otherwise approved by the Council,
may be part of any lot, the buffer shall be subject to a permanent
maintenance easement acceptable to the city and shall not be counted in the
calculation of minimum lot size required by the applicable zoning. Such
easements shall be deed restricted to prevent adjacent property owners from
constructing any facilities or structures (including fences) on a berm or
easement.



(Ord. 3319, passed 2-22-2005)



APPENDIX A: APPROVED STREET TREE LIST



 

Scientific Name
 
Common Name
 

Mature Height





Small Trees
 
 

<35'




   Acer griseum

 
Paperbark Maple
 

25-30




   Acer truncatum

 
Purple-blow Maple
 

25-30




   Amelanchier spp.

 
Serviceberry (Improved cultivars)
 

25-30'




   Cercis canadensis

 
Redbud
 

25-30'




   Chionanthus virginicus

 
Fringetree
 

25-30'




   Cornus Kousa

 
Kousa Dogwood
 

20-30'




   Halesia carolina

 
Carolina Silverbell
 

25-30'




   Malus spp.

 
Crabapple, (Non-fruiting cultivars)
 

25-35'



Medium Trees
 
 

35-50'




   Carpinus betulus

 
European Hornbeam
 

35-40




   Carpinus caroliniana

 
American Hornbeam
 

25-40'




   Koelreuteria paniculata

 
Golden Rain Tree
 

35-40




   Ostrya virginiana

 
Hophornbeam
 

30-40'



Large Trees
 
 

>50'




   Acer rubrum

 
Red Maple (Improved cultivars)
 

>50'




   Acer saccharum

 
Sugar Maple (Improved cultivars)
 

>50'




   Celtis occidentalis

 
Hackberry
 

>50'




   Cladrastis kentukea

 
Yellowwood
 

>50'




   Ginkgo biloba

 
Ginkgo (Fruitless cultivars only)
 

>50'




   Gymnocladus dioicus

 
Kentucky Coffeetree (Fruitless cultivars only)
 

>50'




   Gleditsia triacanthos

 
Honeylocust (Fruitless cultivars only)
 

>50'




   Platanus x acerifolia

 
London Planetree
 

>50'




   Quercus acutissima

 
Sawtooth Oak
 

>50'




   Quercus bicolor

 
Swamp White Oak
 

>50'




   Quercus coccinea

 
Scarlet Oak
 

>50'




   Quercus muehlenbergii

 
Chinkapin Oak
 

>50'




   Quercus phellos

 
Willow Oak
 

>50'




   Quercus rubra

 
Northern Red Oak
 

>50'




   Quercus shumardii

 
Shumard Oak
 

>50'




   Sophora japonica

 
Japanese Pagoda Tree
 

>50'




   Taxodium distichum

 
Bald Cypress
 

>50'




   Tilia americana ‘Redmond’

 
Redmond Linden
 

>50'




   Tilia tomentosa ‘Sterling’

 
‘Sterling’ Silver Linden
 

>50'




   Ulmus parvifolia

 
Lacebark Elm
 

>50'




   Zelkova serrata

 
Japanese Zelkova (Improved cultivars)
 

>50'



NOTES TO TABLE:

-  This list is a guide to selecting trees for use in the right-of-way
adjacent to the street.

-  Trees not on this list must be approved by the city before installation.

-  Improved cultivars should be used when indicated or available.




 



(Ord. 3857, passed 1-20-2015)



APPENDIX B: STORM INLET AND STREET CROSS-SECTIONS



Editor's Note: The images contained within Appendix B are available in a
printer-friendly PDF format. Please click HERE.







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 



CHAPTER 156:  MOBILE HOME PARK CODE



Section



   156.01   Short title



   156.02   Definitions



   156.03   Planned use approval



   156.04   Application for permit



   156.05   License



   156.06   Standards



   156.07   Inspection



   156.08   Suspension or revocation of license



   156.09   Appeal and judicial review



 



   156.99   Penalty



§ 156.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Mobile Home Park
Code”.



(1999 Code, § 156.01)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)



§ 156.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate building or structure, the use of
which is incidental to and customarily in conjunction with the main building
or use and which is located on the same lot as the main building or use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES shall include sheds, detached garages, decks, pools and
covered patios.



   CITY. The City of O’Fallon, Illinois.



   INDIVIDUAL UTILITIES. The provision for each mobile home of a separate
metered connection to electrical service, separately tapped water service
from an approved public water supply or a separate private water supply, and
a separately tapped connection to an approved public sewer system or a
separate private sewage disposal system.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which,
in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or
more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet and which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein. All mobile homes shall comply with the Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards established pursuant to
the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42
U.S.C. § 5403 and constructed after 6-15-1976. Each mobile home unit shall
contain a red metal label, permanently affixed to the rear of each towable
unit and comply with the requirement of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), the State Department of Public Health and all other
applicable agencies. The term MANUFACTURED HOME is synonymous with the term
MOBILE HOME.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of
land upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for two or more
mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue
purposes and maintained or operated jointly, and shall include any building,
structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the
equipment of such mobile home park. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts
of land shall not preclude the tracts of land from common licensure as a
MOBILE HOME PARK if they are maintained and operated jointly. A motorized
recreational vehicle shall not be construed as being a part of a MOBILE HOME
PARK.



   REVENUE PURPOSES. Includes, but is not limited to, moneys or other
valuable consideration paid by a tenant or lessee or paid by a contract
purchaser pursuant to a lease, rental agreement, contract for deed, sale or
purchase prior to the delivery of the deed conveying legal title.



   SITE. The lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent
habitation.



(1999 Code, § 156.02)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)



§ 156.03  PLANNED USE APPROVAL.



   No person, firm or corporation shall alter an existing mobile home
park, or construct or establish a new mobile home park without first
obtaining planned use rezoning approval through §§ 158.115 through 158.121
of this code. The term ALTER shall include, but not be limited to, any
expansion or material change to any improvements within the mobile home park
such as utilities, streets, pads or buildings, or any resubdivision, but
shall not include changes only to a mobile home structure itself or minor
maintenance.



(1999 Code, § 156.03)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Upon planned use rezoning approval and receipt of an
application for a permit to construct a new mobile home park or an
application for a permit to alter a licensed mobile home park, the city
shall, if the park is, or the proposed park will be, in conformity with this
chapter and the rules and regulations adopted by the city pursuant thereto,
issue a permit to construct, a permit to alter or an original license, as the
case may be. If the application for a permit to construct, a permit to alter
or an original license is declined, the city shall give the reasons therefor
in writing to the applicant; and if the objections can be corrected, the
applicant may amend his or her application and resubmit it for approval.



   (B)   If a permit to construct or a permit to alter a park has been
issued, the applicant upon completion thereof shall notify the city. The city
shall then inspect the park and, if completed in accordance with the approved
plans, shall issue a license for the number of approved sites after receipt
of the required fee.



(1999 Code, § 156.04)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)



§ 156.05  LICENSE.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain,
conduct or operate a mobile home park after the effective date of the city
ordinance adopting this chapter (Ord. 3563), without first obtaining and
maintaining a valid license therefor from the city. CONDUCT OR OPERATE A
MOBILE HOME PARK, as used in this chapter, shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, supplying or maintaining common water, sewer or other utility
supply or service, or the collection of rents directly or indirectly from two
or more independent mobile homes. Such license shall expire April 30 of each
year and a new license shall be issued upon proper application and payment of
the annual license fee; provided, the applicant is in compliance with this
chapter. The annual license fee shall be in an amount as established by the
city.



   (B)   Annual license fees submitted after April 30 shall be subject
to a late fee as established by the city. The licensee shall also complete
and return a license renewal application by March 31 of each year.



   (C)   The licensee shall pay to the city within 30 days of receipt
of notification from the city an additional fee, as established by the city,
for each additional mobile home site added to the park under authority of a
written permit to alter the park as provided in this chapter. Payment of the
additional fee for the additional mobile home sites shall be paid and the
amended license therefor obtained before any mobile homes are accommodated on
the additional mobile home sites. The city shall issue an amended license to
cover such additional mobile home sites, when they are to be occupied before
the end of the license year, for which an annual license has been previously
issued.



   (D)   Each license fee shall be paid to the city and any license fee
or any part thereof, once paid to and accepted by the city shall not be
refunded.



   (E)   All permits to construct, all licenses to operate and all
permits to make alterations therein shall be prominently displayed in the
park office. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be transferable
only with the written consent of the city; provided, however, that, the city
may not withhold such consent where the provisions of this chapter have been
met.



(1999 Code, § 156.05)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.06  STANDARDS.



   Each mobile home park licensed or to be constructed under the
provisions of this chapter shall be operated and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of this section and all other applicable codes and
regulations of the city and the following supplemental regulations.



   (A)   Every mobile home park shall be managed by a responsible
individual whose name, address and telephone number shall be on file at all
times with the city and whose duty it shall be to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and
shall be responsible, with the licensee, for any violation of the provisions
of this chapter.



   (B)   No mobile home park shall be so located that the drainage of
the park area will endanger any water supply. All such parks shall be well
drained. No waste water shall be deposited on the surface of the ground
within the mobile home park.



   (C)   Each site on which a mobile home is accommodated shall have a
minimum area of 2,500 square feet.



   (D)   Except as noted hereafter, no mobile home shall be parked
closer than five feet to the side lot lines of a park. However a minimum
separation of ten feet shall be maintained between the mobile home and any
other structures including those structures on adjoining property. No mobile
home shall be situated closer than 25 feet to a public street, alley or
building and no closer than ten feet to a private street or alley. Each
individual site shall abut or face on a private or public street. All streets
shall have unobstructed access to a public street.



   (E)   When a water carriage system of sewage is used each site shall
be provided with a sewer connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or
outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of
the park to provide an approved type of water and odor tight connection from
the mobile home water drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be the
duty of the owner or operator to make such connection and keep all occupied
mobile homes, connected to the sewer while located in the park. Sewer
connections in unoccupied sites shall be so closed that they will emit no
odors or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or waste shall be allowed
to fall on the ground from a mobile home.



   (F)   A sufficient number of adequate fly-proof and water-tight
containers in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the city shall
be supplied for the storage of garbage.



   (G)   Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once a week and
shall not be filled to overflowing, or allowed to become foul smelling or a
breeding place for flies. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a
manner which creates neither a nuisance, nor a menace to health and which is
approved by the city.



   (H)   Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed.
All buildings shall be fly- and rodent-proof and rodent harborages shall not
be permitted to exist in the park or pathways.



   (I)   All streets in every park must be maintained in a passable and
reasonably dust-proof condition at all times.



   (J)   The management and owner of every park shall assume full
responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary,
electrical and safety appliances in the park, and shall promptly bring such
action as is necessary to prosecute or eject from the park any person or
persons who willfully or maliciously damage such appliances, or any person or
persons who fail to comply with the regulations of this chapter.



   (K)   Electrical outlets for each individual site shall be provided
and the installation shall be in accordance with all state or local codes and
ordinances.



   (L)   In no event shall a non-permanent shelter or other vehicle
designed or used for sleeping purposes, other than a mobile home, be
permitted for occupancy at any time in a mobile home park.



   (M)   When community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries or other
facilities are provided, such facilities and equipment as are supplied must
be maintained in a sanitary condition and kept in good repair, and subject to
such rules and regulations as may be issued by the city.



   (N)   All buildings constructed or altered, all plumbing and all
electrical and heating installations shall be in accordance with existing
city ordinances and codes and the applicable codes and regulation of the
state.



   (O)   The city shall keep a record of all mobile home parks, those
records to show the names and addresses of all parks, names and addresses of
the licensees, number of mobile home lots in each park, source of sewage and
garbage disposal, and any other information desired by the city.



   (P)   A register shall be maintained by the manager of each mobile
home park. Such register shall include the name and address of the owner of
each mobile home and every occupant of such mobile home and the square feet
of floor space contained in such mobile home and the date of entry of such
mobile home into the park. The register shall be signed by the owner or
occupant of the mobile home. Any person furnishing misinformation for
purposes of registration shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. The
registration records shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no
registration records shall be destroyed until one year following change in
ownership of a mobile home or the termination of a lease of a mobile home or
eviction of the mobile home or tenant from the park. The register shall be
available for inspection upon request by all law enforcement officers and by
the city.



   (Q)   Mobile home parks shall comply with such additional
requirements as set forth in ILCS Ch. 210, Act 115, the Mobile Home Park Act,
and any state regulations enacted pursuant thereto except where inconsistent
with the requirements herein.



   (R)   The Code Official shall be authorized to adopt such
interpretations, regulations or orders as may be necessary to enforce and
apply the provisions and intent of this section.



(1999 Code, § 156.06)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.07  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The city shall inspect at least once each year, each mobile
home park and all the accommodations and facilities therewith. Such officials
or officers are hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the
premises of such parks at any time for the purposes herein set forth.



   (B)   The city may issue rules and regulations to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. Such rules may contain provisions for the city to
grant a waiver to a mobile home park, if the intent and purpose of this
chapter are met.



(1999 Code, § 156.07)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.08  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation
or suspension by the city. However, the city shall first serve or cause to be
served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way
or ways in which such licensee has failed to comply with this chapter, or any
rules or regulations promulgated by the city pertaining thereto. The notice
shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, unsanitary or
objectionable condition, specified in such notice, within five days or within
a longer period of time as may be allowed by the city. If the licensee fails
to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice, within the time
specified or such extended period of time, the city may revoke or suspend
such license.



   (B)   A mobile home park whose license has been voided, suspended,
denied or revoked, may be re-licensed by submission of an application to the
city. Approval shall be issued if an inspection of the park, by the city,
reveals compliance with this chapter and the rules promulgated pursuant to
this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 156.08)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.09  APPEAL AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any person whose application for a license is denied or whose license
is suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
Hearing Officer and judicial review in the same manner as an appeal pursuant
to §§ 158.295 through 158.301 of this code. Any person who fails to file
such an appeal within the time frames and requirements set forth therein
shall to the full extent permitted by law be barred from obtaining judicial
review of such administrative decision for failure to exhaust applicable
remedies.



(1999 Code, § 156.09)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or shall fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant to any
section of this chapter, upon conviction therefore, shall be punished in
accordance with the general penalty for violation of ordinances of the city.



   (B)   Each day such violation or failure to comply continues after
issuance of notice by the city, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall limit any other remedy that the city may
have by law.



   (D)   Any failure to operate a mobile home park without a valid
license shall also preclude any claim of continued lawful non-conforming
status as may otherwise exist pursuant to §§ 158.075 through 158.084 of
this code.



(1999 Code, § 156.99)  (Ord. 3563, passed 3-3-2008)



CHAPTER 157:  RESERVED



Section



CHAPTER 158:  ZONING



Section




Article 1:
General Provisions




   158.001   Short title; introduction



   158.002   Authority



   158.003   Jurisdiction



   158.004   Purpose



   158.005   Relationship to other provisions of the Code



   158.006   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan and other policies



   158.007   Relationship to private restrictions



   158.008   Prohibitions



   158.009   Adequate public facilities and services



   158.010   Zoning of annexed lands



   158.011   Use of land or buildings



   158.012   Severability



   158.013   Computation of time



   158.014   Fees



   158.015   Rules of interpretation



   158.016   Definitions




Article 2:
Zoning District Regulations




   158.030   Zoning districts - general



   158.031   Regulation of structures and dwellings



   158.032   Establishment of zoning districts



   158.033   Interpretation of provisions



   158.034   Interpretation of district boundaries



   158.035   Existing special uses



   158.036   Schedule: area and bulk regulations



   158.037   Schedule: permitted uses; accessory uses; exceptions and
special permits



   158.038   Supplementary use and bulk regulations



   158.039   General supplementary regulations




Article 3:
Site Plans




   158.050   Purpose and intent



   158.051   Types of site plans; when required



   158.052   Site plan exceptions



   158.053   Preliminary site plan



   158.054   Final site plan



   158.055   General site plan review procedures



   158.056   Site plan design standards and requirements



   158.057   Issuance of permits



   158.058   Improvement guarantee



   158.059   Site plan amendments



   158.060   Compliance with site plans required




Article 4:
Non-Conformities and Vested Rights




   158.075   Definitions



   158.076   Continuation of non-conformities



   158.077   Extension or enlargement of non-conformities



   158.078   Repair, maintenance and restoration



   158.079   Change of non-conforming use



   158.080   Abandonment, discontinuance or reduction of non-conformity



   158.081   Non-conforming signs



   158.082   Undeveloped non-conforming lots



   158.083   Completion of non-conforming projects; vested rights



   158.084   Special use permit authorizing alteration of the
non-conformity




Article 5:
Special Uses




   158.095   Statement of intent



   158.096   When special use permit required



   158.097   Special use permit; application requirements



   158.098   Procedures and criteria for considering special use permits



   158.099   Vesting of rights



   158.100   Public buildings, public utility buildings or structures



   158.101   Final development plan; transferability, lapse, expiration
and revocation



   158.102   Violations




Article 6:
Planned Uses




   158.115   Statement of intent



   158.116   Planned use; when required



   158.117   Planned uses; general procedure



   158.118   Application and submission requirements



   158.119   Consideration of a planned use



   158.120   Final site plans; approval, modification, expiration



   158.121   Planned use; automotive service station or convenience
store




Article 7:
Parking and Loading




   158.135   Vehicle parking; when required



   158.136   Requirements; how calculated



   158.137   Unlisted uses



   158.138   Alternate parking plan



   158.139   Guidelines; Downtown District parking



   158.140   Dedication to parking use



   158.141   Proximity of vehicle parking spaces to use



   158.142   Requirements for design of parking lots



   158.143   Lighting



   158.144   Parking lot landscaping standards



   158.145   Handicap accessible parking spaces



   158.146   Loading




Article 8:
Signs




   158.160   Purpose and scope



   158.161   Sign permit required; administration



   158.162   General sign regulations



   158.163   Signs authorized without permit; all zoning lots;
exceptions



   158.164   Signs authorized only by permit; residential zoning lots



   158.165   Signs authorized only by permit; non-residential zoning
lots



   158.166   Supplemental sign regulations by type; non-residential
zoning lots



   158.167   Prohibited signs



   158.168   Definitions




Article 9:
Landscaping and Riparian Corridors




   158.180   Statement of intent



   158.181   Applicability



   158.182   Landscape plan; submittal requirements



   158.183   General requirements



   158.184   Subdivision landscape standards



   158.185   Parking lot landscape standards



   158.186   Buffers, where required



   158.187   Minimum buffer standards



   158.188   Modifications and alternative compliance



   158.189   Installation



   158.190   Maintenance



   158.191   Landscape credit



   158.192   Construction protection



   158.193   Riparian corridors



   158.194   Definitions




Article 10:
Telecommunications




   158.205   Purpose



   158.206   The legislative findings



   158.207   Definitions



   158.208   General requirements



   158.209   Permitted uses



   158.210   Authorization by administrative permit



   158.211   Special use permit required



   158.212   Obsolete non-complying tower structures



   158.213   Commercial operation of unlawful tower or antennas




Article 11:
Administration and Enforcement




   158.225   Director of Community Development



   158.226   Planning Commission



   158.227   Building permits, zoning permits and occupancy permits



   158.228   Entry and inspections of land and buildings



   158.229   Violations of prior regulations




Article 12:
Zoning Amendments




   158.240   Who may apply



   158.241   Consideration of zoning text amendments



   158.242   Consideration of property rezoning applications



   158.243   Limitation on successive property rezoning applications by
landowner




Article 13:
Notices and Hearings




   158.255   Publication notices



   158.256   Notices of hearing to surrounding property owners



   158.257   Public hearings




Article 14:
General Applications and Procedures




   158.270   General



   158.271   Applications



   158.272   Pre-application conference



   158.273   General application requirements



   158.274   Submission of technical studies



   158.275   When applications deemed complete



   158.276   Application and submission deadlines



   158.277   Dual applications



   158.278   City staff review



   158.279   Conditional approvals



   158.280   Written findings not required; when



   158.281   Final decision where ordinance required



   158.282   Appeals of final decisions




Article 15:
Variances and Appeals




   158.295   Establishment of office of Hearing Officer



   158.296   Powers and duties



   158.297   Appeals



   158.298   Variances



   158.299   Procedure



   158.300   City Council power of administrative review



   158.301   Judicial review of final decision




Article 16:
Airport Overlay Generally




   158.315   Airport Overlay (AO) District established



   158.316   Purpose



   158.317   Interpretation



   158.318   Definitions



   158.319   Acronyms



   158.320   General use restrictions



   158.321   Administration and enforcement



   158.322   State airport hazard zoning regulations



   158.323   Development application consultation procedures



   158.324   Regional Advisory Board




Article 17:
Airport Overlay Boundaries and Maps




   158.335   Airport Overlay District



   158.336   Interpretation of District Boundaries



   158.337   Subareas; overlap



   158.338   Maps




Article 18:
AO-1: Primary Planning Influence Area




   158.350   Purpose and generally



   158.351   Consultation



   158.352   Avigation easements



   158.353   Lighting




Article 19:
AO-2: Safety Zones Area




   158.365   Purpose and generally



   158.366   Procedures and design regulations in safety zones



   158.367   Use regulations in safety zones




Article 20:
AO-3: Height Restriction Area




   158.380   Purpose and generally



   158.381   Procedures and design regulations in the height
restriction areas



   158.382   Area regulations



   158.383   Height exceptions and limitations




Article 21:
AO-4: Noise Zones Area




   158.395   Purpose and generally



   158.396   Procedures and design regulations in noise zones



   158.397   Use regulations in noise zones



   158.398   Attenuation




Article 22:
Airport Overlay Supplemental Procedures




   158.410   Generally



   158.411   Hearing Officer



   158.412   Appeals



   158.413   Variances



   158.414   Non-conformities



   158.415   Airport hazard marking



   158.416   Process chart



   158.417   Airport imaginary surfaces



 



   158.999   Penalty




ARTICLE 1:
GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 158.001  SHORT TITLE; INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning
Ordinance of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois”.



   (B)   This chapter repeals, replaces, augments and revises Chapter
42, Zoning of the Code of Ordinances, City of O’Fallon, Illinois, in
existence on the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.002  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
the city by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 et seq., the city’s nuisance
powers, and the police powers of the city.



   (B)   In addition, to the extent applicable, the authority and
powers of the city to enact and enforce the provisions herein shall be deemed
governed by the home rule authority as may apply, established by Art. VII, §
6(a), of the State Constitution, and to the extent any conflict exists
between this chapter and any statutory enactment, this chapter shall be
deemed to supersede, except where such authority has been expressly preempted
by the General Assembly.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.003  JURISDICTION.



   This chapter shall be effective throughout the corporate limits of the
city and on property owned by the city outside the corporate limits of the
city. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the city from adopting
and enforcing extraterritorial zoning, planning, subdivision and building
regulations.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.004  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter have been established for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the community
and for maintaining a high quality living environment. The zoning regulations
and districts have been designed and developed to lessen congestion in the
streets; to secure safety from fire and other hazards; to provide adequate
light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
to maintain the aesthetics of development and redevelopment; to conserve
property value;  to promote innovative and energy conscious design, and
ensure efficient and effective circulation systems; to encourage the
conservation of land resources, minimization of auto travel; to promote
orderly economic growth and to protect and preserve historical, architectural
or aesthetically important sites.



   (B)   The zoning regulations and districts have been made with
reasonable consideration of the character of the district, the suitability
and aesthetic quality for the particular uses, and with a view of conserving
the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the community in accordance with the city’s Comprehensive Plan.



   (C)   This chapter is adopted under the authority of state statutes
and any amendments thereto and other applicable authority.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.005  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PROVISIONS OF THE CODE.



   (A)   Cross-references.



      (1)   The use of buildings and land within the city is subject
to all other applicable provisions of the city’s code of ordinances as well
as this chapter, whether or not the other provisions of the city’s code of
ordinances are specifically cross-referenced in this chapter.



      (2)   Cross-references to other provisions of the code in this
chapter are for the convenience of the reader, and lack of a cross-reference
should not be construed as an indication that other provisions of the
city’s code of ordinances do not apply.



   (B)   Chapter provides minimum requirements.



      (1)   The provisions of this chapter are the minimum
requirements necessary for the promotion of public health, safety or the
general welfare.



      (2)   Whenever this chapter requires greater restrictions than
are required pursuant to any other statute or local regulation, this chapter
shall govern.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.006  RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OTHER POLICIES.



   (A)   It is the intention that this chapter implement the planning
policies adopted for the city as reflected in the Comprehensive Plan, as
amended, and other planning documents, including the Commercial Design
Handbook, dated 7-6-2009 and on file with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Neither this chapter nor any amendment thereto may be
challenged merely on the basis of an alleged non-conformity with the
Comprehensive Plan or other planning policy.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 3665, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 158.007  RELATIONSHIP TO PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to affect any deed
restriction, covenant, easement or any other private agreement or restriction
on the use of land. Where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive
or impose higher standards than any such private restriction, the
requirements of this chapter shall control. Where the provisions of any
private restriction are more restrictive or impose higher standards than the
provisions of this chapter, the private restrictions shall control, if
properly enforced by a person having the legal right to enforce the
restrictions. Private restrictions shall not be enforced by the city.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.008  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No building or structure shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or altered, nor shall any building, structure or land be
used for any purpose, except in accordance with the provision of this chapter
and other relevant provisions of the city’s code of ordinances.



   (B)   The density and yard requirements of this chapter are the
minimum regulation for each and every building or structure constructed after
the effective date of this chapter and for any building or structure
hereafter constructed or structurally altered.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.009  ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES.



   At the time of submittal of a sketch plan, preliminary and/or final
development plan, special use permit, preliminary plat or final application,
the applicant shall submit proof of having reviewed the development proposal
with applicable officials regarding public services and facilities,
including, but not limited to, water, sewer, gas, electric, highway and
street officials. Proof of this review shall be provided on forms furnished
by the Department. These forms shall provide an opportunity for applicable
water, storm and waste water, fire, gas, electric and highway and street
officials to provide comments on the existing and future availability and
timing of services and facilities provided by their respective districts,
agencies or departments to the subject property. If adequate public
facilities and services are not presently available at the time of submittal
of these applications, or are not planned to be available reasonably
concurrent with the anticipated impacts of the proposed development, as
determined by the affected utility company, city or other governmental agency
or department, the application may be denied.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.010  ZONING OF ANNEXED LANDS.



   All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall
automatically, upon annexation, be classified as RR Rural Residential
District and subject to the requirements of the RR district, unless otherwise
stipulated in a pre-annexation agreement, there is a more appropriate zone
district that is comparable to the property's existing zoning in the county,
or until the territory is rezoned. The owner of said property may petition
for rezoning simultaneously with the petition for annexation, pursuant to
§§ 158.240 through 158.282.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 158.011  USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Subject hereto, no person may use or occupy any land or
buildings or authorize or permit the use, occupancy of land or buildings,
except in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the “use” or “occupancy”
of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on
or in that building or land.



   (C)   The Director shall monitor all outstanding special use permits
issued under the previously existing regulations and prior to expiration of
the existing special use permit, the permit holder may, if required under
this chapter, apply for a special use permit as set forth in §§ 158.095
through 158.102 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.012  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   It is the city’s intention that the sections, divisions,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are severable, and
if any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction
in a valid judgment or decree, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall
not affect any of the remaining sections, divisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases of this chapter since the same would have been enacted
without the incorporation into this chapter of the unconstitutional or
invalid section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.



   (B)   The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the
ordinance which adopted this chapter and each subchapter, section, division,
sentence, clause and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more other subchapters, sections, divisions, sentences, clauses and phrases
be declared unconstitutional.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.013  COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which
an act is to be completed is based upon calendar days.



   (B)   All acts must be completed within the timeframe specified,
subject to extension periods specifically provided for in this chapter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.014  FEES.



   (A)   Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of
administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be
charged to applicants for zoning permits, sign permits, special use permits,
subdivision plat approval, zoning amendments, variances and all other
applications covered by this chapter. The amount of the administrative fees
charged shall be as established by the city.



   (B)   Fees established in accordance with this section or as
established by separate ordinance shall be paid upon submission of a signed
application or notice of appeal.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.015  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Definitions and usage. For the purposes of this chapter, all
words and terms used in this chapter are limited to the meanings given to
them by § 158.016 of this chapter or as specifically provided in another
subchapter of this chapter. Words and terms that are defined in another
subchapter of this chapter relate specifically to that subchapter. Words or
terms that are not defined shall be given their common dictionary definition.
Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the following
interpretations apply:



      (1)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense;



      (2)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural and
words used in the plural shall include the singular; and



      (3)   The word “shall” is mandatory.



   (B)   Definitions in other chapters. If a word or term is not
defined in § 158.016 of this chapter, but is defined elsewhere in this
chapter or in the municipal code, that definition shall be applicable unless
the context indicates that a standard dictionary definition is more
appropriate.



   (C)   Interpretation of land uses. If a particular land use is not
defined in this chapter or substantially conforms with one of the land use
definitions provided herein, the city shall determine if said use(s) is
permitted in a particular district and the appropriate land use regulations
that may apply.



   (D)   Joint ownership. Where this chapter permits or requires an act
on the part of an “owner” or “landowner”, and a particular lot or
tract of land is owned by several persons, whether in joint tenancy, tenancy
in common, partnership, joint venture or other form of joint ownership, the
act shall be taken on behalf of, and with the express written consent of, all
such persons, which written consent shall be provided to the city.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.016  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUT. To physically touch or border upon; to share a common property or
lot line.



   ACCESS. A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a
property.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A subordinate building or structure,
the use of which is incidental to and customarily in conjunction with the
main building or use and which is located on the same lot as the main
building or use. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES shall include sheds, detached garages,
carports, decks, pools and covered patios. A structure housing an accessory
use is considered an integral part of the principal structure when it is
attached to the principal structure and must meet principal structure
setbacks.



   ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate use of a building or land which is
incidental to the main use, and customarily associated with the main use
which is located on the same lot as the main building or use.



   ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
structure.



   ADJACENT. Having a common border or end point, or across a road,
street, sidewalk, right-of-way or thoroughfare.



   ADULT. Any person who has reached 18 years of age.



   ADULT USES. The following words associated with adult entertainment or
uses shall have these definitions.



      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment that, as a regular and
substantial business purpose, offers for sale or rent books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, slides, films or videotapes
that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.” The derivations of, modifications of or
terms directly associated with adult bookstore shall maintain the following
definitions.



      (2)   ADULT ENCOUNTER PARLOR. An establishment that, as a
regular and substantial portion of its business, provides premises where
customers congregate, associate or consort with employees and/or performers
or private contractors who display “specified anatomical areas” in the
presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual gratification
or stimulation to such customers.



      (3)   ADULT ENTERTAINER. Any person who provides adult
entertainment within an adult entertainment business, as defined in this
section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.



      (4)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any live exhibition, performance,
display or dance of any type, including but not limited to, talking, singing,
reading, listening, posing, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the
sale of food, beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling, removal of
clothing, or any service offered for amusement on a premises where such
exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to seek to arouse or
excite the sexual desires of the entertainer, other entertainers or patrons,
or if the entertainment involves a person who is nude or in such an attire,
costume or clothing as to expose to view any “specified anatomical area”.



      (5)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. Any enterprise to which
the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted, and where providing
“adult entertainment”, as defined herein, is a regular and substantial
portion of its business.



      (6)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. An establishment, that, as
a regular and substantial portion of its business, is providing adult
entertainment which features strippers, male or female impersonators, go-go
dancers, live performances or material that is primarily characterized by an
emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.



      (7)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT STUDIO. Includes the terms rap
studio, exotic dance studio, sensitivity studio and/or encounter studio. An
establishment whose premises is physically arranged to provide booths,
cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the
premises, and where a regular and substantial portion of its business is
providing entertainment which features materials or live performances
characterized by an emphasis on or features materials relating to
“specified sexual activities” or the exhibition of “specified
anatomical areas”.



      (8)   ADULT MEDIA. Magazines, books, videotapes, movies,
slides, paraphernalia or other media which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      (9)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region
or pubic hair; or buttock; or female breasts or breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or nipple; or any combination of the
foregoing; or



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernable erect state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      (10)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:



         (a)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or



         (b)   Acts actual or simulated of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy or oral copulation.



   AGRICULTURAL OPERATION. Use of land where such land is devoted to the
production of plants, animals or horticultural products, including forests
and forest products; harvest and management; dairy farming; grazing and
pasturage; truck gardening; bee keeping; the raising of crops, fruit and
nursery stock; fish farms; fur bearing animal farms; and the harvesting,
processing, packaging, packing, shipping, marketing and selling of products
produced on the premises; incidental farm occupations; and such uses as
machinery, farm equipment, and domestic repair and construction, excluding
stockyards, agricultural processing plants, commercial feed lots and
slaughter houses. AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY shall not include the removal of
trees for the purpose of development or redevelopment or the removal of trees
without replanting.



   AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICES. Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers,
pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally related
services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is
rendered. Uses also include hay, feed and grain stores and tree service firms.



   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for flight in
air.



   ALLEY. See STREET.



   ALTERATION. Any addition, removal, extension or change in the location
of any portion of a structure.



   ANTENNA - ACCESSORY USE. Except for circumstances governed by the
definitions in §§ 158.205 through 158.213 of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply to this chapter.



      (1)   ANTENNA. An arrangement of wires, metal rods or other
materials used for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic
waves. The derivations of or words directly associated with antenna shall
maintain the following definitions.



      (2)   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any mast, pole, tripod, tower
or similar structure used to support an antenna.



      (3)   ANTENNA SYSTEM. The combination of an antenna and
antenna support structure.



      (4)   ANTENNA SYSTEM HEIGHT. The overall vertical length of
the antenna system above grade. If such system is located on a building, the
overall height shall include the height of the building.



      (5)   ANTENNA TOWER. Any structure designed for the purpose of
mounting an antenna.



      (6)   COMMUNICATION TOWER. Any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas,
including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers.
The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and the like.



      (7)   MAST. Any structure or part of an antenna that has
vertical dimensions greater than five times its horizontal dimension that
supports or lends support to any part of an antenna.



      (8)   RADIO TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING ANTENNA. An array or
system of wires, tubing and supporting members mounted on a mast, tower or
building, used for transmitting and/or receiving radio signals that include,
but are not limited to, citizen band and other special frequencies.



      (9)   SATELLITE PARABOLIC OR DISH RECEIVING ANTENNA. A
conical, circular or similar shape element of any material, and all of its
supporting structures and devices, used for the reception of signals of any
frequency from an earth satellite.



      (10)   STANDARD RESIDENTIAL RECEIVING ANTENNA. An array made
up of small metal tubing and supporting members that are commonly installed
on or near residential buildings for the purpose of receiving television or
radio signals.



   APARTMENT. See DWELLING.



   APPLICANT. The owner of land, or the owner’s authorized agent, or any
person authorized by this chapter for which an approval in relation to this
chapter is sought.



   AREA, BUILDABLE. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum
open space, setback and all other lot requirements have been satisfied.



   AREA ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE. Those properties located in a
Residential District (as defined).



   ARTS, CRAFTS AND PHOTO STUDIO. An establishment or place of business
primarily engaged in the production of works of art or photographs which may
require mechanical equipment or individuals and assistants, including the
sale to consumers of those works produced.



   AUDIO AND VIDEO RECORDING SALES AND RENTALS. A business establishment
primarily engaged in the retail sale or rental of prerecorded music, movies
or other audio or video programs.



   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE. An establishment or place of business primarily
engaged in automotive related sales or services. The following automotive use
types shall be defined as follows.



      (1)   AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND LEASE. An establishment or place of
business primarily engaged in the sale and leasing of automobiles, vans
and/or trucks less than two tons, including incidental parking and servicing
of vehicles available for sale, lease or rent.



      (2)   AUTOMOTIVE RENTAL AGENCY. An establishment or place of
business primarily engaged in the rental of automobiles, vans and/or trucks
less than two tons, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles
available for rent.



      (3)   AUTOMOTIVE CUSTOMIZING SHOP. An establishment or place
of business that primarily provides after-sales services for automobiles,
including the attendant retail sales of accessories for such automobiles,
such as installation, conversion and modifications to the interior or
exterior of automobiles.



      (4)   AUTOMOTIVE PARTS AND SUPPLY STORE. An establishment or
place of business primarily engaged in the sale of merchandise that is
associated with the use, repair or upkeep of automobiles, including service
and installation, but excluding automotive repair shops.



      (5)   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION. An establishment or place of
business primarily engaged in gasoline or diesel fuel sales at retail for
automobiles, recreation vehicles and motorcycles, and where in addition at
least one of the following services is rendered: sale, replacement or
servicing of spark plugs, oil, water hoses, brake fluids, batteries,
distributors, tires, carburetors, brakes, fuel pumps or other automotive
parts or accessories. Such use shall include establishments that provide
express oil changes, and sell at retail and install new automobile audio
and/or video equipment. See “automotive repair shop” where major
mechanical activities are allowed.



      (6)   AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SHOP. An establishment or place of
business primarily engaged in the repair of automobiles or other motorized
vehicles, or the installation or repair of equipment or parts on motorized
vehicles such as mufflers, brakes, tires, transmissions, glass and engines or
engine parts, but excluding dismantling or salvage. AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SHOPS
also include the following.



         (a)   AUTOMOTIVE PAINT OR BODY SHOP. The use of a
building or premises for the repair of automotive bodies and/or major
mechanical works, straightening of body parts, painting, welding or storage
of automobiles not in operable condition.



         (b)   TIRE RETREADING OR REPAIR SHOP. The use of a
building or premises for the repairing or retreading of automotive tires.



      (7)   AUTOMOTIVE TIRE STORE. An establishment or place of
business primarily engaged in the sale of tires and services relating to the
repair or purchase of tires for automobiles.



   BAKERY. A place for preparing, cooking, baking and selling of these
said products on the premises.



   BAR or TAVERN. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises with a city and state approved liquor license, including
taverns, bars, cocktail lounges and similar uses other than a restaurant, at
which more than 50% of the total revenue is generated by food sales.



   BARBER SHOP, BEAUTY SALON, SPA. A commercial establishment that serves
its customers by cutting and dressing hair, shaving or trimming beards,
and/or providing manicures, pedicures and facials. For purposes of this
Zoning Code, establishments that provide manicures, but do not cut hair, will
also be considered a BEAUTY SALON.



   BASEMENT. A story below the first story, and counted as a story for
height regulations if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than
for a janitor or watchperson employed on the premises.



   BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME STAY. An establishment or place of business that
is a private, owner-occupied residence with one to three guest rooms,
occupied or used as a transient abiding place of individuals or groups of
individuals who are lodged for compensation, with or without food service.



   BEDROOM. A room in a dwelling unit designed for sleeping that is
separable from other rooms by a door.



   BERM. A mound of earth used as a screening or landscaping device.



   BLOCK. A platted tract of land entirely surrounded by public highways,
streets, streams, waterways, railroad rights-of-way, cemeteries or parks, or
a combination thereof. In places where the platting is incomplete or
disconnected, the Director shall determine the outline of a BLOCK.



   BOARD. The City of O’Fallon, Illinois, Zoning Board of Appeals.



   BROADCAST. To transmit information over the airwaves to two or more
receiving devices simultaneously, including transmission over local
television or radio stations, satellite systems or wireless data
communications networks.



   BUFFER ZONE. An open and unpaved ground area around the perimeter of a
tract of land that is landscaped or planted so as to provide green space.



   BUILDING. A structure for the purpose of housing or enclosing persons,
animals or chattels.



   BUILDING COVERAGE. The floor area of the building at grade, also known
as the BUILDING’S FOOTPRINT.



   BUILDING ELEVATION. An exterior wall of a building exposed to public
view.



   BUILDING, EXISTING. A building erected prior to, or for which a valid
building permit has been issued prior to, the effective date of this chapter.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the highest
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front wall of the
building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip or gambrel roofs.



   BUILDING LINE. See SETBACK LINE.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the city, or his or her
designee.



   BUSINESS OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL. A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial and/or
trade skills such as accounting, data processing and repair. This
classification excludes establishments providing training in an activity that
is not otherwise permitted in the zoning district. Incidental instructional
services in conjunction with other primary use shall not be considered a
BUSINESS OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL.



   CARPORT. A roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage
of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.



   CAR WASH. A building or portion thereof containing facilities for
washing, waxing, drying, polishing or vacuuming private automobiles, light
trucks and vans, but not commercial fleets. For purposes of this chapter,
coin-operated devices operated on a self-serve basis shall be construed to be
the same.



   CATERING SERVICE. An establishment that serves and supplies food to be
consumed off premise.



   CEMETERY, ACCESSORY USE. A place for the burial of deceased human
beings or animals.



   CHAPTER. The Zoning Ordinance, Ch. 158 of the O’Fallon Municipal Code.



   CHIMNEY. A structure containing one or more flues for drawing off
emissions from stationary sources of combustion.



   CHURCH, TEMPLE or SYNAGOGUE. A building or group of buildings that are
used to conduct organized religious services.



   CITY. The City of O’Fallon, Illinois.



   CITY CODE. The Code of Ordinances of the city, as amended.



   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois.



   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of O’Fallon, Illinois,
or his or her designee.



   CLUB, CIVIC OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. A membership association
composed of persons who are bona fide dues paying members and to whom (and
their guests) use of facilities owned or leased by the association is
generally restricted. Such definition shall include buildings owned or
operated by a person, for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but
not primarily for profit and not primarily to render a service that is
customarily carried on as a business. This definition shall include
organizations such as the American Legion, Masonic Lodge and Veterans of
Foreign War.



   CLUSTER/CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT.  A form of development that
concentrates buildings or lots on a part of the site, reserving a significant
amount of the land to be used for the permanent preservation of natural
areas, agricultural land, and environmentally sensitive features.



      (1)   To the greatest degree practicable, natural areas shall
connect to natural areas or potential natural areas, on neighboring
properties.



      (2)   To the greatest degree practicable, natural areas shall
be designated as a single block and not divided into unconnected small
parcels located in various parts of the development.



      (3)   Stormwater and roadway designs may vary from code
requirements as approved by the city engineer and city council.



   CO-BRANDED FACILITY. Co-branding is the pairing of two nationally
branded businesses in a single establishment. The most common CO-BRANDED
DEVELOPMENTS consist of a fast-food restaurant franchise and a major branded
fuel station. CO-BRANDED FACILITIES may also contain as a planned use a
convenience store, car wash, ATM machine or drive through service. Parking,
signage, landscaping and design continuity shall be in accordance with the
city’s minimum requirements.



   COMMERCIAL ART OR GRAPHIC DESIGN SERVICE. Establishments primarily
engaged in providing commercial art or graphic design services for
advertising agencies, publishers and other business and industrial users.



   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.



   COMMON GROUND. Land within a development, not individually owned or
dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the purpose of
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. COMMON GROUND
may include complementary structures and improvements.



   COMMUNICATION TOWER, ACCESSORY USE. See ANTENNA.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Comprehensive Plan of the city.



   COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, REPAIR OR DATA PROCESSING SERVICE. Establishments
primarily engaged in providing computer programming services on a contract or
fee basis, the maintenance and repair of computers and computer peripheral
equipment (whether on the premises or off), and/or providing computer
processing and data preparation services including complete processing and
preparation of reports from data supplied by the customer or specialized
services, such as data entry or making data processing equipment available on
an hourly or time-sharing basis. Such uses may also include a variety of
additional services, such as computer software design and analysis;
modifications of custom software; and training in the use of custom software.



   CONDOMINIUM. A system of separate ownership of individual units in a
multiple unit building in which the property and building must be held in
common ownership.



   CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR. A person engaged in the construction of
buildings, engaged in heavy construction (such as streets, bridges or
utilities), or specialized in such construction trades as plumbing, heating
and air-conditioning, electrical wiring, masonry, roofing or gutters, well
drilling or house painting. Outdoor storage of machinery, equipment or
supplies shall be subject to provisions of §§ 158.075 through 158.084 of
this chapter.



   CONSTRUCTION VEHICLES/EQUIPMENT. A self-propelled or non-propelled
equipment designed for on- or off-road use in grading or construction or any
vehicle containing or carrying construction tools or equipment; including
trailers, attachments and component parts for such equipment.



   CONVALESCENT, NURSING OR RETIREMENT HOME. An intermediate care facility
primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services
to residents who require watchful care and medical attention or treatment,
but not on a continuous basis, although staff is on duty 24-hours per day.



   CONVENIENCE STORE. An establishment or place of business primarily
engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or diesel fuel at fuel pumps and a
limited number of products related to automobile maintenance, along with,
packaged food, cold drinks, tobacco products and household convenience goods.
This use shall not include liquor stores, automobile repair facilities or
those uses allowed at an automotive repair shop.



   COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.



   COURT.



      (1)   An unoccupied open space other than a yard on the same
lot with a building which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of
such building; or



      (2)   A court of law.



   COVENANTS. Any contract or deed, or portion thereof, restricting the
manner in which land may be used.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A street right-of-way intersecting another street
right-of-way at one end and which terminates with a permanent vehicular turn
around at the other end.



   CURB LEVEL. The top of the curb at its highest point in front of the
lot, or in the case of a corner lot, the point along the abutting streets
where the curb level is the highest.



   DANCE HALL. A business or establishment that offers for its patrons
dancing accommodations exceeding 20% of the total floor area of the
establishment. Uses shall include nightclubs, private clubs or other uses
offering dancing accommodations for patrons of any age.



   DAY CARE FACILITY. Terms associated with DAY CARE FACILITIES shall be
defined as follows.



      (1)   DAY CARE (HOME) or CHILD CARE (HOME). A family home
occupied by the day care provider in which family-like care is given to no
more than eight children under 12 years of age for any part of the 24 hour
day, without overnight stays.



      (2)   DAY CARE (COMMERCIAL). A building occupied by a day care
provider that receives more than eight persons for care for any part of a
24-hour day, without overnight stays.



      (3)   DAY CARE (ACCESSORY USE). An accessory use wherein a
portion of a building or lot occupied by a different primary use is occupied
by the day care provider in which family-like care is given to no more than
eight persons for any part of the 24-hour day, without overnight stays.



   DECK, PLATFORMS and GAZEBOS. A platform constructed of wood and located
in the side or rear yard serving as a floor and located above the finished
grade that is attached to a building.



   DEPARTMENT. The Community Development Department of the city.



   DEVELOPER. A person who engages in development of land, whether or not
that person is the landowner.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved land,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Community Development Department of the
city, or his or her designee.



   DOG RUN. An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising and/or
containment of dogs and similar animals.



   DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business that through design,
physical facilities, service or packaging procedures, encourages customers to
receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in their
motor vehicles. This definition shall include all businesses with a
drive-through component.



   DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY PICK-UP. An establishment or business
maintained for the pick-up and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry
without the maintenance or operation of any laundry or dry-cleaning equipment
or machinery on the premises.



   DRY CLEANING PLANT. A facility where chemical solvents are used to
dry-clean clothing and other fabrics.



   DWELLING. A room or suite of rooms within an apartment building
arranged, intended or designed as a place of residence; or any building, or
portion thereof, which is designed, built, leased, rented, let or hired to be
occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more
families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in
the said building; or a building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for
residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple
dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and apartment
hotels, but not hotels, motels, rooming houses, nursing homes, travel
trailers, recreational vehicles, manufactured or mobile homes. The following
words or terms associated with DWELLING shall have the following meanings.



      (1)   APARTMENT. A suite of rooms or a room in a building
arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or a group
of individuals living together as a family in a separate dwelling unit.



      (2)   FOUR-FAMILY DWELLING (QUADPLEX). A dwelling situated on
one lot occupied exclusively by four families, respectively, in separate
dwelling units living independently of each other.



      (3)   LOFT DWELLING. A dwelling located above the first floor
of a non-residential use such as a store or office.



      (4)   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling situated on one lot
occupied by three or more families in separate dwelling units living
independently of each other.



      (5)   SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING (VILLA, TWIN HOME,
CONDOMINIUM OR TOWNHOME). Single-family dwellings sharing a common wall, but
situated on separate lots, designed to be owned and occupied exclusively by
separate families.







 



      (6)   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING. A dwelling situated on
one lot designed to be occupied exclusively by one family.







 



      (7)   THREE-FAMILY DWELLING (TRIPLEX). A dwelling situated on
one lot occupied exclusively by three families, respectively, in separate
dwelling units living independently of each other.



      (8)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING (DUPLEX). A dwelling situated on one
lot occupied exclusively by two families, respectively, in separate dwelling
units living independently of each other.



   DWELLING UNIT. One room or rooms connected together constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or
rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically
separated from any other rooms which may be in the same structure, and
containing independent cooling and sleeping facilities.



   EASEMENT. A grant to the public or a person by the owner of land of the
use of a described area of the land for specified purposes, where fee simple
title to the land remains with the property owner.



   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date the ordinance adopting this chapter takes
effect.



   EGRESS. A means of access or exit.



   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons, including managers and entertainers who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of a
business.



   ENGINEER, CITY. See CITY ENGINEER.



   EQUIPMENT RENTAL STORE. A place of business that rents tools, aerators,
generators, compressors, tampers and other light landscaping and construction
tools and equipment.



   EXISTING USE. The use of a lot or structure at the time of the
effective date of this chapter.



   EXTERMINATING SERVICES. Any services related to the eradication and
control of rodents, insects and other pests with incidental storage on lots
other than where the service is rendered.



   FAMILY.



      (1)   A single individual doing his or her own cooking and
living upon a premises as a separate housekeeping unit;



      (2)   A collection of persons doing their own cooking and
living together upon a premises as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic
relationship based on birth, marriage, adoption or employment as domestic
servants; or



      (3)   A group of not more than three unrelated persons doing
their own cooking and living together on the premises as a separate
housekeeping unit pursuant to a mutual agreement.



   FENCE. A freestanding structure resting on or partially buried in the
ground that forms a barrier which is not otherwise part of any building or
other structure and is used to delineate a boundary or as a means of
confinement or privacy.



   FINANCIAL SERVICES.



      (1)   An office establishment or business that primarily
performs central banking functions (such as issuing currency, managing
national money supply and international reserves, and acting as fiscal agent
for the central government) and accepts deposits (or share deposits) and
lends funds from these deposits, and which establishment may include these
services to patrons and customers through an accessory, drive-through, as a
planned use.



      (2)   FINANCIAL SERVICES shall also include establishments
primarily engaged in one or more of the following:



         (a)   Underwriting securities issues or making markets
for securities and commodities;



         (b)   Acting as agents (i.e., brokers) between buyers
and sellers of securities and commodities;



         (c)   Providing securities and commodity exchange
services; and



         (d)   Providing other services, such as managing
portfolios of assets; providing investment advice; and trust, fiduciary and
custody services. Uses include banks; savings associations; savings and loan
institutions; investment banking; brokerage for securities or commodities;
credit reporting services; certified financial planning; accounting;
auditing; bookkeeping; credit service offices, including credit unions;
holding and investment services; savings and loans association offices; and
consumer and mercantile credit reporting services.



      (3)   FINANCIAL SERVICES does not include pawn shops,
businesses primarily engaged in check cashing or issuing money orders or
title loan establishments or other businesses offering short-term consumer
loans secured by personal property, certificates of title to such property
estimated tax refunds or other such collateral (all of which are prohibited
money changing/money brokering uses). (See also SMALL LOAN ESTABLISHMENTS.)



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The numerical value obtained through dividing
the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the area of the lot on
which the building or buildings are located.



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA). The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors, measured in square feet, including the basement floor,
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline
of walls separating two buildings. The GROSS FLOOR AREA of a building shall
also include elevator shafts and stairways at each floor; floor space used
for mechanical equipment, penthouses, interior balconies and mezzanines,
enclosed porches and floor area devoted to accessory uses. The GROSS FLOOR
AREA shall not include. areas or space devoted to off-street parking or
loading; and uncovered porches, terraces and loading docks.



   FLOOR AREA, NET (NFA).



      (1)   The sum of the net horizontal floor area of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the interior faces of walls separating two buildings.



      (2)   The NET FLOOR AREA of a building shall include:



         (a)   Basements, when used for other than storage;



         (b)   Penthouse, excluding mechanical penthouses;



         (c)   Attic space having a headroom of seven and
one-half feet or more;



         (d)   Enclosed porches;



         (e)   Interior balconies and mezzanines, excluding those
designed and used as pedestrian common space;



         (f)   Floor area devoted exclusively to storage;



         (g)   Entrance lobbies;



         (h)   Interior covered common areas designed primarily
for pedestrian circulation; and



         (i)   Public restrooms.



      (3)   The NET FLOOR AREA of a building does not include:



         (a)   Floor space occupied by mechanical, telephone and
electrical equipment and mechanical penthouses;



         (b)   Stairwells, escalators and elevator shafts;



         (c)   Attic space having a headroom of less than seven
and one-half feet;



         (d)   Interior off-street parking and loading areas; and



         (e)   Basements, or portions thereof, used for storage.



   FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or premises where trucks, railcars or
other vehicles load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and
freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for
transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation.



   FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting a public right-of-way line.



   FRONTAGE ROAD. A public or private street, closely paralleling a larger
public street that provides the primary means of vehicular access from
abutting property to a larger street.



   FUNERAL HOME SERVICES. A building or establishment, or portion thereof,
used for the preparation of deceased humans and ceremonies connected
therewith prior to burial or cremation.



   FURNITURE, APPLIANCE OR EQUIPMENT LEASE OR RENTAL. An establishment
“leasing” furniture, appliance, television, stereo and/or VCR equipment,
and other household items to consumers under retail installment sales
agreements or other contracts styled as a lease renewal from week to week or
month to month. Also known as RENT-TO-OWN STORES.



   GARAGE, ACCESSORY USE. An accessory building to a principal structure
primarily used for storage of a motor vehicle.



   GARDEN CENTER. A retail establishment that sells gardening supplies,
landscaping tools, plants, shrubs, trees and associated products. Uses shall
include commercial green houses, garden centers and plant nurseries.



   GOLF COURSE. Golf courses of regulation size “Par 3” golf courses
of either nine or 18 holes, but not including commercially operated golf
driving ranges, nor miniature golf courses. GOLF COURSE shall include
associated club house or country club, pro shop and cart rental operation.



   GOVERNING BODY. The Mayor and City Council of the city and/or the body
having jurisdiction or final authorization of any requirement(s) contained
herein.



   GRADE. The average elevation of the finished surface of the ground,
paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and property line or,
when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the
building and a line five feet from the building.



   GRADE, STREET. The slope of a road, street or other public way,
specified in percentage of vertical to horizontal measurements.



   GREENHOUSE. A building whose roof and sides are made primarily of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for subsequent sale
or for personal enjoyment.



   GROSS FLOOR AREA. See FLOOR AREA, GROSS.



   GROUP HOME FOR THE DISABLED. A residential facility for the
developmentally disabled where meals, lodging, supervision and training are
provided.



   GROUP HOME, DORMITORY. A residential facility for religious,
educational or charitable purposes where meals, lodging, supervision and
training are provided.



   GUEST HOUSE. An accessory use to a dwelling designed and intended for
the temporary housing of visitors to a property at the invitation of the
property residents for no fee or other consideration, and meeting or
exceeding the standards for single-family dwellings.



   HEALTH CLUB or FITNESS CENTER. A business that provides facilities for
aerobic exercises, such as running and jogging tracks, exercise equipment,
game courts, gymnasium or swimming facilities.



   HEARING OFFICER. The City of O’Fallon Hearing Officer.



   HEIGHT. See BUILDING HEIGHT.



   HELIPORT. An area of land or water or a structural surface that is used
for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas that
are used for helicopter buildings and other heliport facilities. This
definition shall also include HELISTOPS.



   HOME OCCUPATION, ACCESSORY USE.



      (1)   Activity conducted in a dwelling unit as an economic
enterprise or for compensation by members of the household residing therein
that is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes. For purposes of this definition, “activity” shall
be presumed to include any activity occurring in whole or part from a
residence in the city that is:



         (a)   Required to be licensed by the state;



         (b)   Operating under an incorporated entity under
applicable law or required to be so incorporated; or



         (c)   Otherwise determined to be a business activity
operating out of the home by the Planning Director based on the character of
the  activity at the location such as:



            1.   Use of residential location on marketing or
other materials;



            2.   Customer  visits;



            3.   Signage; and



            4.   Deliveries or other activities of a degree or
nature that are not typical of purely residential uses.



      (2)   HOME OCCUPATIONS shall include, but not be limited to:



         (a)   Office uses, including web-based businesses;



         (b)   Art studio or home crafts including, but not
limited to, quilting, sewing, jewelry making, home cooking for sale off-site;



         (c)   Teaching, with instruction limited to three pupils
at a time; and



         (d)   Home day care.



   HOSPITAL. An institution providing primary health service and medical
and surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions. This shall
include, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as
laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.



   HOTEL. A building, or portion thereof, offering lodging accommodations
to the general public for compensation and that may provide additional
services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities.



   HOUSE, BOARDING. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where
meals are provided for compensation to three or more persons, but not more
than ten, who are not members of the keeper’s family, but not open on a
daily, overnight or per meal basis to transient guests. Uses include lodging
house and rooming house.



   IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE. The total ground area covered by all buildings,
roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways, and
any other site improvements or structures contributing to run-off greater
than would occur on the site in its natural state.



   IMPROVEMENT. Any human-made item that becomes part of, is placed upon
or is affixed to land.



   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. A zoning district designated by this chapter as I.



   INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY. A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw
materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using
flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that
potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Such uses include asphalt plants; oil and gas production; manufacture of
cement, lime, gypsum and plaster of paris, chemicals and allied products,
fabricated metal products, rubber and plastics products, stone, clay, glass
and concrete products and transportation equipment.



   INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT. A  use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental indoor
storage, sales and distribution, of such products, but excluding basic
industrial processing at a scale and intensity that is compatible with the
surrounding uses and the intent of the city’s I District regulations. Uses
include bakery (industrial); bottling works; beverage manufacturing
including, dairies (distributing and pasteurization) breweries/distilleries
(fermentation, bottling and distribution); bus or taxi service or terminal
(indoors); freight terminal and/or agency; dry cleaning plants; food and
kindred products; printing and publishing; sawmill; welding repair shops;
tool and die shops, and, the manufacturing of construction materials,
electronic equipment and components, HVAC equipment, furniture, fixtures,
precision instruments, tents, awnings and signs.



   INFILL DEVELOPMENT. Construction on an existing vacant lot on an
existing street in an existing neighborhood or developed area. INFILL
DEVELOPMENT shall also include lots where more than 50% of the primary
structure is altered.



   INGRESS. A means of access or entry.



   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. See VEHICLE, INOPERATIVE.



   INTERFERENCE. Disturbances in reception caused by intruding signals or
electrical current.



   JUNKYARD, WRECKING YARD, SALVAGE YARD or SCRAP YARD. A place where
waste, discarded or salvaged metals, inoperative vehicles, used plumbing
fixtures and other materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled,
cleaned; or a place for the storage of salvaged materials and equipment from
house wrecking and salvaged structural steel; but excluding retail/commercial
pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars
in operable, drivable condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture and
household equipment, and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged
materials as part of manufacturing operations. For the purposes of this
definition, any lot containing more than two inoperative vehicles shall be
considered a JUNKYARD.



   KENNEL. Any structure or lot on which four or more dogs and/or cats
over four months of age are kept.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Establishments primarily engaged in providing
boarding and/or breeding services for a fee, for pets, equines and other
animal specialties. Does not include veterinary uses.



   LABORATORY. A building, or portion thereof, in which scientific,
medical or dental research, investigation, testing or experimentation is
conducted.



   LAND DISTURBANCE. Any removal of trees, groundcover or other
vegetation, or excavation or disturbance of soil, by means of heavy equipment
(including all equipment weighing in excess of 1,500 pounds) or by any means
affecting an area of 5,000 square feet or more in a period of one year or
less.



   LANDOWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in a property.



   LAUNDROMAT. An establishment where patrons wash, dry, press or dry
clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron.



   LIMITED PRICE VARIETY STORE. An establishment or place of business
primarily engaged in the retail sale of a variety of goods at a set discount
price such as a dollar store.



   LIQUOR STORE. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in retail sale for consumption off the premises of alcoholic beverages. Uses
include liquor stores, bottle shops or any licensed sales of liquor, beer or
wine for off-site consumption.



   LIVESTOCK. Animals used for the production of food or products, such as
cattle, sheep, goats, hogs or poultry.



   LIVING SPACE. Space within a dwelling unit utilized for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, washing and sanitation purposes.



   LOADING AREA. An area used for loading or unloading of goods from a
vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which a loading space is
located.



   LOT.



      (1)   A parcel of land or portion thereof (whether a portion
of a platted subdivision or otherwise) occupied or intended to be occupied by
a building or a mobile home or other structure or use and its accessories,
together with such yards as are required under the provisions of this
chapter, having not less than the minimum areas, widths and depth required
under the provisions of this chapter, for a lot in the district in which land
is situated, and having its principal frontage on a street or on such other
means of access as permitted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



      (2)   The minimum area of a LOT, as defined herein, must be an
integral unit of land under unified ownership in fee or in co-tenancy, or
under legal control tantamount to such ownership, which ownership or control
must continue for the existence of the building or other structures permitted
to be situated on the lot. The word “lot” shall include the word
“plot,” “tract,” “zoning lot” or “parcel”. The derivations of
lot shall maintain the following definitions:







 



         (a)   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded
by the vertical planes through front, rear and side lot lines.



         (b)   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersection.



         (c)   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between
the front and rear lot lines.



         (d)   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two
non-intersecting roads; as distinguished from a corner lot. This definition
shall include through lots.



         (e)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot whose
sides do not abut upon any street.



   LOT LINE. The property boundary line of any lot. The derivations or
modifications of lot line shall maintain the following definitions.







 



      (1)   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line abutting a street or
private drive. In the case of a corner lot, the FRONT LOT LINE shall normally
be the lot line with the shortest length. In the case of a double frontage
lot, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be the lot line adjacent to the street that
provides primary access to the lot or towards which the main building on the
lot is oriented.



      (2)   LOT LINE, REAR. Any lot line that is not a front lot
line or a side lot line.



      (3)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line that intersects the front
lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE shall include any linked line segments or arcs that
have a bearing which is within 45 degrees of a line drawn perpendicular to
the front lot line. Where the application of the rules is ambiguous or where
the property owner requests an alternative designation, the Director may
specifically designate the various lot lines for a particular lot.



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the front building line.



   LOT COVERAGE.



      (1)   The percentage of a lot or parcel which is, or will be,
covered by the principal structure(s) and accessory structure(s). LOT
COVERAGE shall include all uses governed by a building permit, including, but
not limited to, above ground pools, in-ground pools, decks, covered patios,
garages (detached and attached), sheds, car ports, porches and other similar
items. Uncovered patios, driveways, sidewalks, retaining walls and play areas
shall not be included as LOT COVERAGE.



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, LOT COVERAGE is measured
from a horizontal plane from the outermost edges of eaves, cornices,
overhangs or areas covered by a weather-tight roof and shall be expressed as
a percentage of total lot area.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot for which the plat or deed has been properly
recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter.



   LUMBER OR BUILDING MATERIALS SALES. Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale sale of materials used
in the construction and maintenance of structures, as well as construction
activities and the outdoor storage of construction equipment or materials on
lots other than construction sites. Uses may include lumber yards, building
materials stores, and tool and equipment rental or sales.



   MAIN BUILDING. The primary building on a lot, or a building that houses
a main use on a lot.



   MAIN USE. The primary or predominant use of land, a building or a
structure.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. See STRUCTURE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME SALES. A premises on which manufactured and/or
modular homes are displayed for sale and are sold.



   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. Any lot or parcel under single ownership
on which two or more manufactured homes are to be located or intended to be
located.



   MANUFACTURING. An economic activity involving the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products
including the assembly of component parts, the manufacturing of products and
the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or
liquors, at a scale and intensity that is compatible with the surrounding
uses and the intent of the city’s I District. See also INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY
and INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT.



   MASSAGE, THERAPEUTIC. An establishment licensed by the state, pursuant
to the Massage Licensing Act (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 57, §§ 1 et seq., as
amended) that offers therapeutic massage. The definition does not include
establishments that offer illicit sexual services under the guise of
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE.



   MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE. See OFFICE.



   MICROWAVE. Electromagnetic radiation with frequencies higher than 1,000
MHZ; highly directional signal used to transmit radio frequencies from point
to point at a relatively low power level.



   MINI-WAREHOUSE (SELF-STORAGE). A building or group of buildings
consisting of individual, self- contained units leased to individuals,
organizations or businesses for self-service storage of personal property.



   MODULAR HOME. See STRUCTURE.



   MOTEL. A building primarily offering transient lodging accommodations
to the general public for compensation with access from each room to a
readily accessible off-street parking area for use by the patrons of the
building. This definition shall also include motor lodges.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. See VEHICLE, MOTOR.



   MUNICIPALITY. The city and any other body politic whether it be a city,
town, village or political subdivision of the state, organized under the
Constitution of the state or under laws of the state or by decision of the
highest court of the state determined to be a municipal corporation.



   NATURAL AREA. A natural area is an area of land, not necessarily
undisturbed, which either retains or has been substantially restored to its
original natural or native character. NATURAL AREA shall not include
parkways, landscape islands, detention areas, athletic fields, golf courses,
turfed areas, or similar features.



   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL CENTER. A neighborhood commercial center (NCC)
is a planned use that is designed to provide commercial support services to
the rural areas of the city. The permissible locations for a (NCC) are only
such locations designated as “neighborhood commercial” in the city’s
Comprehensive Plan. The NCC allows a mixture of residential and commercial
uses to integrate commercial support for the residents located within a
viable market area for the Rural Neighborhood District. All neighborhood
commercial centers are subject to the requirement of §§ 158.077 and 158.115
through 158.121 of this chapter.



   NURSERY. Land or structures used to raise flowers, shrubs, trees and
other plant material for retail or wholesale sale.



   NURSING HOME. See CONVALESCENT, NURSING OR RETIREMENT HOME.



   OCCUPANCY PERMIT. Permit issued by the city prior to occupancy of any
structure indicating compliance with applicable building codes.



   OFFICE. The use of any building or premises primarily for conducting
the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, and
generally furnished with desks, tables, files and communication equipment.
Terms associated with the word OFFICE shall have the following meanings.



      (1)   BUSINESS OFFICE, GENERAL. An office used for the
administrative or legal affairs of a non-residential use company with no
retail activity or vehicular requirements of a walk-up or drive-through
establishment and with no fleet vehicles and no outside storage requirements.
This includes for profit, non-profit or charitable establishments. Uses shall
include corporate offices, public relations service, direct mail or
advertising agency, employment or personnel agency, manufacturers
representative office, management services, insurance agents, brokers,
carriers and services, security service office, trade union or association
office, travel agency, dance, art or photography studio or other general
business office with no retail activity.



      (2)   MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE. An office occupied and
maintained for the provision of services by a person licensed by the state to
practice in the healing arts for humans, such as a physician, surgeon,
dentist, optometrist or associated rehabilitation, fitness and recreation
offices.



      (3)   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office occupied by a member of a
recognized profession and maintained for the provision of professional
services, such as a certified public accountant, lawyer, architect, city
planner, landscape architect, interior designer, engineer, real estate
agents, brokers, operators and lessors offices and property management
services.



      (4)   OTHER OFFICE. Any other office used for the
administrative or legal affairs of a non-residential use with no retail
activity.



   OFFICE PARK. A planned use, developed on a single parcel of property,
that may contain a mix of office, retail and service uses as regulated by
§§ 158.115 through 158.121 of this chapter and authorized by the City
Council pursuant to an approved site plan.



   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel of land or water essentially unimproved or
otherwise devoid of structures and paved areas set aside, dedicated,
designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use
and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such
OPEN SPACE.



   OPEN SPACE RATIO. The numerical ratio between the open space of the
site and the gross land area of the site.



   OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREA. A portion of a property outside of any building
where merchandise, goods or other items are placed in public view for the
purpose of direct sale or lease to customers.



   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping in an unroofed, open area of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24
hours.



   PARAPET WALL. Any wall that extends above the roof line.



   PARKING AREA (LOT), PUBLIC. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a
street or other public way, used for the parking of automobiles or other
motor vehicles and available to the public whether for a fee or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.



   PARKING GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof used by the
public for the storage or parking of motor vehicles for compensation.



   PARKING, OFF STREET.



      (1)   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. A paved or dust-free space
within a public or private parking area of not less than 190 square feet (ten
feet by 19 feet), exclusive of access drives, or aisles, ramps, columns or
office and work areas, for the storage of one passenger automobile or
commercial vehicle under one and one-half ton capacity.



      (2)   PARKING AREA, AUTOMOBILE. A lot or part thereof used for
the storage or parking of motor vehicles with or without the payment of rent
or charges.



      (3)   PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open, hard-surfaced area other
than a street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the
storage of private passenger automobiles only, or occupants of the building
or mobile home for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.



      (4)   LOADING SPACE (COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ONLY). An
off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street,
alley or other appropriate means of access.



      (5)   PARKING GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building or portion thereof
for the storage of one or more vehicles for persons living on the premises.



   PATIO. A level, unenclosed surfaced area located at the finished grade
that is accessory, and usually directly adjacent, to an attached building.
PATIO does not include a deck.



   PAWNBROKER or PAWNSHOP. An establishment or individual or business
entity which lends money on the deposit or pledge of physically delivered
personal property, other than property the  ownership of which is subject to
a legal dispute, securities, printed evidence of indebtedness or printed
evidence of ownership of the personal property, or who deals in the purchase
of such property on the condition of selling the property back again at a
stipulated price, shall be held and is hereby declared and defined to be a
PAWNBROKER. The business of a PAWNBROKER does not include the lending of
money on deposit or pledge of title to property.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way dedicated or otherwise assigned to
public use that cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to
adjacent streets and properties.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic
or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, heat, glare or
other effects generated by or inherent in the uses of land or buildings. Such
standards may also establish other various criteria for land use.



   PERFORMING ARTS THEATER. See THEATER.



   PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated
or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental
entity or other entity or group of persons however organized.



   PHOTOCOPYING AND DUPLICATING SERVICE. Establishments primarily engaged
in reproducing text, drawings, plans, maps or other copy, by blueprinting,
photocopying, mimeographing or other methods of duplication other than
printing or microfilming.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Commission appointed by the City Council to
administer the planning and zoning regulations as stipulated by the City
Council and the statues of the state.



   PLAT, FINAL. A complete and exact subdivision plat, prepared for
official recording as required by state statute and the subdivision
regulations, to define property boundaries and proposed streets and other
improvements.



   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A formal proposed plan for a subdivision prepared in
accordance with the subdivision regulations.



   PLATTED. Real property that is included within the area of land covered
by a final plat recorded with the Recorder of Deeds.



   PLAY AREA. An improved and equipped area for the play of children.



   POLE BARN. A typically metal clad structure most often utilizing wooden
poles and trusses for support with unfinished, insulated interiors. Such
structures are normally used for agricultural purposes, for construction
trade storage, or for general storage and not intended for human inhabitation.



   PORCH, ACCESSORY USE. A platform that may be screened, projecting from
the wall of a building and with direct access to or from a building. PORCH
does not include a deck.



   PREMISES. An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings that,
because of its unity of use, is one unit of real estate.



   PRINTING AND PUBLISHING FACILITY. Establishments primarily engaged in
printing by the lithographic process usually performed on a job or custom
basis; but in some cases lithographed calendars, maps, posters,
decalcomanias, or other products are made for sale. Offset printing,
photo-offset printing, photolithographing and publishing are also included.
Establishments primarily engaged in publishing and printing newspapers and
periodicals are also included.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. See OFFICE.



   PROFESSIONAL OR TRADE ASSOCIATION. A private organization that promotes
the interests of business groups, such as the Chamber of Commerce;
professions, such as the Bar Association; or members of a trade, such as a
labor union.



   PROHIBITED USE. A use that is not permitted in a zoning district by
right, as an accessory use, with a special use permit, or as a planned use.



   PUBLIC CULTURAL FACILITIES. Libraries, museums, art galleries and
similar cultural facilities which are open to the general public.



   PUBLIC HEARING. A meeting announced and advertised in advance that is
open to the public, and at which the public is given an opportunity to speak
and participate.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Street pavements, curb and gutters, sanitary and
storm sewers, permanent street monuments, water mains, sidewalks and any
other related items that are owned by a political subdivision or public
utility.



   PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES. A use owned or operated by a publicly owned
or publicly licensed or franchised agency which provides essential public
services such as utility, emergency and safety services, including filtration
plants, pump stations, water reservoirs, public water storage facilities,
sewage treatment plants, police and fire stations, post offices, government
administration buildings or other governmental uses. Wireless communication
facilities, as defined herein, are not included in this definition.



   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. Railroad right-of-way and trackage, but not
including classification yards, terminal facilities, nor maintenance
facilities.



   RECORDING STUDIO. An establishment providing sound recording services
on a contract or fee basis.



   RECREATION FACILITY OR AREA (COMMERCIAL). A commercial establishment or
place of business primarily engaged in the provision of sports, entertainment
or recreation for participants or spectators. RECREATION FACILITY, as defined
here, does not include any “adult uses”. It shall include golf driving
ranges, miniature golf, baseball and softball batting cages, billiards hall,
bowling alley, arcade, skating rinks, swimming pools, camps, gun clubs, skeet
or trap shoots, archery ranges or fishing lakes operated as a commercial or
for-profit endeavor for recreational use of its patrons.



   RECREATION FACILITY OR AREA (NON-COMMERCIAL). Private outdoor
playgrounds and recreational facilities that are accessory uses to a
subdivision, apartment development, church or other non-commercial principal
use of property.



   RECREATION, RURAL. Rural recreation facilities generally include
private clubs, lodges, camps, gun clubs, skeet or trap shoots, archery ranges
or fishing lakes operated as a non-commercial or non-profit endeavor for
recreational use of its patrons and located at least 1,000 feet from any
residence other than of the owner or lessee of the site and if not so
operated as to withdraw land from its primary agricultural use. (See also
CLUBS, LODGES AND CAMPS.)



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle used for purposes of recreation and
amusement, including a portable vehicular structure without a permanent
foundation that can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as a
temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use. The
definition includes, but is not limited to, motorcycles, mopeds, scooters,
travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, boats, personal watercraft,
snowmobiles, go-carts, tent trailers, fifth-wheel trailers and self-propelled
motor homes. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE does not include manufactured home or
mobile home.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES, LEASE OR RENTAL. The sale, lease or rental
of recreational vehicles, including incidental storage, maintenance and
servicing.



   RECYCLING FACILITIES. An establishment, place of business or use of
land for the collection of materials for the purpose of crushing, melting,
rendering or reconstitution and reuse of the same materials. Recyclable
materials include, but are not limited to, paper, newspaper, plastic,
aluminum cans, metal, cardboard and magazines. Terms associated with
RECYCLING are defined as follows.



      (1)   RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY, TEMPORARY. A facility for
the deposit or drop-off of recyclable materials. A recycling collection
facility is not a salvage yard. Such a facility does not do processing,
except limited baling, batching, and sorting of materials. It is designed to
allow for a combination of bins, boxes, trailers, reverse vending machines
and other containers for the collection of recyclable materials.



      (2)   RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY, COMMERCIAL. A facility
that receives material from the public and/or other recycling facilities and
uses power-driven machinery to prepare materials for efficient shipment by
such means as flattening, sorting, compacting, baling, shredding, grinding
and crushing.



      (3)   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. “Feedstock” used for direct
conversion to manufactured products. It includes, but is not limited to,
cans, bottles, plastic and paper. Items composed of more than one material,
such as salvaged vehicular parts, are generally not considered a RECYCLABLE
MATERIAL.



   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
structure, improvement or fixture for the purpose of maintenance.



   REPAIR SERVICES, ON-SITE. An establishment primarily engaged in
specialized repair services such as appliance repair, jewelry repair, bicycle
repair, furniture repair or reupholstering services, leather goods repair
(including shoe), lawn mower and lawn equipment repair, lock and gun repair,
musical instrument repair and radio, stereo, VCR, computer or television
repair where the repairs primarily take place at the business establishment.
This use does not include “automotive repair shops”. Repairs and all
associated materials shall be performed inside a fully enclosed building.
Storage of goods shall be inside a fully screened enclosure.



   REPAIR SERVICES, OFF-SITE. An establishment primarily engaged in
specialized repair or maintenance services at its customer’s premises
including, but not limited to, repairs to major appliances, heating and air
conditioning units, electrical systems, plumbing systems, as well as
performing pipe and drain cleaning, exterminating services, tuck pointing and
drive-way sealing. Such use also includes the incidental sale of heating, air
conditioning, plumbing and other appliances by the service provider.



   RESEARCH SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in research of an
industrial or scientific nature, excluding final product testing. Uses
include electronics research laboratories, space research and development
firms, medical laboratories or pharmaceutical research labs.



   RESIDENCE. A dwelling unit.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A zoning district designated by this chapter as
A, RR, SR-1, SR-1B, SR-2, SR-3, MR-1, MR-2, and MH-1.



   RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale
of food and beverages, excluding alcoholic beverages. Such uses prepare food
for consumption off the premises although seating may  be provided for
dining on the premises. Uses include soda fountains, cafés, diners, grills
ice cream parlors, pizza parlors, chili parlors, hamburger shops, sandwich
(sub) shops, coffee shops or snack shops, take-out only establishments and
those that include a drive-through.



   RESTAURANT, GENERAL. An establishment or place of business primarily
engaged in the preparation of full course meals served on the premises, with
complete kitchen facilities for preparation of the food sold, and where
alcoholic beverages may be sold in conjunction with meals, or at a bar within
the restaurant, provided that more than 51% of the revenue generated at the
restaurant is related to food sales. Uses include buffets, cafeterias,
cantinas, barbeques, hamburger shops, pizza or chili parlors, diners and
steak houses where more than 51% of the revenue generated is from food sales.



   RESTAURANT, LIMITED. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale
of food and beverages, excluding alcoholic beverages. Uses include soda
fountains, cafés, diners, grills ice cream parlors, pizza parlors, chili
parlors, hamburger shops, sandwich (sub) shops, coffee shops or snack shops,
take-out only establishments and that do not include restaurants that serve
alcoholic beverages, include a drive-through or that would be included under
the definition of “fast food” or “drive-in”.



   RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES. A business offering the sale of commodities
and services directly to customers, when such commodities and services are
used or consumed by the customer and not purchased primarily for the purpose
of resale. RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES shall include the following uses:



      (1)   GENERAL MERCHANDISE RETAIL STORES. Limited to:



         (a)   Department stores;



         (b)   Dry goods stores;



         (c)   Limited price variety stores; and



         (d)   Wholesale establishment.



      (2)   FOOD MERCHANDISE RETAIL STORES. Limited to:



         (a)   Bakeries, non-manufacturing - except for retail
sale upon the premises only; (See also BAKERY.)



         (b)   Candy and confectionery shops;



         (c)   Dairy product markets;



         (d)   Delicatessens;



         (e)   Fruit and vegetable markets;



         (f)   Grocery stores (excluding convenience stores);



         (g)   Health food stores; and



         (h)   Meat, fish, seafood and poultry markets.



      (3)   FURNITURE AND HOME FURNISHING RETAIL STORES. Limited to:



         (a)   China, glassware and metalware stores;



         (b)   Draperies, curtains and upholstery stores,
including custom-made service and supplies;



         (c)   Floor covering and carpet stores, including
installation and cleaning service;



         (d)   Furniture stores, including repair and service;



         (e)   Household appliance stores, including repair and
service;



         (f)   Interior decorator’s service stores or offices,
excluding fabrication shops;



         (g)   Lamp and mirror stores;



         (h)   Musical instrument stores, including repair and
tuning service, and supplies;



         (i)   Office furniture and business machine stores,
including service, repair, supplies and equipment; and



         (j)   Radio, television, computer and audio and video
recorder stores, including parts, repair, service and supplies.



      (4)   APPAREL AND ACCESSORIES, RETAIL STORES AND SHOPS.
Limited to:



         (a)   Apparel accessory shops;



         (b)   Clothing stores;



         (c)   Custom tailoring and dressmaking shops;



         (d)   Clothing rental stores;



         (e)   Jewelry and lapidary shops; and



         (f)   Shoe stores.



      (5)   MISCELLANEOUS RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE STORES AND SHOPS.
Limited to and including the offering for retail sale any or of the following
commodities:



         (a)   Art articles and artist’s supply stores;



         (b)   Auction halls and antique shops;



         (c)   Barber shop, salon, spa, beauty shop; (See also
BARBER SHOP, SALON, SPA OR BEAUTY SHOP.)



         (d)   Books, magazines, newspapers, greeting cards and
stationery (including letterhead and business card printing) stores;



         (e)   Camera and photographic supply shops, including
optical goods;



         (f)   Coin and stamp stores;



         (g)   Equipment rental stores (does not automotive sales
and lease, truck and equipment sales, lease and rental and/or trailer rental);



         (h)   Florists;



         (i)   Gift, novelty, curio and souvenir shops;



         (j)   Hardware and lawn and garden equipment and supply
stores;



         (k)   Hobby and craft shops, including, but not limited
to, trophies and engraving, woodworking, taxidermists, gunsmiths and bicycles;



         (l)   Leather and luggage retail shops;



         (m)   Locksmith;



         (n)   Newspaper distribution and delivery stations;



         (o)   Pet shops, retail;



         (p)   Pharmacies, including, but not limited to,
retailing of toiletries, notions, and sundries;



         (q)   Photography processing patron drop-off stations,
retail, (excluding patron drive-through service);



         (r)   Sporting goods shops; or



         (t)   Tobacco shops. (See also TOBACCO SHOPS.)



   REZONING. Any amendment of the zoning district classification
applicable to one or more specific parcels of property.



   ROOF. The outside top covering of a building or structure.



   ROOF, MANSARD. A roof having two slopes on all four sides, with the
lower slope almost vertical and the upper slope almost horizontal; or, from
the ground, having the appearance of such a ROOF.



   SCHOOL, BUSINESS OR VOCATIONAL. A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial and/or
trade skills such as accounting data processing and computer repair.



   SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY. Schools furnishing academic courses,
ordinarily for kindergarten through grade 12. Included are public, private
and parochial schools and military academies furnishing academic courses for
kindergarten through grade 12, and secondary schools which furnish both
academic and technical courses.



   SCHOOL, PRIVATE. A facility established for the purposes of general
education not associated with any public or governmental body. This
definition shall include schools, academies, colleges, day schools, nursery
schools and schools associated with religious institutions (does not include
home schooling by a parent of children residing at residence.)



   SCHOOL, PUBLIC. A facility established by the state or other
governmental agency for the purposes of education.



   SCRAP YARD. See JUNKYARD.



   SETBACK LINE or BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the respective lot
line and internal to the lot that defines the required building setback as
specified in the zoning district regulations. The derivations of SETBACK LINE
shall maintain the following definitions.







 



      (1)   SETBACK LINE, FRONT. Shall be parallel to the front lot
line and shall extend from side lot line to side lot line.



      (2)   SETBACK LINE, REAR. Shall be parallel to all rear lot
lines and shall extend from side lot line to side lot line. If there is no
rear lot line, a semicircular REAR SETBACK LINE shall be drawn with a radius
equal to the rear setback requirement and a center at the intersection of the
side lines.



      (3)   SETBACK LINES, SIDE. Are parallel to any side lot line
and extend from the front setback line to the rear setback line or another
side setback line.



   SHOPPING (STRIP) CENTER. A single piece of real estate containing more
than three commercial establishments and a total retail or service space of
more than 5,000 square feet planned, constructed and managed as a total
entity with customer and employee parking provided on site.



   SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE. The area bounded by the street right-of-way
lines of corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines 30
feet from their points of intersection. Nothing shall be erected, placed,
planted or allowed to grow within this triangular area in a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and eight
feet above the grades of the outside edge of the street surface of the
intersecting surfaces. These requirements shall also apply to driveways
serving development off collector and arterial roadways. The City Engineer
may establish different sight triangles based upon standards in the policy
manual published by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO). See diagram for a depiction of the SIGHT
DISTANCE TRIANGLE at an intersection of two streets.







 



   SIGN. See §§ 158.160 through 158.168 of this chapter.



   SMALL LOAN ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that engages in transactions
in which a short-term cash advance is made to a consumer in exchange for a
customer’s post-dated check in the amount of the advance plus a fee, or in
exchange for a consumer’s authorization to debit a transaction account in
the amount of the advance plus a fee at a designated future date. Uses
include check cashing stores. The classification does not include a state or
federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union or industrial
land company. Further, this classification does not include establishments
selling consumer goods where the cashing of checks or money orders is
incidental to the main purpose of the business.



   SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION. A facility where refuse and garbage, but
no hazardous waste, is delivered for compaction or aggregation and loaded on
trucks for shipment to a remote landfill or other disposal facility.



   SPECIAL EVENT. See Ch. 118 of this code of ordinances.



   SPECIAL USE. A use allowed in the particular zoning district upon the
issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



   SPECIALTY STORE. A retail establishment that sells a small number of
specific lines of new merchandise, such as furniture, furnishings, carpet and
tile, appliances, large wares, fixtures, computer or software, paint,
wallpaper, fabric, luggage or leather goods, sewing equipment, sporting goods
(including bikes, camping, hiking and other outdoor items), electronic
equipment, audio/video equipment, wireless telephones and services, camera
and photography equipment, and similar specific lines of merchandise. (See
also RETAIL, SALES AND SERVICES.)



   STABLE, TRACK OR POLO FIELD. Any structure or area located on a lot
designed, arranged or used for the care, exercise, running, feeding and
storage of horses and other such animals, including, but not limited to,
ponies, donkeys and mules.



   STOCKYARD. An establishment or place of business primarily used for the
temporary keeping of livestock for slaughter, market, auction or shipping.



   STORAGE. The placement, keeping or retention of vehicles, equipment,
materials, goods or products for intermittent use or subsequent distribution
or transfer.



   STORY. The part of a building including between the surface of one
floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above,
that part of the building which is above the surface of the next highest
floor thereof. A top STORY attic is a half story when the main line of the
eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such STORY. The first
STORY is the highest STORY having its interior floor surface not more than
four feet above the curb level, mean street grade or average ground level.



   STREET. An improved way for the conveyance of motor driven,
rubber-tired vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks. Terms related to
street shall mean as follows.



      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET. A state- or U.S.-numbered highway.
ARTERIAL STREETS are used for traffic of moderate to fast speeds and high
volumes between major local centers of employment, recreation and shopping.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET. A major street used for traffic of
moderate speeds and high peak volumes between local streets and arterial
streets or serving as a principal entrance street or primary circulation
route within a neighborhood or other limited area. COLLECTOR STREETS serve
residential subdivisions, non- residential or multi-family areas, but are not
state- or U.S.-numbered highways.



      (3)   LOCAL STREET. A minor street used for traffic of
relatively low speeds and volumes and for primary access to abutting
properties.



      (4)   ALLEY. A narrow street used as a secondary means of
access and usually located along the rear lines of abutting properties.



   STREET LINE. The dividing line between the street and the abutting
property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, to
any structure.



   STRUCTURE. A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface
of land or water. Unless otherwise indicated, the following specific
definitions shall apply.



      (1)   CONVENTIONALLY-BUILT BUILDING or CONVENTIONALLY-BUILT
STRUCTURE. A building or structure utilizing customary methods of carpentry
and construction; a building assembled and erected at the building site using
traditional or customary methods of carpentry and construction, having need
of a permanent perimeter foundation. Such a building may involve the use of
individual prefabricated structural-units (such as a beam, girder, plank,
strut, column or truss). The term shall include buildings designed and
intended for dwelling, business, educational or industrial use occupancy.



      (2)   PREFABRICATED BUILDING OR PREFABRICATED BUILDING
STRUCTURE. A completely assembled and erected building designed and
constructed for permanent occupancy, of which 50% or greater of the
structural parts consist of individual prefabricated structural units (such
as a beam, girder, plank, strut, column or truss) and prefabricated building
subassemblies (such as an assembled section of wall, ceiling, floor or roof,
which may be of closed or open construction) that are transported from the
place of manufacture to the building site to be incorporated into the
building by field erection of such structural units and building
subassemblies, having need of a perimeter formation permanent foundation. The
term shall include buildings designed and intended to be used for dwelling,
business, educational or industrial use occupancy all of which are not
regulated by the State Department of Health.



      (3)   MODULAR BUILDING or MODULAR BUILDING STRUCTURE.



         (a)   A modular building or structure is a building
assembly or system of building sub-assemblies including the necessary
electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other service systems, which
is of closed or open construction and which is made or assembled by a
manufacturer, on or off the building site, for installation or assembly and
installation on the building site with a permanent foundation. The permanent
foundations shall consist of a closed perimeter formation comprised of
materials such as concrete or concrete blocks which extends into the grounds
below the frost line. MODULAR BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES shall have a yellow
seal permanently affixed to the electrical box and comply with all applicable
requirements of the State Department of Health and the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International (BOCA), Inc., or the International Code
Council (ICC). The city may require additional items other than the minimum
state requirements to be incorporated into the construction of MODULAR HOMES.



         (b)   MODULAR UNITS typically come from the factory in
two of more sections (box-like configurations complete with the plumbing,
electrical, mechanical, wall, floor and ceiling coverings and cabinets. The
illustration is a example of a MODULAR DWELLING.







 




Characteristics of a Modular Structure:
Residential Design




   Residential Character:



      Pitched Roof



      Covered Entry



      Enclosed Garage



   Architectural Details:



      Eave Projection



      Varying Depths



      Ornamental Windows



   Modular Features:



      Modules for on-site construction



   Permanent Features:



         Walkway and Stairs



         Formal Landscaping



         Footings and Foundation



      (4)   MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME. A structure, transportable
in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more
in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning
and electrical systems contained therein. All MANUFACTURED HOMES shall comply
with the federal manufactured home construction and safety standards
established pursuant to the National Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5403 and constructed after 6-15-1976. Each
MANUFACTURED HOME UNIT shall contain a red metal label permanently affixed to
the rear of each towable unit and comply with the requirements of the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the State Department of
Public Health and all other applicable agencies.







 




Characteristics of a Manufactured Home




      Residential Character:



      Pitched Roof



      Font Porch



      Landscaping



   Architectural Details:



      Eave Projections



       Covered Entry



      Ornamental Windows



   Manufactured Home Features:



      Horizontal Lap Siding



      Permanent Masonry foundation



      Double-wide manufactured home



      (5)   STRUCTURES; DIFFERENTIATION OF MOBILE HOME STRUCTURES.



         (a)   (MOBILE STRUCTURE) MOBILE HOME STRUCTURE. A mobile
structure that is not resting in whole upon a permanent foundation and was
constructed prior to the passage of the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5403, of 6-15-1976.



         (b)   IMMOBILIZED-MOBILE HOME or IMMOBILIZED-MOBILE HOME
STRUCTURE. A mobile home transformed to that which is “real property”,
distinguished from that which is “personal property”, by virtue of
causing the structure to rest in whole on a permanent foundation. Having been
designed and constructed as a mobile home, the lack of mobility, for
whatsoever cause, does not render the structure not a mobile home. Mobility
or portability is not germane, that is, when portability is removed from a
mobile home by causing it to rest in whole on a permanent foundation, it
remains a mobile home. The transformation brought about by the act of causing
the mobile home to rest in whole on a permanent foundation is the act to
transform the mobile home from that which is personal property to that which
is real property.



         (c)   MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT. A mobile home, or travel
trailer, which does not have a flush toilet or a bathtub or shower.



         (d)   MOBILE HOME, INDEPEN-DENT. A mobile home, or
travel trailer, that has a flush toilet and a bathtub or shower.



   SWIMMING POOL. A structure, whether indoor or outdoor, above or below
the surface of the ground or both, intended to contain water for swimming or
wading, having an inside wall depth at any point of more than two feet or a
surface area exceeding 250 square feet. The terms associated with SWIMMING
POOL shall have the following meanings.



      (1)   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. A swimming pool located at a
private residence, used or intended to be operated for the exclusive use of
the residents of the lot upon which it is located and their invited guests.



      (2)   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE MEMBERSHIP. A swimming pool
intended for use by only those persons who pay a membership or similar fee
that entitles such persons to use the swimming pool for a predetermined
period of time.



      (3)   SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC. A swimming pool intended for use
by the general public.



   SYNAGOGUE. See CHURCH, TEMPLE or SYNAGOGUE.



   TANNING SALON. Any business subject to licensing by the state to use
artificial lighting systems to produce a tan on an individual’s body.



   TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. A place wherein tattooing, branding or body
piercing on the body of another person is performed. For purposes of this
definition, the following definitions apply.



      (1)   TATTOO. One or more of the following:



         (a)   An indelible mark made on the body of another
person by the insertion of a pigment under the skin; or



         (b)   An indelible design made on the body of another
person by production of scars other than by branding.



      (2)   BODY PIERCING. The perforation of human tissue other
than an ear for a non-medical purpose; and



      (3)   BRANDING. Making a permanent mark on human tissue by
burning with a hot iron or other instrument.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT. Antennas, cabinets, towers and other
equipment attendant to facilities used by the wireless telecommunications
industry.



   TEMPLE. See CHURCH, TEMPLE OR SYNAGOGUE.



   TEMPORARY USE. A use established for a fixed period of time with the
intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.



   THEATER.



      (1)   A building or premises devoted to showing motion
pictures, or for live dramatic or musical performances.



      (2)   Terms associated with theater shall be defined as
follows.



         (a)   DRIVE-IN MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An open lot with
its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion
pictures or other prerecorded productions to patrons seated in automobiles.



         (b)   MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building primarily used
for the exhibition of movies or other prerecorded productions to the general
public in an indoor setting.



         (c)   PERFORMING ARTS THEATER. A building primarily used
for the presentation of live performances of plays or music.



   TITLE LOAN ESTABLISHMENT. Any person, entity or business that lends
money to a borrower and in exchange retains physical possession of the
state-issued certificate of title to the personal property of the borrower.



   TOBACCO SHOP. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in retail sale for consumption off the premises of tobacco and/or
tobacco-related products (“tobacco products”) and/or an establishment
where one-half or more of the net floor area is dedicated to or where
one-half or more of the gross receipts are derived from the sale of tobacco
products.



   TOWNHOUSE. See DWELLING.



   TRACT. A single unit of real property under one ownership, which may be
platted or unplatted.



   TRAILER. A portable structure supported by wheels, jacks, horses, skids
or blocks without permanent foundation that is towed or hauled by another
vehicle used for temporary human occupancy, to carry materials, goods or
objects; or use as a temporary office.



   TRAVEL TRAILER CAMPS. A tract or parcel of land where temporary
accommodations are provided for two or more trailers open to the public
either free or for a fee.



   TREE. See §§ 158.180 through 158.194 of this chapter.



   TRUCK AND EQUIPMENT SALES, LEASE AND RENTALS.



      (1)   An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in the sale, lease or rental of heavy trucks, tractors, construction
equipment, trailers, agricultural implements and similar heavy equipment,
including incidental storage, maintenance and servicing.



      (2)   Uses include heavy truck dealerships and construction
equipment dealerships.



   UNRELATED. When referring to persons, shall mean two or more people not
related by blood, marriage or adoption.



   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land, or structure thereon,
is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.



   USED CAR LOT. A lot or parcel of land on which pre-owned or used motor
vehicles, including automobiles, trailers and trucks, are displayed for sale
or trade.



   USED MERCHANDISE STORE. A use primarily engaged in the retail sale of
used merchandise, antiques and secondhand goods, such as clothing and shoes;
furniture; books and rare manuscripts; musical instruments; office furniture;
phonographs and phonograph records; and store fixtures and equipment.



   VACATION. The official abandonment of public right-of-way or easement
by the city in accordance with state law.



   VARIANCE. A modification of the application of certain regulations or
provisions of this chapter by the Board, in accordance with the procedure
established by this chapter.



   VEHICLE, INOPERATIVE. Any wrecked, disabled or damaged motor vehicle.
Any one of the following conditions shall be deemed prima facie evidence that
a vehicle is inoperable:



      (1)   Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks,
blocks, chains or other supports;



      (2)   Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary
for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon the streets and highways;



      (3)   Storage of a vehicle with one or more deflated tires;
and/or



      (4)   A vehicle that is not properly registered as required by
law.



   VEHICLE, MOTOR. Any passenger vehicle, motorcycle, recreational
vehicle, truck, trailer truck or semi-trailer that is propelled or drawn by
mechanical power.



   VETERINARIAN. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in the medical care and treatment of animals.



   VETERINARY CLINIC. A facility for the medical treatment of small
domestic animals, which is staffed by at least one doctor of veterinary
medicine, and which meets the following additional requirements:



      (1)   Proper waste disposal with no detectible odors beyond
the property line;



      (2)   No outdoor dog runs or play areas;



      (3)   No indoor or outdoor boarding of animals, except for
indoor boarding directly related to medical treatment; and



      (4)   Verification is provided to the city that the building
design or construction will prevent noise from animals being audible from
adjacent properties or tenants.



   VIDEO GAMING LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. The phrases “video gaming
terminal”, “licensed retail establishment”, “licensed fraternal
establishment”, “licensed veterans' establishment” and “licensed
truck stop establishment” shall have the meanings set forth in the Illinois
Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5).  Each of the aforementioned
establishments shall be referred to herein as a VIDEO GAMING LICENSED
ESTABLISHMENT, whether it be a “retail licensed establishment”,
“licensed fraternal establishment”, “licensed veterans establishment”
or “licensed truck establishment” as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming
Act.



   WALK-UP ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment not engaged in the
retail sales of goods that encourages its customers or patrons to park and
leave their vehicle briefly to transact business.



   WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION. An establishment or place of business
primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of
materials and equipment other than live animals and plants , at a scale and
intensity that is compatible with the surrounding uses and the intent of the
city’s M-1 District. Such uses include freight terminals; trucking and
courier services, moving and storage facilities, cold storage and wholesale
and distribution establishments.



   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business primarily engaged in
selling, brokering and distributing merchandise to persons other than members
of the general public.



   YARD. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. In measuring a
YARD, for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a
front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between
a lot line and the building, or any protrusions therefrom, shall be used. The
derivations of YARD shall maintain the following definitions.



      (1)   YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot
extending from the front line of the main building to the front line of the
lot.



      (2)   YARD, REAR. A yard between the rear lot line and the
rear of the main building and the side lot lines.



      (3)   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the
adjacent side line of the lot, and extending entirely from the front yard to
the rear yard thereof.



      (4)   YARD, REQUIRED. The minimum open space between a lot
line and the buildable area of a lot within which no structure, parking area
or other obstruction shall be located, except as provided by this chapter.



      (5)   YARD, REQUIRED FRONT. That yard established by the front
setback requirement of this chapter and the established front lot line.



      (6)   YARD, REQUIRED REAR. That yard established by the rear
setback requirement of this chapter and the established rear lot line.



      (7)   YARD, REQUIRED SIDE. That yard established by the side
setback requirement of this chapter and the established side lot line.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator shall be the Planning
Director or his or her designee. Also known as the ZONING OFFICIAL.



   ZONING MAP OR ATLAS. The Zoning District Map of the city.



   ZONING PERMIT. A permit issued by the city indicating compliance with
applicable zoning regulations.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 3483, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 3643, passed
11-2-2009; Ord 3665, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 3901,
passed 10-5-2015; Ord. 3997, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 4021, passed 12-4-2017)




ARTICLE 2:
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS




§ 158.030  ZONING DISTRICTS - GENERAL.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided
into 13 categories of zoning districts as follows:



 

Symbol
 
Designation




A
 
Agricultural District


RR
 
Rural Residential District


SR-1
 
Single-Family Residence Dwelling District


SR-1B
 
Single-Family Residence Dwelling District


SR-2
 
Single-Family Residence Dwelling District


SR-3
 
Single-Family Residence Dwelling District


MR-1
 
Two-, Three- and Four-Family Residence Dwelling District


MR-2
 
Multi-Family Residence Dwelling District


MH-1
 
Single-Family Mobile Home Dwelling District


O-1
 
Office District


B-1
 
Community Business District


B-2
 
General Business District


I
 
Industrial District




 



   (B)   When a use or accessory use is not specifically listed in the
sections devoted to “uses permitted”, it shall be assumed that such uses
are expressly prohibited unless, by a written decision of the City Council,
it is determined that said use is similar to and is compatible with the uses
listed and is expressly included as a use permitted in a zoning district.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 659, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 949, passed
12-17-1979; Ord. 1584, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1878, passed 11-18-1996; Ord.
3817, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 4021, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 158.031  REGULATION OF STRUCTURES AND DWELLINGS.



   (A)   Structures, property, and dwellings are divisioned and
classified as hereunder listed and established for the purpose of this
chapter.



      (1)   Structures.



         (a)   Building structures.  Class 1,
conventionally-built building structures; Class 2, prefabricated building
structures; and Class 3, modular building structures.



         (b)   Mobile home structures.  Class 4,
immobilized-mobile home structures; and Class 5, (mobile) mobile home
structures.



      (2)   Property.



         (a)   Real property.  Class 1, conventionally-built
building structure; Class 2, prefabricated building structure; Class 3,
modular building structure; and Class 4, immobilized-mobile home structure.



         (b)   Personal property. Class 5, (mobile) mobile home
structure.



      (3)   Dwellings.



         (a)   Residence dwellings.  Class 1,
conventionally-built residence dwelling; Class 2, prefabricated residence
dwelling; and Class 3, modular residence dwelling.



         (b)   Mobile home dwellings.  Class 4,
immobilized-mobile home dwelling; and Class 5, (mobile) mobile home dwelling.



   (B)   When a given class of structure is not listed in the sections
of this chapter devoted to “permitted principal structure class” for a
given category of zoning, it shall be assumed that class of structure is
expressly prohibited in that category of zoning or zone district.



   (C)   When a given class of dwelling (use) is not listed in the
sections of this chapter devoted to “permitted uses” for a given category
of zoning, it shall be assumed that class of dwelling (use) is expressly
prohibited in that category of zoning or zone district.



   (D)   However, not in conflict with the foregoing, if there is doubt
in determining of which class a given structure shall be classified, or if
there is doubt in determining of which class a given dwelling shall be
classified, then by written order or resolution by the City Council, after
reviewing the definitions of the several relevant words, terms and phrases
listed and defined in and for the purpose of this chapter, the City Council
shall determine and identify that the structure or dwelling in question is of
a character that is most nearly equal to and compatible with one of the above
five listed classes of structures or dwellings, as the instance shall
dictate. Thereafter, structures or dwellings of the question shall be
expressly included as being of that declared class, unless the City Council
shall subsequently reverse or amend its order or resolution following the
same procedure.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 949, passed 12-17-1979)



§ 158.032  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The boundaries of the zones provided in § 158.030 of this chapter are
established as shown on the city’s Zoning District Map. The zoning
districts and boundaries are hereby adopted and established as shown on the
District Map, which map, together with all notations, references, data,
district boundaries and other information thereon, are made a part of this
chapter by reference. A copy of the Zoning Map properly attested shall remain
on file in the office of the Zoning Inspector and the office of the City
Clerk.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.033  INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Whenever this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed and required by other provisions of law
or by other rules or regulations or resolutions, the provisions of this
chapter shall govern.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.034  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, the
centerlines or alley lines of alleys, or the centerlines or right-of-way
lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning
map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use
of such scale as may be shown on said zoning map.



   (B)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.



   (C)   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located at the railroad right-of-way line
closest to the most restrictive zoning district line shown on the Zone
District Map.



   (D)   Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or
other body of water, said boundary line shall be construed to be the
centerline of the stream, otherwise at the limit of the jurisdiction of the
city, unless otherwise indicated.



   (E)   Any areas shown on the zoning map as park, playground, school,
cemetery, water, street or right-of-way, shall be subject to the zoning
regulations of the district in which they are located.



   (F)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated in
the manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such
street, alley or public way shall automatically extend to the center of such
vacation and all area included in the vacation shall thereafter be subject to
all regulations of the extended districts.



   (G)   Where any land or territory within the city is not shown to be
located in a district, the zoning regulations of the most restrictive
adjoining district shall govern.



   (H)   Where a lot under single ownership is divided at the time of
enactment of this chapter, or by subsequent amendments, by a zoning district
boundary line, the requirements of the less restrictive district adjacent to
such line may be extended for that lot, not more than 25 feet into the more
restrictive district.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.035  EXISTING SPECIAL USES.



   Where a use is classified as a special use under this chapter, it shall
be considered a legal use, without further action of the City Council.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.036  SCHEDULE: AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   To facilitate public understanding of this chapter and for the
better administration and convenience of use thereof, the regulations
limiting the dwelling unit density, the heights, bulk and arrangement of
buildings for each of the districts established by § 158.030 of this chapter
(or specified use) are set forth in § 158.036(D) of this chapter,
hereinafter called “schedule”. Such schedule is hereby adopted and
declared to be an integral part of this chapter, and it may be amended in the
same manner as any other part of this chapter.



   (B)   For each district (or specified use) named in said schedule.
the maximum number of dwelling units shall be as indicated in § 158.036
Column B; the minimum lot requirements shall be as indicated in § 158.036
Columns C, D, E; the minimum yard dimensions shall be as indicated in §
158.036 Columns F, G, H, I, J; maximum lot coverage therefore shall be
indicated as § 158.036 Column K; permitted floor area ratio (ratio of floor
area to lot area) shall be indicated as § 158.036 Column L; maximum building
heights shall be as indicated in § 158.036 Column M; requirements for
accessory buildings and uses, as to maximum height shall be as indicated in
§ 158.036 Column N; and as to minimum distance of detached accessory
buildings and uses to principal buildings, streets and lot lines, as
indicated in § 158.036 Columns O, P, Q, R, S, respectively; and as otherwise
set forth in the Schedule and in notes and remarks appended thereto.



   (C)   A blank space in a block of a column of said Schedule
indicates that the requirement of that column does not pertain to the
district or use specified on the corresponding horizontal lines. The words
“Same as SR-1 (or other symbol or reference)” as used in a column shall
mean and include the specific limitations and requirements



as set forth in the same column for district referred to by such symbol or
reference; otherwise the limitations and requirements in said schedule shall
be read from left to right.



   (D)   Schedule: area and bulk regulations:



 


Principal Building or Structure Minimum Yard Dimensions for Agricultural and
Residential Districts






 



 

Minimum Lot Size (See Note 1)

 

Principal Building or Structure
Minimum Yard Dimensions (See Note 2)

 



 



 






A

 

B

 

C

 

D

 

E

 

F

 

G

 

H

 

I

 

J

 

K

 

L

 

M




Zoning District

 

Maximum Number of Dwelling Units

 

Lot Area in Square Feet or Acres

 

Lot  Width at Building Line, in Linear Feet

 

Mean Lot Depth, in Linear Feet

 

Depth of Front Yard, in Linear Feet

 

Depth of Side Yard Abutting a Street, in Linear Feet

 

Depth of a Side Yard Abutting a Lot, in Linear Feet

 

Minimum Distance to Nearest Principal Structure on an Adjacent Lot, In Linear
Feet

 

Depth of Rear Yard,



in Linear Feet

 

Maximum Lot Coverage in Percent (See  Note 3)

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio  (See  Note 4)

 

Maximum Height of Principal Building in Linear Feet (See Note 5)




Total for Both

 

Minimum for Either





“A” Agricultural
 
1 per 3 acres of lot area
 

3 acres

 

150 feet

 

200 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

20 feet

 

10 feet

 

20 feet

 

25 feet

 

20%

 



 

35 feet



“RR”
Rural Residential
 

1 per 1 acre of lot area

 

1 acre

 

100 feet

 

150 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

20 feet

 

10 feet

 

20 feet

 

25 feet

 

25%

 



 

35 feet



“SR-1”
Single- Family
 
1 per 10,000 sq. ft. of lot area
 

10,000 sq. ft.

 

75 feet

 

100 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

20 feet

 

10 feet

 

20 feet

 

25 feet

 

30%

 



 

35 feet



“SR-1B”
Single- Family
 
1 per 10,000 sq. ft. of lot area
 

10,000 sq. ft.

 

75 feet

 

100 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

15 feet

 

7½ feet

 

15 feet

 

25 feet

 

30%

 



 

35 feet



“SR-2”
Single- Family
 
1 per 8,000 sq. ft. of lot area
 

8,000 sq. ft.

 

60 feet

 

100 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

15 feet

 

7½ feet

 

15 feet

 

25 feet

 

30%

 



 

35 feet



“SR-3”
Single- Family
 
1 per 6,000 sq. ft. of lot area
 

6,000 sq. ft.

 

50 feet

 

100 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

5 feet

 

10 feet

 

25 feet

 

30%

 



 

35 feet



“MR-1”
2-, 3-, and 4-Family
 
1 per 3,000 sq. ft. of lot area
 
6,000 sq. ft. minimum, or 3,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit, whichever is
greater
 
50 feet minimum or 25 feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater
 

120 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

5 feet

 

10 feet

 

25 feet

 

30%

 



 

35 feet



“MR-2”
Multi- Family
 
1 per 2,700 sq. ft. of lot area
 
6,000
sq. ft. minimum, or 2,700 sq. ft. per dwelling unit, whichever is greater
 
50 feet minimum, or 10 feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater
 

120 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 
10 feet minimum, or 6 inches per foot of building height, (½ the
building’s height), whichever is greater
 

20 feet

 

25 feet

 

30%

 

3/4 : 1

 

35 feet



“MH-1” Single- Family Mobile Home Dwelling District
 
1 per 6,000 sq. ft. of lot area
 

6,000 sq. ft.

 

50 feet

 

100 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

5 feet

 

10 feet

 

25 feet

 

30%

 



 

35 feet



“O-1” Office District
 

1

 

8,000  sq. ft.

 

60 feet

 

100 feet

 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

5 feet

 

10 feet

 

20 feet

 

30%

 

3/4 : 1

 

35 feet



“B-1”
Community Business District
 
Not a permitted use (see Note 9)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No side yards are required except in the instances where the subject lot
abuts an "RR", “SR”, “MR”, or “MH” District or where a side yard
is voluntarily provided a side yard of at least 12 feet shall be required
 
12 feet where yard area is required or provided
 

20 feet

 

50%

 

2 : 1

 
92 feet or 8 stories in height, which is smaller


“B-2”
General Business District
 
Not a permitted use (see § 158.037 (D)(12))
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No side yards are required except in the instances where the subject lot
abuts an "RR", “SR”, “MR”, or “MH” District, a side yard of at
least 25 feet shall be required or where a side yard is voluntarily provided,
a side yard of at least 12 feet shall be required
 
12 feet where yard area is required or provided
 

20 feet

 

50%

 

2 : 1

 
92 feet or 8 stories in height, whichever is smaller


“I”
Industrial District
 
Not a permitted use (see § 158.037 (D)(13)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 feet

 

25 feet

 

50 feet

 

25 feet

 



 

20 feet

 

40%

 

1 : 1

 
92 feet or 8 stories in height, whichever is smaller




 



 



 


Accessory Buildings or Structures (See Note 6)




If Detached, Minimum Yard Dimensions




A

 

N

 

O

 

P

 

Q

 

R

 

S




Zoning District

 

Maximum Height, in Linear Feet (See Note 5)

 

Principal Building or Structure, in Linear Feet

 

Front Lot Line in Linear Feet

 

Side Lot Line, Street Side, in Linear Feet

 

Side Lot Line, Interior Side, in Linear Feet

 

Rear Lot Line, in Linear Feet





“A” Agricultural
 

35 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“RR”
Rural Residential
 

35 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

5 feet

 

5 feet



“SR-1”
Single-Family
 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“SR-1B”
Single-Family
 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“SR-2”
Single-Family
 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“SR-3”
Single-Family
 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“MR-1”
2-, 3-, and
4-Family
 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“MR-2”
Multi-Family
 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“MH-1” Single-Family Mobile Home Dwelling District
 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

3 feet

 

3 feet



“O-1”
Office District
 

20 feet

 

10 feet

 

20 feet

 

25 feet

 

5 feet

 

5 feet



“B-1”
Community Business District
 

20 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet



“B-2”
General Business District
 

20 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet



“I”
Industrial District
 

20 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet





 



Note 1: Where the use of private individual wells and/or septic tank (or like
private systems) is practiced, the maximum dwelling unit density, minimum lot
area size, lot frontage and lot depth are subject to the operations of §
158.039(K).



Note 2:  Exceptions to the minimum yard dimensions are as established by §
158.039(P).



Note 3:  Coverage regulations do not apply to automobile parking areas.



Note 4:  Floor area ratio shall apply to the total area included in the
development, excluding streets and other public areas, and shall not exceed
the ratio specified for the district where the development is located.



Note 5:  Exceptions to the maximum height limitations of buildings and
structures are as established in § 158.039(O).



Note 6:  Any attached accessory building shall be considered as part of the
principal building.



Note 7:  Signs are regulated by the provisions of §§ 158.160 through
158.168.



Note 8:  Parking lots and driveways abutting a residence district. Whenever
a parking lot or a driveway to a parking lot is hereafter established in
other than a residence district so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot
in a residence district, a solid masonry wall, shrubbery planting, or a fence
not less than five feet high and not more than eight feet high shall be
constructed and maintained along said side or rear lot line.  In addition in
all districts, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, on any
parking lot or driveway shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying
glare directed or reflected toward residence buildings or residence districts.



Note 9:  Residential uses are allowed in the “B-1” district only as a
special use and any such residential uses established in the “B-1”
district shall comply with all of the regulations of the least restrictive
residential district in which that type of residential use is permitted, see
§ 158.037(12)(c) listing of special uses in the “B-1” district.



   (E)   Use specific regulations.



      (1)   Churches. Minimum lot area and yard dimensions for
churches and other places of formal worship are additionally subject to the
operation of § 158.038(D).



      (2)   Fences, walls and hedges. Fences, walls and hedges are
subject to the operations of § 158.038(A).



      (3)   Fishing clubs. Setbacks applicable to buildings, parking
lots or other intense use activity for fishing lakes or clubs are
additionally regulated by the applicable provisions of § 158.037(D).



      (4)   Golf courses. Setbacks applicable to clubhouses, parking
lots, and accessory buildings for regulation and “Par 3” golf courses are
additionally regulated by the applicable provisions of § 158.037(D).



      (5)   Gun clubs. Setbacks from neighboring dwelling uses for
gun clubs are additionally regulated by the applicable provisions of §
158.037(D).



      (6)   Incinerators. Setbacks from adjacent buildings or
structures for incinerators (for home use) are additionally regulated by the
applicable provisions of § 158.037(D).



      (7)   Nursery schools. Minimum lot area and off-street loading
of children for nursery schools are additionally subject to the operation of
§ 158.038(Q).



      (8)   Nursing homes. Minimum lot area for nursing homes is
additionally subject to the operation of § 158.038(P).



      (9)   Public buildings. Minimum yard dimensions for public
buildings are additionally subject to the operation of § 158.038(J).



      (10)   Public service facilities. Minimum lot width and depth
dimensions for electrical, gas or telephone substations and exchanges are
subject to the operation of §§ 158.038(K) and 158.039(Q).



      (11)   Schools. Minimum lot area and yard dimensions for
private and parochial schools are additionally subject to the operation of §
158.038(L). Public schools are deemed to be public buildings and are
additionally subject to the operation of § 158.038(J).



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 659, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 1584, passed
12-21-1992; Ord. 1762, passed 5-15-1995; Ord. 1796, passed 10-30-1995; Ord.
1878, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 1881, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 3538, passed
9-17-2007; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 4021, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 158.037  SCHEDULE: PERMITTED USES; ACCESSORY USES; EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL
PERMITS.



      (1)   “A”, Agricultural District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; and Class 2, prefabricated building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   All uses commonly classified as agriculture,
horticulture or forestry, including crop and tree farming, truck farming,
gardening, dairy farming, livestock raising, animal and poultry breeding and
raising, forestry operations, together with the operation of machinery or
vehicles, but not including stockyards, commercial livestock or poultry
feeding nor agricultural processing plants;



            2.   One-family dwellings of the following class,
as regulated by § 158.036(E):  Class 1, conventionally-built residence
dwellings; and Class 2, prefabricated residence dwellings.



            3.   Living quarters for persons employed in
agricultural or related activities that are conducted upon the premises;



            4.   Parking lots subject to §§ 158.135 through
158.146;



            5.   Private clubs, lodges or camps, except those
whose chief activities are a service customarily carried on as a business;



            6.   Golf courses of regulation size “Par 3”
golf courses, but not including commercially operated golf driving ranges,
nor miniature golf courses; provided that, no clubhouse, parking lot, nor
accessory building shall be located nearer than 500 feet to any dwelling or
another zoning lot;



            7.   Fishing lakes or clubs; provided that, no
building, parking lot nor other intense use activity is located nearer than
500 feet to any dwelling or another zoning lot;



            8.   Gun clubs, if located not nearer than 1,000
feet to any residence other than that of the owner or lessee of the site, and
if not so operated as to withdraw land from its primary agricultural use;



            9.   Carnivals, circuses and similar temporary
transient amusement enterprises;



            10.   Plant nurseries and greenhouses, subject to
the provisions of § 158.038(R);



            11.   Schools and colleges for academic
instruction, subject to § 158.038(J) and (L);



            12.   Libraries, museums, art galleries and
similar public cultural facilities, subject to the provisions of §
158.038(J);



            13.   Cemeteries and mausoleums in conjunction
therewith;



            14.   Essential governmental and essential public
utility services, subject to the applicable provisions of §§ 158.038(J),
(K) and 158.039(Q);



            15.   Public service uses, including filtration
plants, pump stations, water reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, police and
fire stations or other governmental uses, subject to the applicable
provisions of §§ 158.038(J), (K) and 158.039(Q);



            16.   Railroad right of way and trackage, but not
including classification yards, terminal facilities, nor maintenance
facilities;



            17.   Temporary produce stands for the sale of
agricultural produce raised upon the premises, provided adequate off-street
parking is available and congestion or hazards would not be created in
conjunction with the location of access thereto; and



            18.   Radio or television transmission towers,
subject to the provisions of § 158.039(O).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses.



            1.   Any accessory use permitted and as regulated
in the SR-1 District, unless specified as a permitted principal use in this
district;



            2.   Mobile homes, subject to the provisions of §
158.038(H)(2); and



            3.   Accessory uses that are clearly supplementary
and secondary to the principal use of the subject premises.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses). Churches and other
places of formal worship, subject to the provisions of § 158.038(D), but not
including funeral chapels nor mortuary chapels.



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exception permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of this subchapter and §§ 158.038 and/or
158.039 of this chapter, as applicable thereto.



      (2)   "RR", Rural Residential District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes: Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures: and Class 2, prefabricated building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   Agricultural uses, but not including
stockyards, commercial livestock or poultry feeding nor agricultural
processing plants. All outdoor areas used for animals shall be fenced, shall
not be within 10 feet of the side or rear property lines, and shall not be
within 25 feet of any public right of way. Animal types and counts shall be
regulated as follows:



               a.   Horses, donkeys, emus, ostriches,
llamas, alpacas - two animals per acre, max three animals; and



               b.   Sheep or goats - two animals per acre,
max six animals; and



               c.   Chickens - six hens per acre, max 12
hens, no roosters allowed. See Supplemental Regulations for Accessory
Buildings in § 158.039 (E).



            2.   One-family dwellings of the following class,
as regulated by § 158.036(E): Class 1, conventionally-built residence
dwellings; and Class 2, Prefabricated residence dwellings;



            3.   Essential governmental and essential public
utility services, subject to the applicable provisions of §§ 158.038 (J),
(K) and 158.039 (Q);



            4.   Public service uses, including filtration
plants, pump stations, water reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, police and
fire stations or other governmental uses, subject to the applicable
provisions of §§ 158.038 (J), (K) and 158.039 (Q);



            5.   Railroad right of way and trackage, but not
including classification yards, terminal facilities, nor maintenance
facilities;



            6.   Temporary produce stands for the sale of
agricultural produce raised upon the premises, provided adequate off-street
parking is available and congestion or hazards would not be created in
conjunction with the location of access thereto;



            7.   Radio or television transmission towers,
subject to the provisions of § 158.039 (O) and all other applicable
regulations.



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses.



            1.   Any accessory use permitted and as regulated
in the SR-1 District, unless specified as a permitted principal use in this
district;



            2.   Accessory uses that are clearly supplementary
and secondary to the principal use of the subject premises;



            3.   Boarding of horses or keeping of horses for
rent or hire as part of an authorized home occupation.



         (d)   Planned uses.



            1.   Churches and other places of formal worship,
subject to the provisions of § 158.038(D), but not including funeral chapels
nor mortuary chapels;



            2.   Cluster/Conservation Development, as defined
in § 158.016;



            3.   Golf courses of regulation size "Par 3" golf
courses, but not including commercially operated golf driving ranges nor
miniature golf courses, provided that no clubhouse, parking lot, nor
accessory building shall be located nearer than 500 feet to any dwelling or
another zoning lot;



            4.   Fishing lakes or clubs, provided that no
building, parking lot nor other intense use activity is located nearer than
500 feet to any dwelling or another zoning lot;



            5.   Libraries, museums, art galleries and similar
public cultural facilities, subject to the provisions of § 158.038(J);



            6.   Private clubs, lodges, or camps, except those
whose chief activities are a service customarily carried on as a business;



            7.   Public, private, or parochial schools or
other uses offering courses of instruction in accordance with standards for
compulsory education.



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exception permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 district.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of this subchapter and §§ 158.038 and/or
158.039, as applicable hereto.



      (3)   “SR-1”, Single-Family Residence Dwelling District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures, and Class 2, prefabricated building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   One-Family dwelling of the following classes,
as regulated by § 158.036(E):  Class 1, conventionally-built residence
dwellings; and Class 2, prefabricated residence dwellings.



            2.   Public, private and parochial schools
offering courses of instruction at elementary and secondary levels in
accordance with standards for compulsory education, subject to the provisions
of § 158.038(J) and (L);



            3.   Essential public utility services, including
electrical substations (static transformer stations), gas regulator stations,
telephone exchange facilities and other essential public utility services,
subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038(K) and 158.039(Q);



            4.   Municipal uses, facilities and buildings,
subject to the provisions of § 158.038(J);



            5.   Growing of plants and trees on a private or
commercial basis, provided no retail sales are conducted on the premises,
subject to the provisions of § 158.038(R); and



            6.   Railroad right-of-way and trackage, but not
including switching, storage, freight yards, industrial sidings, nor
classification yards.



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses.



            1.   Private greenhouses, tool sheds and tennis
courts;



            2.   Private patios, subject to the provisions of
§ 158.039(P);



            3.   Private garages, carports, parking spaces,
not for gain in addition to the minimum off-street parking required;



            4.   Private swimming pools, subject to the
provisions of § 158.038(C);



            5.   Keeping of household pets provided kennels
are not maintained;



            6.   Keeping of not more than one unoccupied camp
trailer and/or not more than one utility trailer, subject to the provisions
of § 158.038(I);



            7.   Incinerators for home use, provided such are
located on the lot so as not to constitute an unreasonable hazard to
dwellings and other structures on the premises on adjoining property, and
located not less than 15 feet from any dwelling and not less than ten feet
from any other building;



            8.   Fences, walls and hedges, subject to the
provisions of § 158.038(A);



            9.   Accommodation for professional servants,
caretakers, watchpersons or custodians, but not as a separate detached
one-family dwelling on the same lot;



            10.   Home occupations, subject to the provisions
of § 158.038(B); and



            11.   Temporary construction sheds and temporary
buildings for sales or rental offices or show houses for use during
construction operations, provided all other regulations of the district are
complied with, but in no case shall such office be continued beyond the
duration of construction of the project or one year, whichever is greater.
However, such time limit may be extended for one year by the Zoning Hearing
Officer.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses).



            1.   Differential land-neighborhood park
developments;



            2.   Any special use permitted and as regulated in
the SR-1B District; and



            3.   Churches and other places of formal worship,
subject to the provisions of § 158.038(D), but not including funeral chapels
or mortuary chapels.



         (e)   Exceptions. Existing special uses and
non-conforming uses, subject to the applicable provisions of §§ 158.035 or
158.075 through 158.084.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039, as applicable
thereto.



      (4)   “SR-1B”, Single-Family Residence Dwelling District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; and Class 2, prefabricated building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   One-family dwellings of the following class,
as regulated by § 158.036(E):  Class 1, conventionally-built residence
dwellings; and Class 2, prefabricated residence dwellings.



            2.   Such non-dwelling uses as are permitted in
the SR-1 District, subject to § 158.036(E).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use
permitted and as regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses). Two-family
residence dwellings.



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exemption permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039, as applicable
thereto.



      (5)   “SR-2”, Single-Family Residence Dwelling District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; and Class 2, prefabricated building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   One-family dwellings of the following
classes, as regulated by § 158.036(E):  Class 1, conventionally-built
residence dwellings; and Class 2, prefabricated residence dwellings.



            2.   Such non-dwelling uses as are permitted in
the SR-1 District, subject to § 158.036(E).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use
permitted and as regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses). Any special use
permitted and as regulated in the SR-1B District.



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exemption permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039, as applicable
thereto.



      (6)   “SR-3”, Single-Family Residence Dwelling District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; Class 2, prefabricated building structures; and Class 3, modular
building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   One-family dwelling of the following classes,
as regulated by § 158.036(E):  Class 1, conventionally-built residence
dwellings; Class 2, prefabricated residence dwellings; and Class 3, modular
residence dwellings.



            2.   Such non-dwelling uses as are permitted in
the SR-1 District, subject to § 158.036(E).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use
permitted and as regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses). Any special use
permitted and as regulated in the SR-1B District.



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exemption permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039, as applicable
thereto.



         (g)   Planned use.  Modular building structures as a
principal permitted structure.



      (7)   “MR-1”, Two-, Three- and Four-Family Residence
District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; Class 2, prefabricated building structures; and Class 3, modular
building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   One-family dwellings of the following class,
as regulated by § 158.036(E); and two-, three- and four-family dwellings of
the following class, as regulated by § 158.036(E): Class 1, conventionally-
built residence dwellings; Class 2, prefabricated residence dwellings; and
Class 3, modular residence dwellings.



            2.   Such non-dwelling uses as are permitted in
the SR-1 District, subject to § 158.036(E).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses.



            1.   Any accessory use permitted and as regulated
in the SR-1 District; and



            2.   Accommodations for one boarder or roomer.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses). One- and
two-family residence dwellings only;



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exemption permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039, as applicable
thereto.



      (8)   “MR-2”, Multi-Family Residence Dwelling District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; Class 2, prefabricated building structures; and Class 3, modular
building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   One-family dwellings of the following class,
as regulated by § 158.036(E), two-, three- and four-family dwellings of the
following class, as regulated by § 158.036(E):  Class 1,
conventionally-built residence dwellings; Class 2, prefabricated residence
dwellings; and Class 3, modular residence dwellings.



            2.   Such non-dwelling uses as are permitted in
the SR-1 District, subject to the provisions of § 158.036(E);



            3.   Boarding and rooming houses;



            4.   Dormitories or group living facilities for
religious, educational or charitable purposes;



            5.   Nursing and retirement homes, subject to the
provisions of § 158.038(P); and



            6.   Nursery schools and orphanages, subject to
the provisions of § 158.038(Q).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use
permitted and as regulated in the MR-1 District.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses).



            1.   Planned multi-family developments; and



            2.   Planned mobile home parks subject to the
provisions of § 158.038(H)(1).



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exemption permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039, as applicable
thereto.



      (9)   “MH-1”, Single-Family Mobile Home Dwelling District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures and mobile home structures of the following classes:  Class 3,
modular building structures; Class 4, immobilized-mobile home structures; and
Class 5, (mobile) mobile home structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   One-family dwellings of the following
classes, as regulated by § 158.036(E): Class 3, modular residence dwelling;
Class 4, immobilized-mobile home dwelling; and Class 5, mobile home dwelling
(subject to the provisions of § 158.038(H)(4), as applicable thereto).



            2.   Such non-dwelling uses as are permitted in
the SR-1 District, subject to § 158.036(E).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use
permitted and as regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses). Planned mobile
home parks, subject to the provisions of § 158.038(H)(1).



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exemption permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or § 158.039 of this
chapter, as applicable thereto.



      (10)   Reserved



      (11)   “O-1”, Office District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; Class 2, prefabricated building structures; and Class 3, modular
building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   Professional offices and clinics as listed in
§ 158.036(E), including the following offices and services of the following
professions: architect, landscape architect, engineer, land surveyor,
attorney, dentist, optometrist, physician, psychiatrist, chiropractors,
accountant, surgeon or other similar licensed professionals;



            2.   Home occupations per § 158.038(B);



            3.   Churches and other places of formal worship;



            4.   Service offices such as: insurance, travel,
advertising, real estate, photography, hobby shops;



            5.   Corporate office, government offices;



            6.   Beauty/barber shops;



            7.   Nursing homes;



            8.   Banks and financial services;



            9.   Credit service offices, including credit
unions;



            10.   Holding and investment services;



            11.   Insurance agents, brokers, carriers and
services;



            12.   Real estate agents, brokers and/or
management services;



            13.   Real estate operators and lessors offices;



            14.   Savings and loans association offices;



            15.   Brokerage for securities or commodities;



            16.   Medical offices and facilities, including
associated rehabilitation, fitness and recreation facilities;



            17.   Public, private and parochial schools, per
§ 158.037(E);



            18.   Title abstracting services;



            19.   Building contractor or construction firm
office only (no machinery, equipment or storage);



            20.   Business office, professional or trade;



            21.   General business management and consulting
offices;



            22.   Advertising service offices, excluding
fabrication shops;



            23.   Accounting, auditing or bookkeeping office;



            24.   Consumer and mercantile credit reporting
services;



            25.   Direct mail or advertising agency;



            26.   Employment or personnel agency;



            27.   Manufacturers representative office;



            28.   Security service office;



            29.   Trade union office;



            30.   Travel agency; and



            31.   Dance, art or photography studio or office.



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use as are
permitted in the SR-1 District.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses).



         (e)   Exceptions.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations.



      (12)   “B-1”, Community Business District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following class:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; Class 2, prefabricated building structures; and Class 3, modular
building structures.



         (b)   Permitted uses.



            1.   Retail sale establishments.



               a.   General merchandise retail stores,
limited to: department stores; dry goods stores; and limited price variety
stores.



               b.   Food merchandise retail stores, limited
to:  bakeries, non-manufacturing, except for retail sale upon the premises
only; candy and confectionery shops; dairy product markets; delicatessens;
fruit and vegetable markets; grocery stores (excluding convenience food
stores); health food stores; liquor, beer and wine package goods stores; and
meat, fish, seafood and poultry markets.



               c.   Furniture and home furnishing retail
stores, limited to: China, glassware and metalware stores; draperies,
curtains and upholstery stores, including custom-made service, and supplies;
floor covering and carpet stores, including installation service; furniture
stores; household appliance stores, including repair and service; interior
decorator’s service stores or offices, excluding fabrication shops; lamp
and mirror stores; musical instrument stores, including repair and tuning
service, and supplies; office furniture and business machine stores,
including service, repair, supplies, and equipment; and radio, television,
computer, and audio and video recorder stores, including parts, repair,
service and supplies.



               d.   Eating and drinking place, retail,
limited to:  coffee shops; confectionery and ice cream stores; fast-food
restaurants, including carry-out service; food caterer’s shops, retail;
pizza parlors, with or without delivery service; private membership clubs,
lodges or organizations offering food for member’s consumption on the
premises; restaurants, cafés, and cafeterias; and tea rooms; drive-in
restaurants; and provided none of the uses listed in this division
(D)(11)(b)1.d. shall provide patron drive-through service facilities; and
further provided that; there shall be no sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages upon the premises.



               e.   Apparel and accessories, retail stores
and shops, limited to:  apparel accessory shops; clothing stores; custom
tailoring and dressmaking shops; furrier shops; jewelry and lapidary shops;
millinery shops; and shoe stores.



               f.   Motor vehicles, including parts and
accessories, retail sales, limited to: new automobiles, vans and truck,
three-fourths ton and under, motorcycles, mopeds and motorscooters, and
marine craft, together with their repair and service; tires, batteries,
lubricants and motor vehicle accessories, including service and installation,
but excluding repair garages; and new and rebuilt motor vehicle parts and
supplies, and excluding repair garages.



               g.   Miscellaneous retail sales stores and
shops, limited to and including the offering for retail sale any or of the
following commodities: art articles and artist’s supply stores; auction
halls, second hand merchandise stores and antique shops; books, magazines,
newspapers, greeting cards and stationery (including letterhead and business
card printing) stores; camera and photographic supply shops, including
optical goods; coin and stamp stores; drug and tobacco stores, including, but
not limited to, retailing of toiletries, notions and sundries; equipment
rental stores (excluding motor vehicle and trailer rental); florists; gift,
novelty, curio, and souvenir shops; hardware and lawn and garden equipment
and supply stores; hobby, craft and sporting goods shops, including trophies
and engraving, taxidermists, gunsmiths and bicycles; leather and luggage
retail shops; newspaper distri-bution and delivery stations; pet shops,
retail; and photography proces-sing patron drop-off stations, retail
(excluding patron drive-through service).



            2.   Professional service offices and clinics.
Limited to: architects’ office, excluding landscape architects;
attorney’s office; dentist’s office and dental clinics and dental
laboratories; engineer’s office; optometrist’s office; physician’s
office, physician’s clinic and medical laboratories; psychiatrist’s
office and psychiatric clinics; public and certified public accountant’s
office, excluding bookkeepers; surgeon’s office and ambulatory surgical
clinics; and any other professional service office of professional
practitioners who by formal education and training, at an accredited college
or university, and by examination and registration are qualified to perform
services of a professional nature, excluding veterinarians, veterinarian’s
services and chiropractors.



            3.   Finance, real estate and/or insurance service
offices. Limited to: banks; credit service offices, including credit unions;
holding and investment services offices; insurance agents, brokers, carriers
and service offices; real estate agents, brokers and/or management service
offices; real estate operators and lessor’s offices; registered land
surveyor’s offices; savings and loan associations offices; security and
commodity brokers, dealers, and flotation service offices; and title
abstracting service offices.



            4.   Business service offices. Limited to:
advertising service offices, excluding fabrication shops; bookkeeping
services; business management and consulting service offices; consumer and
mercantile credit reporting service offices, including adjustment and
collection services; direct mail advertising service offices; direct selling
organi-zation offices; employment service offices; manufacturer’s
repre-sentative office; security services office; stenographic, duplicating,
mailing and/or telephone answering service office; and trade union offices.



            5.   Personal service establish-ments. Limited to:
barber’s service shop; beautician’s service shop; chiropractic services
office or clinic; dance instruction studios; garment alteration and repair
service; laundry service establishments, including coin-operated or
self-service establishments, but excluding industrial and/or business
(uniform, linen and the like) laundering and supply service; photographer’s
studio or office and photographic service offices; reducing and/or physical
fitness centers; and travel arranging service office.



            6.   Repair service establishments. Limited to:
Household appliance repair service shops, including, but not limited to,
water heaters, ranges, refrigerators, clothes dryers, washing machines, water
heaters, air conditioners and furnaces, and the retail sale thereof as
limited by division (D)(11)(b)1.; locksmith’s shops; musical instrument
repair and tuning service shops; radio, television, tape and video recorders,
and computer repair service shops; shoe and leather goods repair service
shops; and watch, clock and jewelry repair service shops.



            7.   Communication service offices. Limited to:
commercial mail courier offices; post offices or postal substations; radio
and television broadcasting studios and/or offices, including cablevision;
telephone exchange stations and customer service office, excluding
construction centers; and telegraph message offices.



            8.   Transportation service offices and
facilities. Limited to: bus transportation terminals and shelters, including
park-and-ride stations, but excluding bus garaging and equipment maintenance;
highways, streets and alleys; and taxicab dispatching offices, excluding
garaging and equipment maintenance.



            9.   Public utility service facilities. Limited
to: electricity regulating substations, distribution facilities and customer
service offices (accessory use maintenance and service); gas pressure control
stations, distribution facilities and customer service offices (accessory use
maintenance and service); potable water pressure control stations, storage
tanks, distribution facilities and customer service office; sewage pressure
control stations and adjunct facilities; and other essential public utility
facilities and operations.



            10.   Governmental service offices. Limited to:
municipal, township, county, state and federal governmental service offices,
including legislative and/or administrative service offices, and police
stations, fire stations and ambulance service facilities; but excluding penal
institutions, jails, detention homes, half-way houses, asylums and any other
governmental use activity that is not the nature of being an office use
activity as is listed elsewhere in this list of permitted uses.



         (c)   Special uses.



            1.   Taverns, night clubs, discotheques, cocktail
lounges, restaurants, fraternal organizations, clubs, meeting halls or
anywise, involved in the sale or offering of alcoholic beverages, including
“set-up” or “carry-in”, to its patrons, members or guests;



            2.   Gasoline service stations and/or any listed
permitted use or special use involving the dispensing of motor fuels, either
as a principal or an accessory use;



            3.   Any listed permitted use or special use
offering for its patrons, members or guests a dance floor or other dancing
accommodation, including, but not limited to, taverns, night clubs,
discotheques, dance halls, road houses, private clubs, hotels or motels;



            4.   Dry cleaning service shops;



            5.   Churches, synagogues, temples and other
places of formal worship, including their off-street parking accommodations;



            6.   Public, private and parochial schools and
other uses offering courses of instruction in accordance with standards for
compulsory education;



            7.   Car wash establishments;



            8.   Cultural, entertainment and recreation
service establishments, limited to arcades, bowling alleys, libraries,
meeting or assembly halls, museums, pool or billiard halls, roller and/or ice
skating rinks, and theaters (legitimate and motion picture);



            9.   Used motor vehicle retail sales, as limited
per new motor vehicle sales;



            10.   Two-, three- and four-family residence
dwellings and shall be subject to operation of § 158.036(E), multi-family
dwellings shall be subject to operations of § 158.036(E), apartment
residence dwellings in mixed use occupancy buildings shall be subject to
operations of § 158.038(U).



         (d)   Planned developments.



            1.   Planned multi-family developments;



            2.   Planned business centers;



            3.   Other planned building developments; and



            4.   Veterinary clinics, subject to the provisions
of §§ 158.115 through 158.121 of this chapter.



         (e)   Permitted accessory uses.



            1.   Any accessory use permitted and as regulated
in the MR-2 District;



            2.   Storage of merchandise or inventory usually
carried in stock, provided that all outdoor storage shall be completely
concealed by a solid fence at least six feet in height that meets the
standards of § 158.056.



            3.   Service garage, only if in conjunction with
and accessory and incidental to the sale of new automobiles;



            4.   Retail sale of used automobiles and trucks,
only if in conjunction with and accessory and incidental to the sale of new
automobiles, as limited per new motor vehicle retail sales; and



            5.   Rental or leasing of automobiles and trucks,
only if in conjunction with and accessory and incidental to the sale of new
automobiles.



         (f)   Exceptions. Existing special uses and
non-conforming uses are subject to the applicable provisions of §§ 158.035
and/or 158.075 through 158.084 of this chapter.



         (g)   Supplementary regulations.



            1.   Any given permitted use is subject to the
provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039 of this chapter, as applicable
thereto;



            2.   Outdoor seating requirements.



               a.   All outdoor eating areas on a permanent
or temporary basis are permitted under the following conditions:  The
outdoor area does not exceed 100% of the ground floor area of the building
containing the use or contains a seating area for a maximum of 15; a site
plan must be pre-approved by the Director; the outdoor area is entirely on
private property and on the same or adjacent zoning lot as the building
containing the use; the outdoor eating area is not in a required parking area
or required side, front or rear yards; the outdoor eating area conforms to
the transitional yard requirements of § 158.036(E); the outdoor area does
not interfere with adequate pedestrian flow into the building and meets all
City Building Code requirements; parking requirements are met for enclosed
uses; and if alcohol is to be served, all special use provisions will apply
as indicated in §§ 158.095 through 158.102 of this chapter.



               b.   The preparation, processing, treatment
and/or manufacture of goods or products for retail sale on the premises, and
for food caterer’s service beyond the premises, shall be permitted;
provided that, such preparation, processing, treatment or manufacture of
goods or products shall be customary and subordinate of the use activity
conducted upon the premises.



      (13)   “B-2", General Business District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes:  Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; Class 2, prefabricated building structures; and Class 3, modular
building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   Any use permitted in the B-1 District as
regulated by § 158.036(E) (except that, no dwelling, boarding or rooming
house, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, apartment, hotel or motel,
mobile home, nor any other use for living quarters not specifically listed in
the portion of this division (D)(12)(b) shall be permitted and, the following
uses as regulated by § 158.036(E):



               a.   Places of amusement and recreation
including bowling lanes, drive-in theaters, subject to the provisions of §
158.038(O);



               b.   Automotive and/or agricultural
implements sales, repair and service, subject to the provisions of §
158.038(E);



               c.   Air conditioning equipment, custom
fabrication and installation;



               d.   Beverages, bottling;



               e.   Book publishing, printing;



               f.   Business machines, repair and service,
storage and wholesale;



               g.   Candy, wholesale distribution;



               h.   Carpenters’ shops and power
woodworking;



               i.   Carpet and rug cleaners and storage;



               j.   Cement products wholesale (pipe, blocks
and the like);



               k.   Cleaning and dying processing;



               l.   Cold storage;



               m.   Contractors, equipment and material
storage;



               n.   Dairies, distributing and
pasteurization;



               o.   Decoration, workshop and equipment
yards;



               p.   Display, designers’ and builders’
shops;



               q.   Drive-in restaurants;



               r.   Dry cleaning establishment, bulk
processing;



               s.   Electric equipment, assembly and repair;



               t.   Express companies, warehouses;



               u.   Feed and seed stores;



               v.   Food products, brokers, distributors
and warehousing;



               w.   Furniture, repair and refinishing;



               x.   Locksmiths’ repair shops;



               y.   Machine and equipment rental service;



               z.   Newspaper printing;



               aa.   Photo-engraving company;



               bb.   Roofing materials, storage and sales;



               cc.   Sales of auto parts;



               dd.   Storage of automobiles;



               ee.   Storage yards, bulk materials;



               ff.   Tents and awning manufacture;



               gg.   Tool and die manufacture;



               hh.   Mobile home sales;



               ii.   Warehousing;



               jj.   Water softening equipment, service and
repairs;



               kk.   Weighers, commercial; and



               ll.   Welding, equipment and supplies,
storage.



            2.   Provided that neither junk yards, the
dismantling of vehicles or the storage of dismantled vehicles, petroleum bulk
plants, or outside storage of inflammable liquids or explosives, shall be
permitted in this district; and provided further that adequate safeguards
(structural, mechanical and locational) shall be provided to protect
adjoining properties from the effects of noisome or injurious substances,
conditions and operations as defined in § 158.039 of this chapter.



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses.



            1.   Any accessory use permitted and as regulated
in the SR-1 District;



            2.   Commercial greenhouses;



            3.   Storage of merchandise or inventory usually
carried in stock, provided that all outdoor storage shall be completely
concealed by a solid fence at least six feet in height that meets the
standards of § 158.056.



            4.   Accommodations for caretakers, watchmen or
custodians.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses).



            1.   Planned business centers;



            2.   Other planned building developments; and



            3.   Veterinary clinics, subject to the provisions
of §§ 158.115 through 158.121 of this chapter.



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exception permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039 of this chapter,
as applicable thereto.



      (14)   “I”, Industrial District.



         (a)   Permitted principal structures. Building
structures of the following classes: Class 1, conventionally-built building
structures; Class 2, prefabricated building structures; and Class 3, modular
building structures.



         (b)   Permitted principal uses.



            1.   Any use permitted in the B-1 District (as
restricted in the B-2 District) as regulated by § 158.036(E); any use
permitted in the B-2 District as regulated by § 158.036(E); and the
following uses as regulated by § 158.036(E);



            2.   Any commercial, industrial or manufacturing
operation which is not detrimental to the public health, safety or general
welfare, and provided that adequate safeguards (structural, mechanical and
locational) shall be provided to protect adjoining properties from the
effects of noisome or injurious substances, conditions and operations as
defined in § 158.039 of this chapter;



            3.   Soil mining, mineral extractions, subject to
the provisions of § 158.038(M);



            4.   Sanitary landfill, subject to the provisions
of § 158.038(N); and



            5.   Junk yards, subject to the provisions of §
158.038(G).



         (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use
permitted and as regulated in the B-2 District.



         (d)   Special permits (special uses).



            1.   Planned business centers; and



            2.   Other planned building developments.



         (e)   Exceptions. Any exemption permitted and as
regulated in the SR-1 District.



         (f)   Supplementary regulations. Any given permitted use
is subject to the provisions of §§ 158.038 and/or 158.039 of this chapter,
as applicable thereto.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 659, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 1012, passed
6-21-1982; Ord. 1217, passed 10-23-1986; Ord. 1431, passed 5-17-1990; Ord.
1584, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1878, passed 11-18-1996; Ord. 1895, passed
1-6-1997; Ord. 1897, passed 1-6-1997; Ord. 1992, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 1995,
passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 2053, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 3483, passed 10-16-2006;
Ord. 3643, passed 11-2-2009; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 3941, passed
7-5-2016; Ord. 4021, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 158.038  SUPPLEMENTARY USE AND BULK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Fences, walls and hedges. Fences, walls or hedges used for any
purpose shall in all districts conform to the following.



      (1)   For the purpose of minimizing traffic hazards at street
intersections by improving visibility for converging vehicles, obstructions
higher than two feet above the adjacent top of the curb elevation shall not
be permitted to be planted, placed or erected on any corner lot within the
triangular portion of land designated as “sight distance triangle” in §
158.016.



      (2)   No barbed wire or other such sharp pointed fence and no
electrically charged fence shall be erected or maintained, except in
agricultural districts.



      (3)   No permanent fence or retaining wall shall be
constructed or erected within any public street or alley right-of-way unless
authorized by the City Council. Fences erected on public easement or across
ditches shall be so constructed that drainage shall not be obstructed and, in
event of necessity for removal of such fence for maintenance or other
purpose, removal and/or replacement of such fence or other improvement shall
be the responsibility of the property owner.



      (4)   Fences, walls and hedges in any district may be located
on lot lines; provided, such fences, walls and hedges exceeding six feet in
height shall be subject to the minimum yard requirements of the district in
which such fences are located.



      (5)   Gates or other means of access through fences, walls and
hedges shall be provided from utility easement to the rear yards.



   (B)   Home occupations. Home occupations are required to obtain a
home occupation permit, subject to compliance with all requirements herein
and with such additional conditions, where applicable, as established by the
Community Development Department. The permit shall be applied for on such
form as established by the Director, and shall be approved, denied or
conditioned by the Director as necessary to conform to the requirements
herein. In any district where home occupations are permitted, the
establishment and continuance of a home occupation shall be subject to the
following requirements.



      (1)   Such use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling
and carried on by the inhabitants there and no others. Home occupations may
not serve as a headquarters or dispatch center where employees come to the
home and are dispatched to other locations.



      (2)   Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the
residential character thereof. Client visitations to the home shall no more
than the range of typical visitations for other residential uses in the area.



      (3)   No vehicular or pedestrian traffic generated by a home
occupation shall be allowed to cause a nuisance to neighboring properties or
block or interfere with the regular flow of traffic within the neighborhood.



      (4)   The total area used for such purposes shall not exceed
the equivalent of one-half the floor area, in square feet, of the largest
floor of the dwelling unit.



      (5)   There shall be no advertising, display or other
indications of home occupation on the premises, except one unanimated,
non-illuminated flat nameplate having an area of not more than one square
foot may be permitted, as part of an otherwise authorized address and
residential occupant sign,  subject to other requirements of §§ 158.160
through 158.168. Such nameplate must be on the building.



      (6)   No in-person sales transactions, such as selling stocks
of merchandise, supplies or products may be filled on the premises; provided
that, orders previously made by telephone or at a sales party may be
delivered or received on site subject to limits on the level of activity set
forth above.



      (7)   There shall be no exterior storage on the premises or
public right-of-way of material or equipment used in the home occupation, nor
of any highly explosive or combustible material.



      (8)   Not more than one trailer associated with the home
occupation may be allowed on the premises, subject to the following
requirements.



         (a)   Such trailer may not exceed eight feet wide or 25
feet long.



         (b)   If the trailer has no visible equipment, whether
it is an enclosed trailer or an empty flat bed trailer, it may be parked in
the driveway. If equipment is visible, the trailer must be parked inside a
garage.



         (c)   Such trailer must be able to enter and exit the
premises by way of an improved, dust-free surface.



      (9)   The home occupation shall allow no more than one
commercial vehicle parking on the premises, subject to the following
additional requirements.



         (a)   The commercial vehicle is limited to a passenger
car, van, pickup truck or service vehicle with a license category of B, C or
D and vehicle weight of up to 12,000 pounds.



         (b)   Parking or storage of any vehicles used as a tool
in the business (tow trucks, tree removers and the like) in connection with
the home occupation is prohibited on premises, unless fully concealed in the
dwelling or accessory residential building. Exception: parcels in the
Agricultural Zoning District will be permitted to store equipment and
vehicles consistent with agricultural operations as outlined in the Zoning
Code.



      (10)   Parking or storage of, or delivery by, heavy equipment
including, but not limited to, back hoes, skid loaders, dump trucks and other
similar items on the premises, is prohibited. This shall include businesses
where the home is the base of operations where heavy equipment would be
dispatched from the home and would create noticeable traffic to and from the
home. Exception: parcels in the Agricultural zoning district will be
permitted to store equipment and vehicles consistent with agricultural
operations as outlined in the Zoning Code.



      (11)   There shall be no noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors,
heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line from any business
activity and all activity shall comply with applicable building and fire
codes.



      (12)   In addition to other restrictions, the following types
of uses are also prohibited: service, repair or painting of any motorized
vehicle, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, boats,
personal watercraft, recreation vehicles and snowmobiles where the work is
done on the premises where the home occupation is located; headquarters or
dispatch centers where employees or contractors arrive or depart;
contracting, excavating, welding or machine shops where the work is done on
the premises where the home occupation is located; tow truck services where
the tow truck is stored on site; the sale, lease, trade or other transfer of
firearms or ammunition; sale or use of hazardous materials in excess of
consumer quantities packaged for consumption by individual households for
personal care or household use; and any other use of residential property
that is detrimental or inconsistent with the residential character of the
neighborhood.



      (13)   Exemptions: The following home occupations shall be
exempt from obtaining a home occupation permit; provided that, all other
criteria and conditions established in this section are complied with at all
times of such accessory use:



         (a)   Mere home offices used for telecommuting to a
primary off-site business location; and



         (b)   Home-based direct sale of products and
distribution in which any corporate activity is registered at another address
and provided that:



            1.   Any sales parties or demonstrations are
conducted off-site; and



            2.   The home-based business activity is not
registered or required to be registered under the provisions of the
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120) or ILCS Ch. 805.



   (C)   Swimming pools. No public or private swimming pool in any
district shall be located in any required front yard; however, if not more
than six feet in height, such use may be located in any required side or rear
yard, but not closer than ten feet to a side lot line adjacent to a street,
and subject to the provisions of § 158.038(A). Pools need not meet the
minimum separation from the primary structure of ten feet as shown in §
158.036(D). Any applicable swimming pool building code requirements must be
met.



   (D)   Churches and places of formal worship. In any district where
churches are permitted, the following additional requirements shall be met.



      (1)   For each 75 seats (where benches are provided each 24
inches of said bench shall constitute a seat) or fraction thereof (not
including Sunday school accommodations), the site shall contain at least
one-half acre of land.



      (2)   Each principal building shall be located at least 25
feet from all property lines.



   (E)   Garages, repair. In repair garages, all repair work,
servicing, storage of parts and equipment and the dismantling of vehicles
shall be done completely within an enclosed building, or shall be enclosed by
a solid fence at least six feet in height that meets the standards of §
158.056.



   (F)   Gasoline service stations. In districts where gasoline service
stations are permitted, the establishment of such uses shall be subject to
the following requirements.



      (1)   All gasoline pumps, lubrication or similar devices and
other service facilities shall be located at least 20 feet from any street
right-of-way line.



      (2)   All fuel and oil storage, pumps or other such fuel or
lubricant dispensing devices shall be located at least 20 feet from any side
or rear lot line.



      (3)   No access drive shall be within 200 feet of a fire
station, school, public library, church, park, playground or other public
assembly place.



      (4)   No access or drive shall be within 20 feet of any corner
formed by the intersection of the rights-of-way of two streets. On a corner
where a traffic signal or stop sign exists, such entrance or exit shall be
located at such distance and such manner so as not to cause or increase
traffic hazard or undue congestion.



      (5)   A permanent curb of at least four inches in height,
shall be provided between the public sidewalk and the gasoline pump island,
parallel to and extending the complete length of the pump island.



      (6)   All devices for dispensing or selling of milk, ice, cold
drinks and the like shall be located within, or immediately adjacent to the
principal building.



   (G)   Junk yards. In any district where junk yards are permitted,
the establishment and/or maintenance of such uses shall be subject to the
following requirements.



      (1)   All storage of parts, equipment, and the dismantling of
vehicles, shall be done within a completely enclosed building, or within an
enclosure of a solid fence not less than six feet in height that meets the
standards of § 158.056.



      (2)   Any junk yard shall not be located less than 500 feet
from any residential district boundary.



   (H)   Mobile homes.



      (1)   Mobile home parks. In any district where mobile home
parks are permitted, the establishment of such accommodations shall be
subject to the requirements, standards and restrictions of the city’s
mobile home park ordinance(s), as amended from time to time and are in effect
at the time of application for a planned development and shall be subject to
the following requirements.



         (a)   A mobile home park shall be located on a tract of
land not less than five acres in area, with a minimum width and depth
dimension of 200 feet.



         (b)   No building or structure within the mobile home
park shall exceed the height of 25 feet.



      (2)   Temporary parking - mobile homes. The temporary parking
of an individual mobile home is permitted subject to the following
regulations.



         (a)   An individual mobile home may be parked outside
the public right-of-way, as not otherwise prohibited, for a period of 72
hours; provided that, no such mobile home is parked nearer than 25 feet to
any right-of-way line abutting a public street.



         (b)   An individual mobile home may be parked on a
zoning lot for a period of two weeks; provided that:



            1.   Such individual mobile home is parked in
compliance  with all setback requirements from any lot line or right-of-way
line;



            2.   A permit is secured by the property owner
within 72 hours from the City Clerk, showing the date of issuance, name and
address of property owner, address for which the permit is issued and the
date of termination;



            3.   All such permits shall be returned to the
Building Official on or before the date of termination; and



            4.   Not more than three permits shall be issued
to any property owner during any calendar year, except on approval of the
Zoning Hearing Officer.



      (3)   Parking for inspection and sales; mobile home. A mobile
home may be parked for inspection and sale on any lawful automobile or
trailer sales lot.



      (4)   Parking. Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(H)(2) and (H)(3) above, no person shall be permitted to park and/or occupy
any mobile home on any premises within the corporate area of the city, except
as permitted in a licensed mobile home park or a MH-1 Dwelling District.



      (5)   Removal of wheels and the like. Nowhere in the city
shall any person permanently remove or cause to be permanently removed the
wheels, tongue and hitch or any other transportation device from any mobile
home nor shall any person rest or cause to rest any mobile home on a
permanent foundation, except as permitted when within a MH Dwelling District.



   (I)   Travel trailers. The parking of not more than one unoccupied
camp trailer and/or utility trailer (not exceeding eight feet wide and 25
feet long) in the rear yard, side yard or improved driveway only is hereby
permitted; provided that, no living quarters or business shall be maintained
in any such camp trailer and/or utility trailer; and, provided further that,
the parking of a camp trailer and/or utility trailer, if parked in the side
or rear yard, shall comply with the yard requirements for accessory buildings
of the district in which it is located. If camp trailers and/or utility
trailers are parked in an improved driveway, they must only meet the rear
yard and side yard setback requirements for accessory buildings of the
district in which it is located. Parking of any of the above listed trailers
must be on private property and not overhang or otherwise obstruct any public
right-of-way, including sidewalks.



   (J)   Public buildings. In any district where municipally owned or
other publicly owned buildings are permitted the following additional
requirements shall be met.



      (1)   In any SR, MR or MH Dwelling District, A Agricultural
District, or RR Rural Residential District, all municipal or other publicly
owned buildings shall be located at least 25 feet from all property lines.



      (2)   In any SR, MR or MH Dwelling District, A Agricultural,
RR Rural Residential District, or in any B Business District, there shall be
no permanent storage of heavy construction or maintenance equipment (such as
excavating, road building or hauling equipment), unless in an enclosed
building or enclosed within a solid wall or fence at least six feet in height
that meets the standards of § 158.056. Such storage areas, maintenance yards
or storage warehouse shall be located at least 25 feet from any front and/or
side property line.



   (K)   Public utility stations; exchanges; essential services.
Electrical substations, gas regulator stations or telephone exchange
facilities in any SR, MR or MH Dwelling District, A Agricultural District, or
RR Rural Residential District, shall be subject to the following regulations.



      (1)   No public office, repair or storage facilities shall be
maintained in connection with such substations or exchanges.



      (2)   The building housing any such facility shall be designed
and constructed to conform to the general character of the neighborhood.



      (3)   The area on which the facility is located shall be
landscaped and maintained in conformance with the general character of the
surrounding area.



      (4)   Where all facilities and equipment are entirely within a
completely enclosed building, the minimum lot may be as follows:  lot width
shall not be less than the total width of the building plus the total of the
minimum required side yards; lot depth shall not be less than the depth of
the building, plus the minimum required front yard, plus the two-foot minimum
rear yard.



      (5)   Where facilities or equipment are located outside the
completely enclosed building, no such facilities or equipment shall be
located closer than 15 feet to any side or rear lot line.



      (6)   If transformers are exposed, there shall be provided, an
enclosing fence or wall, at least six feet in height, and landscaping and
adequate to shield view and noise of the same and to screen from the outside
view the handling of materials on the premises.



      (7)   Off-street parking facilities in §§ 158.135 through
158.146, if necessary.



   (L)   Schools, private and parochial. In any district where private
or parochial schools are permitted, the following additional requirements
shall be met.



      (1)   For each 100 students or fraction thereof, the site
shall contain one and one-fourth acres of land.



      (2)   Each principal building shall be located at least 25
feet from all property lines.



   (M)   Soil mining and mineral extraction. In any district where soil
mining or mineral extraction is permitted, the soil mining or mineral
extraction operation shall be subject to all applicable state regulations
with inspection made as necessary by the city to determine compliance.



   (N)   Sanitary landfill. In any district where sanitary landfill is
proposed, the following additional requirements shall apply.



      (1)   A permit for any sanitary landfill operation shall be
issued by the building official only after the receipt of all required maps
and documents and after review and favorable action by the City Council,
instructing the Building Official to issue the permit.



      (2)   The following documents and maps of the site, at a scale
not less than one inch equals 200 feet, shall be filed with the building
official showing:



         (a)   Existing topography of the site at two-foot
contour intervals;



         (b)   Present use of the land and all natural features
such as natural watercourses and drainage areas, forested areas, historic
sites and the like;



         (c)   Ownership of the subject property and the abutting
properties;



         (d)   A plan for the proposed use of the land indicating
the type and location of transportation facilities available and the intended
use of loading of these facilities; the type and location of utilities and
power facilities to be used; and such other data as is necessary to explain
and define the intended operation; and



         (e)   A plan shall be made for reshaping and final
grading of the land after the operation has ceased which shall show final
contours (at an interval of two feet) and drainage plan.



      (3)   The plan for the final grading and contouring of the
site shall provide the land can be readily used for urban and/or agricultural
purposes after the landfill operation has ceased.



      (4)   All topsoil shall be stored and retained on the site and
respread during final grading of the site.



      (5)   A performance bond, equal to the amount of the assessed
valuation of the property for tax purposes shall be posted prior to
development of landfill with the city to ensure reshaping of the topography
in conformance



with the plan after the operation has ceased or has been abandoned. Failure
to continue active operation for a consecutive 12-month period during any
five years shall be deemed to constitute abandonment.



         (a)   If the sanitary landfill is to be conducted on
only a portion of the total parcel at any one time, the portion to be used
may be so designated on the plan and the performance bond posted for the part
or parts to be so used.



         (b)   However, when the operation is completed or
abandoned for any such part or parts, the plan for grading and reshaping the
topography of that section shall be carried out.



      (6)   No sanitary landfill shall be carried out within 1,000
feet of any residential zoning district or any existing residential
subdivision.



      (7)   No sanitary landfill operation shall be permitted on a
site of less than 50 acres.



      (8)   No sanitary landfill operation shall be permitted in the
Industrial District without a special use permit.



   (O)   Drive-in theaters. In any district where drive-in theaters are
permitted, the establishment of such theaters shall be subject to the
following requirements.



      (1)   Projection screens and parking areas shall not be closer
than 50 feet from any street right-of-way line and not closer than 100 feet
from any residential district boundary.



      (2)   The projection surface of motion picture screens shall
not be visible from any major traffic street.



      (3)   Loudspeakers shall be limited to the individual type
which are designated to be heard by the occupants of one car only.



      (4)   Entrances and exits shall connect only to major arterial
or collector streets and shall be designed so as not unduly to interfere with
or unnecessarily impede traffic flow.



      (5)   Entrance waiting space for cars shall be provided to
accommodate not less than 5% of the theater’s parking capacity.



   (P)   Nursing homes. In any district where nursing homes are
permitted, the following additional requirements shall be met. The minimum
site for any nursing home shall be two acres; provided that, for a nursing
home containing more than 40 beds, the minimum site shall be the greater
of:  two acres; or the number of acres determined by the following formula:



 


Number of Beds x % of TFA
          at Ground Level       

 




2000

 
= Site Size in Acres



 



   (Q)   Nursery schools. In any district where nursery schools are
permitted, the following additional requirements shall be met.



      (1)   For each child, at least 50 square feet of floor space
shall be provided in addition to that provided for sleeping purposes.



      (2)   For each child, at least 100 square feet of outdoor,
enclosed (fenced) play area shall be provided.



      (3)   Adequate facilities shall be provided for delivering and
receiving of children in a manner not to cause traffic congestion and shall
be subject to approval by the City Council.



   (R)   Plant nurseries and greenhouses. In any district where tree
and plant nurseries and greenhouses are permitted, the establishment of such
uses shall be subject to the following requirements.



      (1)   No fertilizer, compost, manure or other odor or dust
producing substance shall be stored within 50 feet of any property line.



      (2)   Greenhouse heating plants shall be in an enclosed
building and shall not be less than 50 feet from any property line.



   (S)   Fire walls. Within B-1, B-2 and I Districts, for the purpose
to restrict the spread of fire, any wall of a building constructed along and
adjoining an interior side lot line shall be a continuous wall, having no
openings, of fire resistant non-combustible material of a type approved by
the City Fire Chief. Further, such wall shall be constructed meeting or
exceeding specifications issued by the Fire Chief; such wall shall start at
the foundation and extend continuously through all stories to above the roof.



   (T)   Corner lots, obstruction of vision prohibited. Within B-1, B-2
and I Districts, for the purpose of minimizing traffic hazard for converging
motor vehicles, on a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge or other planting or
structure that will obstruct the vision between a height of two feet and ten
feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets shall be
erected, placed or maintained within the triangular portion of land
designated as “sight distance triangle” in § 158.016.



   (U)   Combined dwelling and business use structures. Buildings
intended to be occupied by both apartment residence dwelling and business
usage (a building containing both an apartment dwelling use and a business
use), shall have a yard area of at least 120 square feet minimum per each
residence dwelling, the yard area shall be provided and maintained in
addition to any off-street parking area required for the dwelling and in
addition to the lot area required for the non-dwelling use. More than 50% of
the total square feet area of such a building must be devoted to the business
use. Such yard area must be accessible to and usable exclusively for active
and/or inactive recreation by the dwelling’s occupants and must be
contiguous to the building and not separated by parking areas or driveways.
The yard area may be provided at the ground level, or at the roof level, or
at levels there between. The edges of any roof area and the edges of any
elevated deck or patio area used for a yard must be adequately protected by a
wall or fence at least four feet in height.



   (V)   Home child care. Home child care shall be a permitted
accessory use to a residential dwelling and subject to all home occupation
requirements within an A, RR, SR-1, SR-1B, SR-2, SR-3, MR-1, MR-2, or MH-1
District; provided that, for any home child care use for four or more
children, the following site and use requirements shall be satisfied at all
times.



      (1)   Any residence, which is renter-occupied, shall provide
written permission from the property owner approving the use of the residence
for home health care.



      (2)   Proof of licensure from the State Department of Children
and Family Services for the specified address.



      (3)   Construction of a permanent, four-foot fence around all
designated outdoor play areas located on the subject property. All play
equipment shall be kept in good repair.



      (4)   Adequate street access, turn-around capacity and safe
and efficient ingress and egress design so as to not interfere with
neighboring properties or area traffic.



      (5)   Inspection by city staff when approved for use by state
license to ensure adherence to current building codes and fire codes prior to
issuance of permit.



      (6)   Number of children is limited to eight, including the
caregiver’s own natural, adopted or foster children, related children and
unrelated children under age 12 living in the home. This does not include
facilities which receive only children from a single household.



      (7)   Hours of operation shall not exceed amounts permitted by
the state license, however children received by a home child care facility
must be for less than 24 hours per day.



      (8)   When a home child care is in violation of certain
covenants and restrictions adopted through a homeowner’s association, Board
of Trustees or other subdivision governing body, the city does not enforce or
take into account private covenants when granting home child care permits.



      (9)   Employees are limited to only inhabitants of the
residence in accordance with § 158.038(B) of this chapter.



      (10)   The use and site fully complies with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.



      (11)   An approved site plan reflecting compliance with all
applicable site requirements.



      (12)   (a)   The zoning authorization and site plan
approval may be revoked by the Director if any of the requirements herein are
at any time not satisfied during home child care use.



         (b)   Where the facility does not fully qualify as a
permitted accessory use but satisfies the general requirements for a special
use permit established by this code and otherwise meets the purposes of this
section, and granting such permit is necessary to satisfy the public
interest, then a home child care may be approved as an accessory use to a
residential dwelling by special use permit in any A, RR, SR-1, SR-1B, SR-2,
SR-3, MR-1, MR-2, or MH-1 District.



         (c)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Director
in approving or denying zoning authorization for a home day care and site
plan as meeting the requirements set forth herein as a permitted use may be
appealed to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the Director
within ten days after the decision, which shall stay such decision until
Council action. Council decision on the appeal shall occur at its next
regular meeting after filing of such appeal, unless the Council extends such
time for good cause.



   (W)   Drive-through regulations. Drive-through service when a patron
is served through a window or other device while remaining in a motor vehicle
may be provided, except where alcoholic beverages are served or sold through
the drive-through window. All property for which drive-through service is
provided shall conform to the following standards.



      (1)   No order box or order window shall be located within 100
feet of any residentially zoned property; provided, however, that, the
100-foot distance may be decreased by 25% if the residentially zoned property
is classified as any non-residential category in the city current
Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   A solid screening fence or wall will be required, along
with appropriate landscaping, to be placed between any property used for a
drive-through facility and any adjoining residentially zoned property in
order to screen passenger car headlight glare from adjacent residential
property. The extent and height of such fence or wall is to be determined at
the time of final development plan approval. Fence or wall must meet the
standards of § 158.056.



      (3)   Adequate passenger car stacking space shall be provided
from the order box or order window to ensure that public right-of-way or
common driveway areas will not be blocked due to the drive-through facility.
An escape lane shall also be provided for each order box and drive-through
window. The amount of stacking space is to be determined as part of the
preliminary site plan and after consultation with and approval by the City
Engineer.



   (X)   Garage conversion for dwelling use. No garage shall be
converted for dwelling use, except within compliance of this section.



      (1)   Inspection by city staff to ensure adherence to current
building codes and fire codes prior to issuance of permit.



      (2)   Not less than one off-street parking space per dwelling
unit shall be provided and maintained.



   (Y)   Temporary storage containers.



      (1)   Definitions.



         CARGO CONTAINER. A standardized, reusable vessel, designed
without an axle or wheels, which was:



            1.   Originally, specifically or formerly designed
for or used in the storage, packing, shipping, movement or transportation of
freight, articles, goods or commodities;



            2.   Designed for or capable of being mounted or
moved on a rail car; and/or



            3.   Designed for or capable of being mounted on a
chassis for movement by a truck trailer or loaded on a ship.



         JOB TRAILER. A structure used for temporary storage or
office space located at an active job site where a valid building permit has
been issued.



         SEMI-TRAILER. A trailer designed to be used with and pulled
by a road tractor, whose intended purpose is to be an on-road transport
vehicle.



      (2)   Regulations.



         (a)   Semi-trailers.



            1.   Use.



               a.   Must be used in the operation of the
business; and



               b.   Must be licensed and operational.



            2.   Location.



               a.   Semi-trailers must be located on the
business property only in the B-1, B-2 or I District;



               b.   Semi-trailers must meet accessory
structure setback requirements; and



               c.   Semi-trailers must be parked on an
improved, dust-free surface.



            3.   Quantity. There is no limit to the number of
semi-trailers permitted.



         (b)   Cargo containers.



            1.   Use.



               a.   Cargo containers may be used for
temporary storage of goods and belongings.



               b.   Cargo containers may not be used for
occupancy or sleeping, housing of animals, housing or storage of firearms,
housing or storage of hazardous or flammable materials, or storage of
materials which are otherwise unlawful to possess (e.g., fireworks or other
unlawful materials or substances).



               c.   Cargo containers must be closed and
secured from unauthorized access at all times when not under the direct
supervision of the permit applicant.



               d.   Cargo containers may not be used to
display signage or otherwise advertise a commercial activity.



               e.   The area around the cargo container
shall be kept free of litter, debris, weeds and similar unsightly materials.



            2.   Location.



               a.   Cargo containers must be located
entirely on private property.



               b.   Cargo containers must meet accessory
structure setback requirements, and be located no closer to the street
frontage than the building face unless otherwise authorized by the Planning
Director. Exception: cargo containers in single-family residential zoning
districts may be located on a paved driveway.



               c.   It shall be unlawful for any person to
park or place a cargo container or similar device in or upon any street,
highway, roadway, right-of-way, designated fire lane, required parking space,
drive aisle or sidewalk in the city without prior city approval.



               d.   It may not be placed in such a fashion
as to impede or obstruct the flow of drainage waters, nor to impede or
obstruct emergency access to the property.



            3.   Quantity.



               a.   Single-Family Residential Zoning
Districts: two cargo containers per zoning lot may be placed for a maximum of
30 days per 12-month period without a permit.



               b.   All other zoning districts: A permit is
required. One cargo container per zoning lot is permitted for a maximum of 90
days per 12-month period.



               c.   The City Council may approve a special
event permit for more than one cargo container for temporary storage of
seasonal items.



      (3)   Compliance six months after adoption. Existing
semi-trailers not in compliance at the time of the adoption of this chapter
must comply with this chapter within six months after the adoption of this
chapter.



      (4)   Grandfathering. Existing cargo containers located in
zoning districts other than Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts not in
compliance at the time of the adoption of this chapter, as listed on the
attached inventory sheet, shall be grandfathered; provided that, the storage
containers meet the use and location requirements listed in this chapter.



      (5)   Exception. This section shall not apply to job trailers
or cargo containers located at the primary business property used in
association with ongoing construction activities carried out pursuant to a
valid building permit.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 659, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 759, passed
8-4-1975; Ord. 949, passed 12-17-1979; Ord. 1794, passed 10-30-1995; Ord.
1898, passed 1-6-1997; Ord. 1995, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 3379, passed
10-3-2005; Ord. 3462, passed 7-3-2006; Ord. 3488, passed 11-20-2006; Ord.
3569, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 3643, passed 11-2-2009; Ord. 3697, passed
12-20-2010; Ord. 3786, passed 12-17-2012; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
4021, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 158.039  GENERAL SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Bulk of buildings. All buildings and structures shall conform
to the building regulations established herein for the district in which each
building shall be located; except that, parapet walls, chimneys, cooling
towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical
appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when
erected in accordance with all other ordinances of the city (as provided in
division (O) below).



   (B)   Maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces. The
maintenance of yards, courts and other open space and minimum lot area
legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner
of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the
building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or
other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by
virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy
yard, court, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other
building.



   (C)   Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall
hereafter be divided into two or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning
lots resulting from each such division shall conform with all the applicable
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.



   (D)   Attached garage/storage in a Residential Dwelling District.



      (1)   The attached garage/storage space in a residential
dwelling unit shall not exceed 50% of the dwelling unit’s living space, as
defined. Single-family lots are permitted to have a 500-square foot attached
garage/storage area regardless of the footprint of the living space in the
dwelling unit, but must comply with all other requirements.



      (2)   The height of the attached garage/storage area may not
exceed the shortest ridgeline of the area of the dwelling unit defined as
living area, not to exceed 25 feet and two stories.



      (3)   The building material of the attached garage/storage
area shall be constructed with material consistent with the dwelling unit.



   (E)   Accessory buildings.



      (1)   No accessory building shall be used for residential
purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



      (2)   The following additional regulations apply only to
accessory buildings (garages, sheds and the like) only in the SR
(single-family) zoning districts. These regulations do not apply to pools,
decks or covered patios.



         (a)   The ground floor area of each accessory building
shall not exceed 1,000 square feet (total floor area not to exceed 2,000
square feet). The footprint of the accessory building may not exceed the
footprint of the principal building. Single-family lots are permitted to have
a 500-square foot garage regardless of the footprint of the principal
building, but must comply with all other requirements.



         (b)   The height may not exceed the shortest ridgeline
of the principal building, not to exceed 25 feet and two stories.



         (c)   The setback requirement between accessory
buildings on the same lot shall be a minimum of ten linear feet.



         (d)   No accessory building exceeding 200 square feet
may have metal exterior walls.



      (3)   The following additional regulations apply only to
accessory buildings (garages, shed, etc.) only in the RR Rural Residential
zoning district. These regulations do not apply to pools, decks or covered
patios.



         (a)   The ground floor area of each accessory building
shall not exceed 2,500 sq. ft. (total floor area not to exceed 5,000 sq. ft.).



         (b)   The setback requirement between accessory
buildings on the same lot shall be a minimum of ten linear feet.



         (c)   Any accessory structure used for animals must be a
minimum of 25 feet from any side or rear property line.



   (F)   Location of required open space. All yards, courts and other
open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the
same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group unless otherwise
specifically provided for herein.



   (G)   Required yards for existing buildings. No yards now or
hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of this
chapter shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below if
already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this chapter for
equivalent new construction.



   (H)   Reduction of lot; limitation on number of principal buildings
on lot. No part of an area, frontage or yard required for any lot, building
or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall
be included as an area, frontage or yard for another lot, building or use.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, only one principal
building shall be permitted on a lot.



   (I)   Corner lots and through lots. For any through lot, both
frontages shall comply with the front yard requirements of the district in
which it is located.



   (J)   Frontage requirements. Any lot in any district shall have
minimum frontage abutting a public street the width of which shall be the
greater of:



      (1)   Thirty feet;



      (2)   The width of the building located on the lot; or



      (3)   The lot width required by the Zoning District in which
the lot is located as shown in § 158.036(E).



   (K)   General performance standards.



      (1)   Any lot shall be properly graded for drainage and
maintained in good condition, free from trash and debris.



      (2)   Noise emanating from any use shall not be of such volume
or frequency as to be unreasonably offensive at or beyond the property line.
Unreasonably offensive noises, due to intermittence, beat frequency or
shrillness shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.



      (3)   No obnoxious, toxic, corrosive or radioactive matter,
smoke, fumes or gases shall be discharged across the boundaries of any lot in
such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, comfort or welfare or to cause injury or damage to property or
business.



   (L)   Occupancy of temporary structures. No temporary structure
(including travel trailers or mobile homes) shall be used or occupied for any
residential, commercial or industrial use, except as specifically permitted
or required by this chapter. However, the Zoning Hearing Officer may, upon
application therefor, permit the use of such temporary structure for such
reasonable time and for such use as the Hearing Officer deems to be
compatible with the character of the area in which the structure is located,
and in compliance with reasonable consideration of the general health, safety
and welfare.



   (M)   Contiguous parcels. When two or more parcels of land, each of
which lacks adequate area and/or minimum dimensions to qualify for a
permitted use under the requirements of the use district in which they are
located, are contiguous, and are held in one ownership, they shall be used as
one zoning lot for such use.



   (N)   Individual water and sewage systems. In any district where
individual water and sewage systems are used in place of public water and/or
sewage facilities, the minimum lot area width and depth shall be subject to
approval of the City Council but shall not be less than required for the
district in which the use is to be located or less than one acre in area,
whichever is greater; or have less frontage than 125 feet. When doubt exists
with the City Council as to the adequacy of the soil structure of the lot to
properly accommodate an individual water and/or sewage system, the City
Council may require the property owner to obtain an opinion from a registered
engineer as to the size of lot required for an individual water and/or sewage
system to operate on the lot according to safe health standards. If the
findings of the engineer indicate that larger lots are necessary, the City
Council may require a lot size in excess of the minimum area defined
previously in this division (N). However, no such variation shall be made by
the City Council without first having a public hearing before the Zoning
Hearing Officer.



   (O)   Maximum height of building; exclusions. The height limitations
of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas,
penthouses or domes not used for human occupancy, nor to chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks, silos, parapet walls, cornices without
windows, antennas or necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above
the roof level or to public buildings or structures located more than one
foot horizontally from the property line for each foot of building height.



   (P)   Minimum yards; exceptions. Subject to the requirements that
there be a minimum distance of six feet between any point on a principal
building and any point on any principal building on an adjacent lot, the
following exceptions shall apply.



      (1)   Cornices, chimneys, planters or other similar
architectural features may extend two feet into a required yard.



      (2)   Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches at ground level may
extend into a required yard not more than six feet.



      (3)   Fire escapes may extend into a required yard not more
than four feet.



      (4)   Patios extending into required rear yards may be covered
by a roof, but shall not be enclosed by walls.



      (5)   Canopies, eaves, balconies, roof overhangs or other
similar features not included in the foregoing parts of this section, may
extend into a required yard not more than four feet.



      (6)   For lots in all SR and MR Districts where homes with
front yards, or side yards facing adjoining streets, have been developed
within the minimum yard requirements for that district, the average front
yard setback of existing homes shall be the minimum setback for new principal
structures and additions; provided, such an average requirement is not less
than ten feet to the property line. Neighboring residences on one side of the
street between intersecting streets shall be used in determining average
front yard setback.



   (Q)   Public utility distribution facilities; exception. Public
utility transmission and distribution facilities may be exempt from minimum
rear yard requirements, except as provided for each zoning district (subject
to § 158.038(K)).



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 949, passed 12-17-1979; Ord. 3786, passed
12-17-2012; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 3901, passed 10-5-2015)




ARTICLE 3:
SITE PLANS




§ 158.050  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The intent of site plan approval is to further the purposes of these
regulations by ensuring that redevelopment and new development are designed
in a manner that reasonably protects the public welfare and which conforms to
the applicable general requirements and any supplemental conditions
established by a planned or special use approval.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.051  TYPES OF SITE PLANS; WHEN REQUIRED.



   The term “site plan” shall include the following required plans.



   (A)   Preliminary site plan (concept plan). A preliminary site plan
is a development plan showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel or
parcels of land as required by § 158.053 of this chapter. The preliminary
site plan is required to depict conceptual development plans for purposes of
approval of a planned or special use.



   (B)   Final site plan (improvement plans). A final site plan is
required to approve the final site requirements as set forth in § 158.054 of
this chapter. Final site plan approval is required prior to the following
activities:



      (1)   The grading of any site for development or the issuance
of any building permit for any new principal structure, including building
and/or parking lot expansion, regardless of type of use;



      (2)   A change in the type of occupancy of a property as
defined in the city’s adopted building codes and that would also require a
building permit; or



      (3)   Any other change in any principal or accessory use of a
property as determined by the Director.



   (C)   Sketch site plan (one- and two-family plot plan).



      (1)   A sketch site plan is required in lieu of a preliminary
site plan and final site plan for the construction or improvements of a
single-family detached structure, single-family attached villa or a duplex.
At a minimum, a sketch plan shall depict all proposed improvements to the
site, limits of the parcel, building setbacks, easements, finished floor
elevations, all existing uses located on the site and other such information
as may be needed to verify compliance with all other laws and regulations of
the city.



      (2)   Sketch plans shall be approved administratively in the
manner provided for site plans for permitted uses. No building permit shall
be effective until a required sketch plan has been approved.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.052  SITE PLAN EXCEPTIONS.



   The Director may waive the requirement that a site plan be submitted
when the applicant demonstrates to the Director one of the following.



   (A)   The proposed development, issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or change in the principal use of property will have no detrimental
impact on adjoining property and would otherwise clearly comply with all
regulations of the city without review of the plan, thereby eliminating the
necessity for the establishment of or revision to a site plan.



   (B)   The proposed development will conform in every material
respect to a site plan previously approved for the same property.



   (C)   Valid and complete subdivision improvement plans already have
been approved by the city for the development as proposed.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.053  PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN.



   (A)   Application submittal requirements. Unless otherwise required
in this chapter or by the Director, the following items must be submitted to
the city for an application to be considered complete (the quantities and
formatting requirements of each item shall be detailed in an application
packet to be provided by the city):



      (1)   Site plan application, completed and signed in such form
as provided by the Director;



      (2)   Site plan application fee;



      (3)   Consultant site plan review payment responsibility form;



      (4)   Site plan review fee deposit;



      (5)   Proof of ownership;



      (6)   Proof of public notice intent as required by the city;



      (7)   Preliminary site plan;



      (8)   Building and accessory structure elevations;



      (9)   Sign concept;



      (10)   Preliminary utilities studies and plans as may be
required by the city;



      (11)   Preliminary drainage report as may be required by the
city;



      (12)   Written narrative explaining the overall development
plan proposed by the preliminary site plan, including proposed uses,
densities, open space areas, public land dedications areas, trails, public
area landscaping, roadways, utility services and other required improvements.
Include analysis relating the preliminary site plan to the review and
approval criteria set forth in this subchapter; and



      (13)   Additional information as may be requested by the city
including, but not limited to, traffic impact study, access management plan,
geologic hazard study, environmental impact report, historic inventory study
and data which estimates and documents how the project will affect
population, employment, schools, parks, streets, utilities, public safety and
other city services as applicable.



   (B)   Preliminary site plan formatting requirements. The Community
Development Department shall maintain a policy memorandum approved by the
Director specifying and describing the formatting requirements, content,
scales, sizes and quantity required for submission of the preliminary site
plan, landscaping plan, architectural elevations and sign concept. The policy
memorandum shall include the following:



      (1)   Detailed list of information necessary for the city to
complete an adequate review of the requirements described in § 158.055(D) of
this chapter;



      (2)   Site plans may include, but are not limited to, the
following items: names of adjacent property owners, property boundaries,
utilities, easements, existing and proposed grading extending beyond the
property line, floodplain, natural features, structures, roads and
right-of-ways, parking, phasing, lighting, legal description and summary
tables, or other such information as required to determine compliance with
city laws and regulations;



      (3)   All preliminary site plans shall bear the seal of a
professional engineer (P.E.) or other such professional certification and
seals as the city may require. Requirement for P.E. certification may be
exempt under unusual circumstances as determined by the Director; and



      (4)   The Director shall have the authority to modify the
policy memorandum as need arises in order for the city to better review an
application’s adherence and appropriateness to the requirements of §
158.055(D) of this chapter.



   (C)   Duration of validity (preliminary site plans). Unless a
shorter time is otherwise specified, an approved preliminary site plan shall
be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of such approval for planned
uses and special uses. The City Council may grant one extension not exceeding
12 months upon written request. If a final site plan is not approved prior to
the final expiration of preliminary site plan, a new preliminary site plan
shall be required subject to the city’s current submission criteria and
approval process as provided herein. Grading and construction permits shall
not be issued prior to the approval of the final site plan.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.054  FINAL SITE PLAN.



   (A)   Application and submission requirements. Unless otherwise
required in this chapter or by the Director, the following items must be
submitted to the city for an application to be considered complete (the
quantities and formatting of each item shall be detailed in an application
packet provided to the applicant by the city):



      (1)   Site plan application, completed and signed in such form
as provided by the Director;



      (2)   Site plan application fee;



      (3)   Consultant plan review payment responsibility form;



      (4)   Site plan review fee deposit;



      (5)   Proof of ownership;



      (6)   Final site plan;



      (7)   Final utilities studies and plans as may be required by
the city;



      (8)   Final drainage report as may be required by the city;



      (9)   Deeds of dedication for all rights-of-way or easements
required as a result of preliminary site plan approval, if conveyance thereof
is not to be made by plat or by the filing of the final site plan pursuant to
this section;



      (10)   A copy of all covenants and restrictions applicable to
the development, if required;



      (11)   Evidence of the establishment of the agency for the
ownership and maintenance of any common open space and all assurances of the
financial and administrative ability of such agency, if required by the terms
of the approved preliminary site plan;



      (12)   Evidence of satisfaction of any conditions of the
preliminary site plan approval that were conditions prior to consideration of
the final site plan;



      (13)   Documentation reflecting how common areas will be
maintained under the ownership or control shall be submitted prior to final
site plan approval. The documents shall include, but are not limited to,
homeowner’s association documents, joint agreements and covenants clearly
defining the shared maintenance of common open spaces and detention/retention
areas and other utilities within each of the zoning lots and/or phases
comprising the proposed development, shared access and parking arrangements,
joint maintenance agreements, common design elements including integration of
common architectural themes and active and passive open space and landscaped
areas; and



      (14)   Additional information as may be requested by the city
including, but not limited to: traffic impact study, access management plan,
geologic hazard study, wildlife impact report, historic inventory study and
data which estimates and documents how the project will affect population,
employment, schools, parks, streets, utilities, public safety and other city
services.



   (B)   Final site plan formatting requirements. For a final site plan
to be accepted for review, all of the information required by the policy
memorandum for the preliminary site plan must be shown on the final site plan
along with the additional requirements set forth below, as applicable:



      (1)   Final storm water collection, detention, erosion control
plans and calculations;



      (2)   Final analysis of the capacity of the existing sanitary
sewer receiving system;



      (3)   Final water and sanitary sewer plans;



      (4)   Final grading plans;



      (5)   Photometric plan formatted in accordance with this code;



      (6)   Final landscape plan formatted in accordance with this
code;



      (7)   Building and accessory structure elevations;



      (8)   One or more illustrations shall be submitted with the
final site plan showing dimensions and areas of all floors within proposed
buildings; and



      (9)   All proposed improvements shall be in accordance with
the city’s land subdivision regulations as they apply to the development
and all final improvement standards prior to the authorization of any
clearing, grading or construction permit(s). Exceptions to these requirements
may be granted subject to approval by the City Council.



   (C)   Consideration of final site plans.



      (1)   No changes. A final site plan that contains no changes
or additions to the approved preliminary site plan shall be approved by the
Director upon a determination that all conditions of approval of the
preliminary site plan, if any, have been satisfied by the applicant, and that
all other submission requirements have been satisfied.



      (2)   Minor changes. A final site plan that contains minor
changes to the approved preliminary site plan may be approved by the
Director. A determination by the Director on such minor changes shall be made
pursuant to this division (C)(2), provided that the Director may, at his or
her discretion, may submit the changes to the City Council for its review.
For purposes of this section, MINOR CHANGES from the approved preliminary
site plan shall mean all of the following changes that are otherwise
authorized by the underlying district regulations:



         (a)   Changes in the density of residential uses of up
to 5%;



         (b)   Increase in the total floor area of all
non-residential buildings covered by the plan of up to 10%;



         (c)   Increase of lot coverage of up to 5%;



         (d)   Changes in the height of any building of up to 10%;



         (e)   Changes of any peripheral setback of up to 5%;



         (f)   Decrease of areas devoted to open space of up to
5%; and



         (g)   Minor changes in the landscape plan; except that,
total landscape area cannot be decreased.



      (3)   Substantial changes. A final site plan that contains any
changes that are not “minor changes” shall be considered substantial
changes from the approved preliminary site plan and may be approved only by
the City Council. The City Council shall apply the criteria set forth herein,
applicable to a preliminary site plan application.



      (4)   Conditions on approval. If the City Council attaches
conditions to the approval of a final site plan, it shall designate specific
requirements, if any, that must be met before issuance of a grading permit or
building permit. The City Council may delegate to the Director the authority
to determine whether the specifically prescribed conditions attached to the
approval have been satisfied by the applicant. Such conditions may arise from
a change in circumstances following the original approval, identification of
new information or other reasonable factors warranting conditions as
necessary to satisfy the approval criteria.



   (D)   Duration of validity (final site plan). Final site plan
approval shall, unless a shorter time is specified, be valid for a period of
12 months from the date of such approval, unless within such period a
building permit is obtained and substantial construction is commenced and all
additional building permits necessary to complete the project as approved in
the final site plan schedule are obtained in a timely fashion, as determined
by the Building Official. An application for extension of a final site plan
may be granted, if the application is filed before the final site plan
expires. Upon granting an extension, the City Council has the authority to
attach new conditions to the final site plan as it deems appropriate.
Substantial construction as used in this section shall mean completion of at
least 10% of the construction in terms of the total expected cost of the
project for which the permit was issued. Whenever a final site plan or phase
thereof has expired as provided in this section, no development shall take
place on the property until a new final site plan has been submitted and
approved. A new final site plan shall be required for any construction not
completed within five years of the date of the final site plan approval.



   (E)   Recording of final site plans for planned and special uses.
Following the approval of a final site plan for any PUD or special use, a
copy of the site plan signed by the Mayor and City Clerk shall be filed by
the applicant with the Recorder of Deeds of the county. All filing fees shall
be paid by the person who filed the site plan application. The authorization
for the use approved by the site plan shall not become effective until a copy
of the recorded plan bearing its recordation notations shall be returned and
placed on file with the City Clerk. Unless waived by the Director, the final
site plan shall be combined with the final plat where easements or
infrastructure are to be dedicated to the public or the final site plan
includes the subdivision of land. Such waiver may be granted where the
dedication and transfer of easements, improvements or land can be lawfully
satisfied pursuant to this code without recording of a final plat.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.055  GENERAL SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   The required general site plan review procedures are as follows.



   (A)   Permitted use. The Director has the authority to
administratively approve a preliminary, final or sketch site plan for a
permitted use in any district. A petitioner requesting site plan approval for
a permitted use may file a final site plan without providing application of a
preliminary site plan.



   (B)   Special use. An application for a special use must comply with
both the preliminary and final site plan application contents and submittal
requirements and procedures and the requirements in §§ 158.095 through
158.102 of this chapter for specials uses. A preliminary site plan for a
special use shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval,
conditional approval or denial as part of the special use application, with
the City Council having the authority to exercise their right of review
within 21 days of the Planning Commission’s decision to approve, approve
with conditions or deny a site plan for a special use as provided in §§
158.095 through 158.102 of this chapter. The final site plan for a special
use may be approved under the administrative process for permitted uses.



   (C)   Planned use. An application for a planned use must comply with
both the preliminary and final site plan application contents and submittal
requirements and procedures as well as the requirements outlined in §§
158.115 through 158.121 of this chapter for planned uses. The approval of a
planned use is a legislative act of rezoning, therefore, the review and
approval of a preliminary site plan for a planned use must be conducted in
accord with all rezoning requirements, including the requirements of §§
158.255 through 158.257 of this chapter. The preliminary site plan shall be
incorporated in and subject to the ordinance approving any planned use as
provided for in §§ 158.115 through 158.121 of this chapter, or as otherwise
provided in this code. The final site plan for a planned use may be approved
under the administrative process for permitted uses.



   (D)   Reports required for planned and special uses. The Community
Development Department shall prepare a project report for special and planned
uses that provides a review of the preliminary site plan in light of the
Comprehensive Plan, the applicable review criteria set forth herein, the
requirements of this chapter and the input of appropriate city departments.
The Director shall forward a copy of the report to the applicant. The
Director shall forward any completed application for a site plan for a
special and planned use to the Planning Commission and/or City Council for
further review and consideration.



   (E)   General site plan review criteria. In reviewing a site plan
application, the Director shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to
the application, including whether it complies with all applicable provisions
of this chapter. Generally, the following criteria are used to evaluate both
the preliminary site plan and final site plan:



      (1)   Conformance with the requirements of the applicable
zoning ordinances and this code, and all other applicable codes and policies
of the city;



      (2)   Circulation in terms of an internal street circulation
system designed for the type of traffic generated, safety, separation from
living areas, convenience, access, handicap access, noise and exhaust
control. Though generally discouraged, private internal streets may be
considered where appropriate to the development. A proper institutional
framework must be established for maintenance thereof and the streets must be
accessible by Police and Fire Department vehicles for emergency purposes.
Bicycle and pedestrian traffic shall be considered and provided for when
necessary;



      (3)   Functional open space in terms of recreation, views,
density relief, convenience, function and optimum preservation of natural
features, including trees and drainage areas;



      (4)   The adequacy, safety, separation, convenience, access to
points of destination and attractiveness of pedestrian ways;



      (5)   Building type in terms of appropriateness to density,
site relationship and bulk and building design in terms of orientation,
spacing, materials, exterior color and texture, storage and lighting are
appropriate for the development;



      (6)   Landscaping of total site as shown by amount, types and
materials used, maintenance, suitability and effect on the neighborhood;



      (7)   The site plan has been shown to fit within the context
of the planned land use pattern and roadway and utility systems of the larger
surrounding sub-area;



      (8)   Consistency with the city’s adopted Comprehensive
Master Plan, the Commercial Design Handbook, dated 7-6-2009, and on file with
the City Clerk, and any adopted design guidelines applicable to the site, and
any adopted sub-area master plan;



      (9)   City water and sewer systems can adequately serve the
proposed development; and



      (10)   Storm water runoff is not increased at the boundaries
of the property or can adequately be handled by an off-site storm water
system.



   (F)   Denial of site plan criteria. The applicant shall have the
burden of demonstrating that the site plan application meets the applicable
review criteria. The city shall not approve a site plan application unless
the city determines that the proposed use or development:



      (1)   When completed pursuant to the proposed site plan,
would  be consistent with all applicable requirements of this chapter or
applicable zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance or other applicable
municipal codes and policies;



      (2)   Would not adversely affect the safety and convenience of
vehicular and pedestrian circulation in the vicinity of the subject property,
including traffic reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use and
other uses in the area;



      (3)   Is  compatible with existing or permitted uses on
adjacent sites, in terms of building height, setbacks and open spaces, bulk
and scale, landscaping, exterior building design features, drainage, access,
parking and circulation features; or



      (4)   Will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity
for reasons specifically articulated by the Director.



   (G)   Appeals. Appeals of any determination made by the Community
Development Director or other city official pursuant to this subchapter may
be taken by filing an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Officer consistent with
the procedures and regulations identified in §§ 158.295 through 158.301 of
this chapter.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 3665, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 158.056  SITE PLAN DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   The following guidelines, principles and standards should be followed
and respected when designing the site.



   (A)   Site design.



      (1)   The site design must respect and enhance the physical
and natural qualities of the site and retain the positive qualities of the
existing environment. It should utilize existing topographic features and
improvements, where feasible, and shall be so located as to complement and
conform to the site topography rather than changing the site to accommodate a
preconceived site design.



      (2)   Areas which shall be visually deemphasized in design of
the site are utilitarian areas such as HVAC equipment, loading docks, storage
areas, service vehicles and trash enclosures. These areas should be located
away from high exposure areas of the building and site (i.e., along street
frontages or other highly visible portions of the site). When such
utilitarian areas are visible from adjacent property or public right-of-way,
screening shall be provided in accordance with §§ 158.180 through 158.194
of this chapter, or as otherwise provided in this code. All HVAC equipment
shall be screened from view of any public right-of-way. Enclosures and
screening structures shall be similar in design, color and/or building
materials to the principal building on site.



      (3)   All fences for the purpose of required screening or
buffering shall be of a durable, maintenance free material such as vinyl or
masonry. Chain link is not permitted for any required screening or buffering.
Gates for enclosures may be allowed the option of chain link if constructed
with a vinyl coating and vision slats.



      (4)   The creative use of landscaping, signage, berming and
lighting is encouraged within the frame work of the overall landscape theme
proposed for the site. Entrances shall be designed to facilitate the flow of
traffic into the development in order to avoid creating congestion on public
streets.



      (5)   Major street design. All proposed development and
associated public improvements to the transportation system shall comply with
the city’s subdivision regulations and Comprehensive Plan’s major street
plan relative to roadway classifications and design standards.



      (6)   Architecture. The proposed building must demonstrate
conformity with design guidelines applicable to the site as part of the
Comprehensive Plan, requirements set forth in this chapter, or any other
design guidelines adopted by the city, including the Commercial Design
Handbook, dated 7-6-2009 and on file with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Site drainage and storm water management. Storm water
management and drainage design shall comply with federal, state and city
regulations and conform to all city specifications relating thereto.



   (C)   Grading/erosion control. Grading and erosion control shall
comply with federal, state and city regulations and conform to all city
specifications relating thereto.



   (D)   Traffic management. All development shall comply with the
city’s and/or Department of Transportation’s access management standards.
The city shall have the authority to permit the type, number and location of
all entrances, exits and circulation patterns on any development site. The
city, at its discretion, may request documentation as necessary to determine
the impact any future improvements may have on the transportation system
located within the city. There are two general levels of documentation that
may be required, which include:



      (1)   Technical assessment letter. An assessment letter,
prepared by a certified engineer, of any future traffic impacts shall be
submitted to the city unless waived by the Director. The letter shall
include, but is not limited to, the total trips generated during both the
a.m. and p.m. peak periods and documentation that adequate stacking, queuing
and intersection spacing is provided;



      (2)   Traffic study. The city may request, at its discretion,
a traffic study when traffic generation shows any level of service of “D”
or worse pursuant to the accepted national traffic standards. The city may
request a traffic study upon review of any development or building
application to the city and upon its determination that a safety or service
level traffic concern reasonably may exist relating to the construction or
development to be permitted, and shall so state in writing to the applicant.
All traffic studies shall be prepared by a certified engineer experienced in
said studies. The city shall determine the executor of the study with the
cost for the study to be paid by the developer. A traffic study should
contain the following information or such other information as may be
required by the City Engineer:



         (a)   Capacity analysis of critical intersections
affected by the development-generated traffic. The capacity analysis should
be performed for existing traffic demand, traffic demand after completion of
the development and ultimate projected traffic demand. Base ultimate
projected traffic volumes shall be provided by city staff. Capacity analysis
shall be performed according to the criteria contained in the current edition
of the Highway Capacity Manual/FHWA/IDOT;



         (b)   Recommendations for maintaining the existing level
of service for each of the critical intersections; recommendations for
projected traffic demand after the development is completed; and
recommendations for ultimate projected traffic demand. These recommendations
may include geometric improvements such as additional turn lanes or changes
in traffic control and/or street widening. Level of service shall be defined
as in the current edition of the Highway Capacity Manual/IDOT;



         (c)   Review of internal traffic circulation and curb
cut locations; and



         (d)   Percentage of contributory traffic created by the
proposed development upon the total entering traffic at critical
intersections.



      (3)   Cost of development. The developer of any property
should expect, as a cost of development, to provide any traffic improvements
necessary to maintain the existing level of service.



   (E)   Site access and circulation.



      (1)   Emergency vehicle access. All developments shall be
designed to facilitate entry of emergency vehicles onto the site.



      (2)   Number and location of access points. All developments
shall utilize the minimum number of access points to public streets necessary
to serve the traffic generated by the proposed use. Traffic study may be
required to determine the number and location of access points for a
development. Cross access with adjacent property and shared entrances and/or
driveways in city approved locations and configurations shall be required
unless such requirement is waived by the City Engineer.



      (3)   Internal circulation. Layout of internal driveways and
aisles shall be designed to reduce the potential for traffic conflict and
provide for maximum visibility, sight distance and safety. All through drives
shall be defined utilizing landscaped median islands, and stop signs shall be
placed at all appropriate intersections of such drives with other through
drives or public streets as determined by the City Engineer. For any driveway
in excess of 30 feet in width, channelization using medians may be required
to control ingress and egress to the site. Bicycle and pedestrian traffic
access shall be adequately provided.



      (4)   Stacking for drive-through. For any drive-in or
drive-through facility, adequate stacking spaces shall be provided to ensure
that vehicles waiting to be served do not interfere with ingress or egress to
or from the site or required parking spaces. All drive-through establishments
shall also comply with the requirements of all applicable drive in and drive
through supplemental regulations.



   (F)   Lighting standards. All lighting shall conform to the city’s
lighting standards as set forth in this code. All lighting shall be properly
designed to serve multiple purposes including illumination, vehicular and
pedestrian safety and security without excessive light or improper light
nuisance or light trespass. Additionally, site lighting shall be subject to
the following requirements.



      (1)   On-site exterior lighting. The height and style of
lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding
area and type of use for which the fixture is designed. Lights shall not be
placed or directed such that they will cause glare or excessive light
spillage on neighboring sites or adjacent public streets. All lights shall be
full-cutoff fixtures unless otherwise authorized by the Director.



      (2)   Streetlights. It shall be the developer’s
responsibility to install lighting standards in accordance with city
standards. If lighting standards already exist and are below current
standards, it shall be the developer’s responsibility to upgrade said
lights to current standards.



   (G)   Landscape requirements. Landscape installation and maintenance
shall conform to the minimum landscape specifications of the city as set
forth in this code.



   (H)   Parking requirements. Parking requirements shall conform to
the minimum parking specifications of the city as set forth in §§ 158.135
through 158.146 of this chapter.



   (I)   Agency comments. Approvals shall be required, as appropriate,
by the applicable water, sewer electric, fire district, school district and
transportation authority confirming adequate capacities, accessibility and
design specifications.



   (J)   Additional conditions and requirements. In reviewing a site
plan application, the city may impose such conditions or requirements as may
be necessary to ensure compliance with the review criteria.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 3665, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 158.057  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   A grading permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not
be issued for any use or development subject to the site plan requirement of
this chapter until a final site plan has been approved as required by this
chapter.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.058  IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE.



   Upon submitting a site plan for review and approval by the city, the
applicant guarantees that all improvements set forth on the site plan shall
be completed within a reasonable time as required by the city. Failure to
complete any improvements set forth in an approved site plan within any
required time period shall be a violation of this chapter. Unless otherwise
provided on the site plan, all site plan improvements shall be installed and
all other site plan requirements met prior to issuance of any temporary or
final certificate of occupancy, unless compliance is otherwise required
earlier. In lieu of the actual construction of all physical improvements
prior to authorizing an occupancy permit, the city may accept cash,
cashier’s check,  letter of credit or other like security approved by the
city, in the amount that will guarantee the installation of the required
improvements within a period of time to be specified and approved by the
city. Such surety shall be properly executed prior to any occupancy and shall
be released in segments upon written approval of the city. Written
authorization to enter the property or fulfill the obligation of said surety
shall be given to the city by the owner as a condition of any certificate of
occupancy permit and of any improvement guarantee. In determining the amount
of said surety, a bonafide estimate or contract provided by the applicant for
improvements shall be submitted to the city for approval.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.059  SITE PLAN AMENDMENTS.



   A site plan may be amended by the applicant in the same manner as is
required for initial approval. Any revised site plan drawings must be
submitted to and approved by the Director prior to issuance of a building or
grading permit.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 158.060  COMPLIANCE WITH SITE PLANS REQUIRED.



   A site plan approved for a property establishes binding requirements
for the use and development of the property on all persons on and after the
date of its approval, irrespective of any change of ownership or tenancy, or
change in the use or structures on the property since its approval. No owner
of a property, or person in control of a property, shall cause or permit the
property to be in non-compliance with a site plan and shall be responsible at
all times to ensure that the property is maintained in full compliance with
any such approved site plan, including, but not limited to, maintenance and
retention of the landscaping and other improvements shown on the plan.



(Ord. 3463, passed 7-17-2006)




ARTICLE 4:
NON-CONFORMITIES AND VESTED RIGHTS




§ 158.075  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS CHAPTER. For purposes of determining the
existence of non-conformity, the effective date of this chapter shall be the
effective date of this chapter or amendment creating the non- conformity.



   NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot lawfully existing on the effective date of
this chapter (and not created for purposes of evading the restrictions of
this chapter) that does not meet the minimum area requirement of the zoning
district in which the lot is located.



   NON-CONFORMING PROJECT. Any lawful structure, development or
undertaking that is incomplete on the effective date of this chapter and
would be inconsistent with one or more of the regulations applicable to the
zoning district in which it is located if completed as proposed or planned.



   NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign lawfully existing on the effective date of
this chapter that does not conform to one or more of the regulations set
forth in this subchapter.



   NON-CONFORMING SITE IMPROVEMENT. An improvement required on a property
by this chapter and which, on the effective date of this chapter, lawfully is
absent on the property or lawfully does not fully comply with this chapter,
including, but not limited to, parking areas, storm drainage facilities,
sidewalks and landscaping.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. A primary use of or structure on a property
lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter which is in any
manner made unlawful by the regulations in this subchapter or any
development, design or performance standards applicable to the zoning
district in which the property is located. NON-CONFORMING USES shall not
include ancillary uses that are not the primary use of the property or
structure.



   NON-CONFORMITY. A non-conforming lot, project, sign, site improvement
or use as defined in this subchapter, or other condition lawfully existing on
a property on the effective date of this chapter that does not fully comply
with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.076  CONTINUATION OF NON-CONFORMITIES.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this subchapter and subject
to the restrictions and qualifications set forth herein, non-conformities
that were lawful on the effective date of this chapter may be continued.
However, it is the intent of this subchapter that non-conformities are not to
be expanded, and they should be abolished or reduced to conformity as quickly
as the fair interest to the parties will permit. Non-conformities made
unlawful by generally applicable public health, safety or welfare ordinances
of the city, enacted in whole or in part pursuant to authority other than the
city’s zoning authority, shall not be governed by this section and shall
have no right of being continued unless otherwise provided by law.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.077  EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT OF NON-CONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Prohibition on enlargement of non-conformity. Except as
specifically provided in this section, no person may engage in an activity
that causes or facilitates an increase in the extent or scope of a
non-conformity, including, but not limited to, physical alteration of
structures or the placement of new structures on open land if such activity
results in:



      (1)   An increase in the total amount of space or building
area devoted to a non-conforming use; or



      (2)   A greater non-conformity with respect to dimensional
restrictions such as setback requirements, height limitations or density
requirements or other requirements such as parking requirements.



   (B)   Prohibition on expansion of area of non-conformity. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, a non- conformity may not be expanded to
cover more land than was occupied by that non-conformity when it became
non-conforming, or such reduced area to which the non-conformity may have
been lawfully converted as provided herein.



   (C)   Prohibition on increase of intensity of non-conformity. The
volume, intensity or frequency of use of the property, where a non-conformity
exists, may not be increased and the equipment or processes used at a
location where a non-conformity exists may not be changed if these or similar
changes cause an increase in the degree of activity.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.078  REPAIR, MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Minor repairs. Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of
structures and property, where non-conformities exist, are permitted. Work
estimated to cost more than 10% of the structural value of the structure to
be renovated shall be prohibited unless authorized by a special use permit
for alteration of the non-conformity pursuant to § 158.084 of this chapter.



   (B)   Repair of unintended damage. If a structure located on a lot
where a non-conformity exists is damaged by fire, explosion, an act of God or
the public enemy, to an extent that the costs of repair or restoration would
not exceed 50% of its structural value, then the damaged structure may be
repaired or restored only in accordance with a written zoning authorization
permit by the Director.



   (C)   Authorization required. Any repairs, renovation or restoration
of a structure pursuant to divisions (A) and (B) above which requires the
issuance of any permit under the city’s Building Codes, Subdivision and
Development Control Ordinance  or site plan approval process shall also
require the prior issuance of a zoning authorization permit by the Director
authorizing the repair or alteration. In support of the application for the
permit, the applicant shall submit sufficient information as may be required
to satisfy the Director that the cost of the proposed repairs, renovation or
restoration will not exceed 50% of the value of the structure prior to the
repair, renovation or restoration.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.079  CHANGE OF NON-CONFORMING USE.



   (A)   Prohibition on change of use. A change in use of property
where a non-conformity exists may not be made, except in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   Change to permitted use. If the intended change in the
non-conforming use is to a use that is a permitted use or a use subject to
conditions in the zoning district in which the property is located, and all
of the other requirements of this chapter applicable to that use can be
complied with, permission to make the change must be obtained in the same
manner as permission to make the initial use of a vacant lot. Once conformity
with this chapter is achieved, the non-conformity status is terminated.



   (C)   Change to permitted use where all chapter requirements not
satisfied. If the intended change in the non-conforming use is to a permitted
use or conditionally permitted use in the district where the property is
located, but all of the requirements of this chapter applicable to that use
cannot reasonably be complied with, then the change is allowed only if the
Commission issues a special use permit for alteration of the non-conformity
authorizing the change pursuant to § 158.084 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.080  ABANDONMENT, DISCONTINUANCE OR REDUCTION OF NON-CONFORMITY.



   (A)   Effect of non-conforming use discontinuation. When a
non-conforming use is discontinued for a consecutive period of 180 days or
discontinued for any period of time without a present intention to reinstate
the non-conforming use, the property involved may thereafter only be used for
conforming uses.



   (B)   Effect of violation of this subchapter. A prohibited expansion
of a non-conformity or other violation of the legal requirements of this
subchapter shall constitute and abandonment of the right to continue the non-
conformity.



   (C)   Effect of non-conformity discontinuance. If the primary use on
property where a non-conformity other than a non-conforming use exists is
discontinued for a consecutive period of 180 days or discontinued for any
period of time without a present intention of resuming that activity, then
the property may thereafter be used only in conformity with any of the
regulations applicable to the preexisting use unless the Commission issues a
special use permit for alteration of the non-conformity pursuant to §
158.084 of this chapter to allow the property to be again used for this
primary purpose without remedying the non-conforming situations.



   (D)   Effect of reducing intensity, scope or area of non-conformity.
If a non-conformity is lawfully reduced in scope, area or intensity, but not
discontinued or abandoned, no right shall exist to thereafter restore the
original scope, area or intensity of the non-conformity.



   (E)   Determination for property as a whole. For purposes of
determining whether a right to continue a non-conforming situation is lost
pursuant to this section, all of the structures, activities and operations
maintained on a lot are generally to be considered as a whole. For example,
the failure to rent one apartment in a non- conforming apartment building for
180 days shall not result in a loss of the right to rent the apartment or
space thereafter so long as the apartment building as a whole is continuously
maintained. But if a non-conforming use is maintained in conjunction with a
conforming use, discontinuance of a non-conforming use for the required
period shall terminate the right to maintain it thereafter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.081  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Compliance with this chapter. Non-conforming signs shall also
be subject to the additional regulations established in this section.



   (B)   Prohibition on alteration of non-conforming signs. A
non-conforming sign may not be enlarged, moved or replaced, nor may the face
appearance be altered, nor illumination added, except to lawfully bring the
sign into complete conformity with the provisions of this chapter or for
maintenance authorized herein.



   (C)   Maintenance and repair.



      (1)   Subject to the other provisions of this section,
non-conforming signs may be maintained and repaired so long as the cost of
such work within any 12-month period does not exceed 50% of the value (tax
value if listed for tax purposes) of such sign.



      (2)   No such work shall be done without the person proposing
to do such work first submitting such information as may be required to
satisfy the Director that the cost of such work would not exceed 50% of the
value of the sign and receiving an authorization from the Director for such
work.



   (D)   Abandonment of non-conforming sign. If a non-conforming sign
other than a billboard is blank or advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that has not been
operated, offered or conducted for a continuous period of 12 months, the
non-conforming sign aspect of that shall be deemed abandoned and shall be
removed within 30 days after such abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the
property where the sign is located or other person having control over such
sign.



   (E)   Non-conforming billboard. If a non-conforming billboard
remains blank for a continuous period of 12 months, that billboard shall be
deemed abandoned and shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, be altered
to comply with this and all applicable provisions of §§ 158.160 through
158.168 of this chapter or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the
property where the sign is located or other person having control over such
sign.



   (F)   Definition. For purposes of this section, a sign is
“blank” if:



      (1)   It advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer
operating or being offered or conducted;



      (2)   The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in
whole or substantial part;



      (3)   The advertising copy paid for by a person other than the
sign owner or promoting an interest other than the rental of the sign has
been removed; or



      (4)   Failure to pay any applicable tax or license fee on any
billboard shall also constitute abandonment requiring its removal.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 3569 passed 4-21-2008)



§ 158.082  UNDEVELOPED NON-CONFORMING LOTS.



   (A)   Definition. This section applies only to undeveloped
non-conforming lots, which shall include all non- conforming lots that do not
have a structure in excess of 600 square feet in floor area constructed for a
main permitted use in the zoning district at the time of construction.



   (B)   Effect of non-conforming lot area. Except as provided herein,
when a non-conforming lot can be used in conformity with all of the
regulations applicable to the intended use; except that, the lot is smaller
than the required minimum lot area applicable to that zoning district, then
the lot may be used as proposed just as if it were conforming. However, no
use that requires a greater lot size than the established minimum lot size
for a particular district is permissible on a non-conforming lot.



   (C)   Prohibition on grouping of non-conforming lots. Subject to the
following sentence, if, on the effective date of this chapter, an undeveloped
non-conforming lot adjoins and has continuous frontage with one or more other
undeveloped lots under the same ownership, then neither the owner of the
non-conforming lot, nor his or her successors in interest, may take advantage
of the provisions of this section. This division (C) shall not apply to a
non-conforming lot if a majority of the developed lots located on either side
of the street where such lot is located and within 500 feet of the lot are
also non-conforming. The intent of this division (C) is to require non-
conforming lots to be combined with other undeveloped lots to create
conforming lots under the circumstances specified herein, but not to require
such combination when that would be out of character with the existing
neighborhood.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.083  COMPLETION OF NON-CONFORMING PROJECTS; VESTED RIGHTS.



   (A)   Administrative permits. All permits issued by an
administrative official or body, or legislative body acting in an
administrative capacity, prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
valid until their expiration under the previously existing regulations.
Applications for administrative permits submitted after the effective date of
these regulations shall be reviewed and evaluated pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter, except as further specified below.



   (B)   Completion of initiated projects. All non-conforming projects
on which construction was lawfully commenced at least 30 days before the
effective date of this chapter may be completed in accordance with the terms
of their permits, so long as those permits were validly issued and remain
unrevoked and unexpired, and a vested rights permit is obtained from the
Director. If a development is designed to be completed in stages, this
division (B) shall apply only to the particular phase under construction.



   (C)   Requirement to obtain vested right permit.



      (1)   Except as provided in divisions (A) and (B) above, all
work on any non-conforming project shall cease on the effective date of this
chapter, and all work on non-conforming projects may be continued only
pursuant to a vested rights permit issued in accordance with this chapter by
the City Council. The City Council shall approve a permit if it finds that
the applicant has proven:



         (a)   It has in good faith made unrecoverable
substantial expenditures or incurred substantial binding obligations;



         (b)   The applicant otherwise has changed position in
some substantial way in reasonable reliance on the regulations as they
existed before the effective date of this chapter and thereby would be
unreasonably prejudiced if not allowed to complete the project as proposed; or



         (c)   Is otherwise entitled to a vested rights permit as
a matter of law.



      (2)   To the extent that a non-conforming project can be made
conforming and that expenditures made or obligations incurred can be
effectively utilized in the completion of a conforming project, a person
shall not be considered prejudiced by having made the expenditures.



   (D)   Completion of phases. When a project was intended to be or
reasonably could be completed in phases, stages, segments or other discrete
units, the person shall be allowed to complete only those phases or segments
with respect to which the person can make the showing required under division
(B) above.



   (E)   Limitation on vested right permit applications. The City
Council shall not consider any application for a vested rights permit
authorized by division (B) above that is submitted more than 60 days after
the effective date of this chapter. The Commission may waive this requirement
for good cause shown, but, in no case, may it extend the application deadline
beyond one year from the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.084  SPECIAL USE PERMIT AUTHORIZING ALTERATION OF THE NON-CONFORMITY.



   (A)   Whenever a special use permit is required by this subchapter
to alter a non-conformity, such permit may be issued by the Commission
subject to the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Such special use permit shall be subject to the same
procedures and standards for the granting of a special use permit pursuant to
§§ 158.095 through 158.102 of this chapter, including the imposition of
appropriate conditions for approval, and with the additional required
findings that:



      (1)   The intended change in use, alteration or repair of
structure or property or continuation of non- conformity will not result in a
violation of the purposes of the applicable provisions;



      (2)   All of the applicable requirements of this chapter are
met to the extent reasonably possible; and



      (3)   The proposed use would be otherwise lawful.



   (C)   Compliance with a requirement of this chapter is not
reasonably possible if compliance cannot be achieved without purchase of
additional land to the lot where the non-conforming situation exists or
without moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation.
Mere financial hardship caused by the cost of meeting such requirements as
paved parking does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not
reasonably possible. Further, in no case may an applicant be given
permission, pursuant to this division (C), to construct a building or add to
an existing building if in doing so additional non-conformities would be
created. Nothing in this division (C) shall be interpreted to require the
granting of a special use permit for a non- conformity authorized under this
section where all requirements or standards are not determined to exist.
Multiple contiguous lots in common ownership shall not be considered
independent lots in determining a hardship. The permit shall specify which
non-conformities need not be corrected.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)




ARTICLE 5:
SPECIAL USES




§ 158.095  STATEMENT OF INTENT.



   The division of the city into zoning districts is based on the
principle that similar conditions prevail throughout a particular district.
Some uses of land are not appropriate as a “permitted use” in certain
districts and are designated as special uses. Because they have a unique,
special or unusual impact upon the use of enjoyment or neighboring property,
these uses are only appropriate at a certain locations and upon receipt of a
special use permit. Special uses shall be permitted only as provided herein
and consistent with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-1.1. Unless otherwise
provided by this chapter, a special use shall be subject to all of the
regulations applicable within the zoning district in which the special use is
authorized in addition to such other regulations as established by the terms
or conditions of the special use permit that supplement, but may not reduce,
such otherwise applicable minimum regulations.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.096  WHEN SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A landowner shall obtain a special use permit prior to the issuance of
a building permit:



   (A)   For any use listed as a “special use” in the applicable
zoning district; and



   (B)   For any use otherwise requiring a special use permit by this
chapter.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.097  SPECIAL USE PERMIT; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any person owning or having a cognizable interest in a given
property may file an application.



   (B)   Except as may be omitted upon written consent of the Director,
the following items shall be submitted in support of an application for a
special use permit:



      (1)   All general application requirements, including, but not
limited to, §§ 158.270 through 158.282 of this chapter;



      (2)   All preliminary and final site plan requirements
contained in §§ 158.050 through 158.060 of this chapter or as otherwise
required by this code;



      (3)   A comprehensive narrative description of the use sought;



      (4)   Development schedule providing reasonable guarantees for
the completion of the proposed development or other construction according to
the development schedule;



      (5)   Any land areas within the Environmental Corridor (see
environmental corridor map appendix in the Environmental/Landscape Framework
Plan);



      (6)   A statement regarding the requested length of term of
the use after the date of issuance of the permit, if applicable;



      (7)   A statement regarding any special conditions governing
the operation of the proposed use(s), site development and other pertinent
descriptive factors;



      (8)   Color photographs of surrounding structures within 250
feet and elevation drawings of the proposed special use in sufficient detail
to determine compliance with the zoning district regulations in which the
special use is to be located;



      (9)   A landscaping plan and any screening elements; and



      (10)   Such other information as may be required by the
Director relevant to the specific application to ensure compliance with the
purposes and provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.098  PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR CONSIDERING SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Notice and hearing. No special use shall be made, except by
specific case or application  and after a public hearing before the Planning
Commission. Such hearing shall be after  publication and notice of the time
and place of the hearing, as provided for in this chapter in § 158.257 of
this chapter applicable to zoning district amendments. The Commission shall
hear the applicant and all interested persons who appear at the hearing.



   (B)   Findings of fact and decision.



      (1)   Subsequent to the hearing, the Commission shall render a
decision on the application based on the criteria established in this
subchapter. Each such decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact,
including a separate conclusion, and shall refer to any exhibits containing
plans and specifications for the proposed use, and shall remain a part of the
permanent records of the Planning Commission. The findings of fact shall
specify the reason or reasons for granting or denying the special use.



      (2)   In making its decision, the Commission shall:



         (a)   Grant the application, with or without conditions;
including such conditions as are reasonably necessary to meet the standards
of this chapter and other applicable law  and to otherwise protect the
immediate neighborhood or the city from adverse effects of the use or
building proposed;



         (b)   Deny the application; or



         (c)   Refer the application back to the applicant for
modification or to the Director for additional review or study if deemed
necessary by the Commission.



      (3)   Any completed application submitted in conformance with
this subchapter shall be deemed denied by the Planning Commission, for
purposes of appeal to the Council, if no final written action has been
rendered within 120 days from the date the complete application is filed. In
such case, the applicant shall file its written appeal with the City Council
within ten days thereafter to seek Council review.



   (C)   Standards for considering applications.



      (1)   A special use may be permitted only upon the applicant
presenting evidence and bearing the burden of proof that such use meets the
standards and requirements established for such classification in this
chapter, and the granting of the permit may be subject to such conditions
necessary to meet such standards.



      (2)   No special use permit may be granted unless the Planning
Commission finds:



         (a)   The special use is necessary for the public
convenience at that location;



         (b)   The special use is not injurious to the use and
enjoyment of neighboring properties, nor detrimental to the  public health,
safety, morals or general welfare;



         (c)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and
other necessary supporting facilities have been provided for;



         (d)   Adequate measures have been provided to
accommodate ingress and egress so as to avoid congestion, not unduly impede
surrounding traffic flows or create hazardous or unsafe conditions;



         (e)   The special use is will not adversely impact
property values in the neighborhood; and/or



         (f)   The special use will conforms to all other
requirements of the district.



      (3)   In considering any special use application, the
Commission and the City Council may give consideration to the criteria stated
below, to the extent they are pertinent to the particular application. The
Commission and City Council also may consider other factors that may be
relevant to a particular application.



         (a)   Satisfaction of any and all conditions and
requirements applicable to the requested special use, as set forth in
supplementary use regulations;



         (b)   The existing uses and zoning of nearby property;



         (c)   The extent to which property values are diminished
by the proposed use;



         (d)   The extent to which the destruction of property
values, if any, of the property to be rezoned or nearby property promotes the
health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public;



         (e)   The relative gain to the public as compared to the
hardship imposed on the individual property owner;



         (f)   The suitability of the property for the zoned
purpose;



         (g)   The length of time the property has remained
vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in
the vicinity of the subject property;



         (h)   The public need for the proposed use;



         (i)   The extent to which the proposed use will
adversely affect the capacity or safety of that portion of the street network
impacted by the use, or present parking problems in the vicinity of the
property;



         (j)   The extent to which the proposed use will create
excessive storm water runoff, air pollution, water pollution, noise pollution
or other environmental harm;



         (k)   The extent to which public facilities and
services, are available and adequate to meet the demand for facilities and
services generated by the proposed use;



         (l)   The conformance of the proposed use to the
Comprehensive Plan, the Major Street Plan, the Capital Improvements Plan and
other adopted planning policies; and



         (m)   The recommendation of professional staff.



   (D)   Denial. If the application is denied, the applicant shall not
again apply within 12 months for a special use permit for substantially the
same proposal unless there has occurred a substantial change of circumstances
and the Commission consents to resubmission of substantially the same
proposal. Otherwise, substantially the same proposal shall be submitted no
earlier than one year after the date of denial. If the application is
referred back to the applicant for modification, the applicant may resubmit
the application in accordance with the directions of the Commission, if any,
otherwise in time for the next regular meeting of the Commission.



   (E)   Appeal to City Council.



      (1)   Immediately following final action by the Planning
Commission on any special use permit, a report shall be filed with the City
Council concerning such action. Within 21 days after the Planning
Commission’s decision, the City Council, upon majority vote, may exercise
the power of review of any Planning Commission decision on an application for
a special use permit.



      (2)   Upon adoption of the motion to exercise the power of
review, the City Council may refer the matter to committee. Following this
adoption, and before acting on the special use permit, the City Council may
set the matter for hearing before the committee or the City Council. The City
Council will give written notice of any such hearing to the applicant and all
other persons who appeared and spoke at the public hearing before the
Planning Commission. In addition, the City Council may, in its discretion,
notify and allow to be heard at the hearing any other person who the Council
believes may be aggrieved by any decision or action concerning the special
use permit.



      (3)   Following its review, the City Council may affirm,
reverse or modify, in whole or in part, any determination of the Planning
Commission. An affirmative majority vote of the City Council shall be
required to overturn or modify a decision by the Planning Commission
concerning a special use permit. The decision of the City Council shall be
made within 45 days of the Planning Commission vote, unless extended for
specified cause by a majority vote of the council, or the Planning Commission
decision shall become final.



      (4)   Unless the City Council exercises its power of review of
a special use permit, the decision of the Planning Commission shall become
effective after 21 days following its decision.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.099  VESTING OF RIGHTS.



   (A)   The mere issuance of a special use permit gives no vested
rights to the permit holder.



   (B)   A right to continue a specially permitted use shall vest only
if the project is constructed and the use actually begun, and only for as
long as may be specified in the permit.



   (C)   The right to continue the special use that was permitted prior
to the effective date of this chapter shall last only as long as specified by
the special use permit.



   (D)   As of the effective date of this chapter, existing permits
shall be subject to the provisions for transferability as expressed in this
chapter.



   (E)   Uses that are allowed without a special use permit prior to
the effective date of this chapter, but are designated as special uses in
this chapter, shall be allowed to continue as non-conforming uses if the
requirements of §§ 158.240 through 158.243, 158.255 through 158.257 and
158.270 through 158.282 of this chapter are satisfied.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.100  PUBLIC BUILDINGS, PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   Except where the use is otherwise designated as a permitted or planned
use pursuant to another section of this chapter, the Planning Commission may
by special use permit authorize any other building or use of the city, the
county, the township, public school district, university, any state or
federal agency or public utility in either a governmental or proprietary
capacity, in any zoning district as the Commission deems necessary for the
convenience and welfare. Such building, structure or use shall be subject to
such of the requirements of the district wherein the building, structure or
use is situated and to such of the other regulations applying to uses
permitted in the development as the Commission deems necessary to comply with
the general provisions of this chapter and to assure compatibility of the
development with the character of its locality.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.101  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN; TRANSFERABILITY, LAPSE, EXPIRATION AND
REVOCATION.



   (A)   Final development plan; effective date of permit. Unless
otherwise specified in the terms of the special use permit, such permit shall
be effective to authorize the use granted therein only upon approval of a
final development plan and recording thereof as provided for final
development plans, elsewhere in this chapter. [See § 158.054(E)]



   (B)   Transferability.



      (1)   A special use permit may be conveyed with the land only
if a right to continue the use has vested under the terms of this subchapter.
The transfer of a permit in which no right has vested shall be invalid.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to alter the expiration date of
permits or the authority of the City Council to revoke a permit.



      (2)   A permit cannot be assigned or transferred to a
different parcel of land.



      (3)   Every entity attempting to convey a special use permit
shall give notice in writing to the Director within 72 hours after having
sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of an interest in or
control of a parcel of land for which a special use permit has been issued.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the successor in interest
or control of the parcel. Receipt of such notice shall not constitute
acceptance of an invalid transfer.



   (C)   Lapse. A special use permit in which no vested right has been
established, shall lapse and become void unless the applicant applies for any
building permit incident to the proposed use within one year of the date of
approval by the City Council. Upon the written request of the property owner
and for good cause shown, the City Council may grant one extension of not
more than one year. An application for extension will be considered only if
it is submitted, in writing, prior to the expiration of the initial period.



   (D)   Expiration of permit. The approved special use permit may
specify the duration of its validity and shall expire, unless renewed by
approval of a new special use permit as provided herein. A special use permit
shall also expire if no final site plan has been submitted and approved
within 12 months from the date of the special use permit approval. The City
Council may grant one site plan extension not exceeding 12 months upon
written request. The approval of a revised preliminary site plan shall not
automatically extend the time period during which the preliminary site plan
and/or special use permit is valid. An expired special use permit shall grant
no authority of any kind upon such expiration and no use shall be permitted
to continue thereafter in reliance on such permit authority.



   (E)   Revocation. Any special use permit granted under the authority
of this section is subject to revocation for any or all of the following
reasons:



      (1)   Non-compliance with any applicable requirement as set
forth in this subchapter;



      (2)   Non-compliance with any special conditions imposed at
the time of approval or renewal of the special use permit;



      (3)   Violation of any provisions of the code of ordinances
pertaining to the use of the land, construction or uses of buildings or
structures or activities conducted on the premises by the permit holder,
agents of the permit holder or tenants;



      (4)   Violation of any other applicable provisions of the code
of ordinances or any state or federal law or regulation by the permit holder,
agents of the permit holder or tenants; provided that, such violations relate
to the conduct or activity authorized by the special use permit or the
qualifications of such persons to engage in the permitted use;



      (5)   Attempted transfer of a permit in violation of this
subchapter; and



      (6)   Revocation is necessary to preserve the public health,
safety and welfare.



   (F)   Procedure for revocation.



      (1)   Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the City
Council.



      (2)   Unless the permit holder and the landowner agree in
writing that the permit may be revoked, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing to consider the revocation of the special use permit.



      (3)   The city shall give the permit holder and landowner
notice of the scheduled revocation hearing at least 15 days prior to the date
scheduled for such hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. If
such notice cannot be delivered or is not accepted, notice may be given by
publishing a notice of hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city or by posting a notice of hearing on the property at least 15 days prior
to the date scheduled for the hearing.



      (4)   The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
rules of procedure established by the City Council. At the conclusion of the
public hearing, the City Council may render its decision or take the matter
under advisement.



      (5)   No special use permit shall be revoked unless a majority
of the City Council is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that
grounds for revocation exist. Any motion for the revocation of a special use
permit shall clearly state the grounds for revocation.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.102  VIOLATIONS.



   No property for which a special use permit has been granted shall be
used or developed contrary to the requirements of such permit and final site
plan, unless such permit is amended by approval granted in the manner as
provided for the initial approval of a special use permit; provided that,
nothing herein shall preclude additional particulars or requirements in a
final site plan or an amended final site plan as may be necessary to satisfy
the conditions of the special use permit. In addition to the other remedies
for violation provided herein, such violations are subject to all other
penalties and enforcement provisions as established for other violations of
this chapter.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)




ARTICLE 6:
PLANNED USES




§ 158.115  STATEMENT OF INTENT.



   The division of the city into zoning districts is based on the
principle that similar conditions should prevail throughout a particular
district. Some uses of land are appropriate neither as a “permitted use”,
nor a “special use”, in certain districts and are, therefore, designated
as planned uses or are otherwise subject to the “planned use” site plan
approval process of this subchapter where such specified circumstances exist.
It is the intent of this subchapter to authorize these “planned uses”
only where the location and circumstances are appropriate to the use and a
site plan is approved by the City Council. It is also the intent of this
subchapter to increase the flexibility of development design through
evaluation and approval of a site plan applying site-specific regulations.
Approval of a planned use and corresponding site plan shall be considered a
legislative act of rezoning. Any ordinance approving a site plan for a
planned use shall be deemed to incorporate the provisions of this chapter.
The term “planned use” shall mean the specified use, associated site
plans, and corresponding “overlay district” regulations authorized
pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 3471, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 158.116  PLANNED USE; WHEN REQUIRED.



   (A)   Change in zoning and new construction requiring planned use
approval.  A planned use approval shall be required for any proposed
amendment or change in zoning, change of use from a residential to a
non-residential use, or any construction of a new building for any
non-accessory use within the MR, O-1, B-1, B-2 or I districts where any of
the following exists:



      (1)   The subject property is adjacent to or within 250 feet
of any property used for residential, public assembly, including
church/religious, or school purposes;



      (2)   A new structure of 20,000 square feet or more is
proposed;



      (3)   Two or more buildings are proposed on one lot;



      (4)   When traffic generation per a traffic study submitted by
the applicant, if requested at the discretion of the city, shows any level of
service of  “D” or worse pursuant to the accepted national traffic
standards; or



      (5)   When required by table of uses in this chapter or
otherwise required elsewhere in this chapter.



   (B)   Change in use requiring planned use approval. A planned use
approval shall further be required for any new, expanded or changed use that
includes any one or more of the following specific uses:



      (1)   Convenience store or automotive service station;



      (2)   Retail or wholesale fuel, dispensed or sold;



      (3)   Uses offering liquor sales and/or consumption, on- or
off-premises;



      (4)   Restaurants (other than restaurants with seating
capacity less than 40);



      (5)   Drive-in or drive-through service (liquor sales shall be
prohibited in connection therewith);



      (6)   Car washes, self and automated;



      (7)   Hotels, motels and overnight accommodations;



      (8)   Dance halls, nightclubs, private clubs or other use
offering for its patrons dancing accommodations;



      (9)   Cultural, recreation or entertainment facilities, such
as theaters, museums, meeting halls, golf courses;



      (10)   Country clubs, driving ranges, mini-golf courses,
arcades, billiard halls, bowling alleys, skating rinks;



      (11)   Bed-and-breakfast;



      (12)   Landfill or disposal site;



      (13)   Gun and archery clubs or ranges;



      (14)   Halfway houses and group homes;



      (15)   Manufactured/mobile home subdivision and mobile home
parks;



      (16)   Mining or mineral excavation or extraction;



      (17)   Mini-warehouses;



      (18)   Correction or detention facility;



      (19)   Dry cleaning service facility;



      (20)   Salvage, scrap or storage yard;



      (21)   Auto repair and service garage;



      (22)   Outdoor display (including car and equipment
dealerships);



      (23)   Apartment buildings, three units or greater;



      (24)   Public, private or parochial schools or other uses
offering courses of instruction in accordance with standards for compulsory
education;



      (25)   Child day care facilities required to be licensed by
the state;



      (26)   Public assembly, including, but not limited to,
schools, auditorium, schools and churches or other places of formal worship;



      (27)   Shopping centers;



      (28)   Pole barns or metal-sided buildings. New principal
uses/structures of this type shall not be approved in any MR-2, O-1, B-1 or
B-2 District; a development plan shall be required for any new pole
barn/metal sided building proposed for any lawful industrial use;



      (29)   Kennels having outdoor runs or containment areas;



      (30)   Veterinary clinics subject to the following additional
requirements:



         (a)   Proper waste disposal with no detectible odors
beyond the property line;



         (b)   No outdoor dog runs or play areas,



         (c)   No indoor or outdoor boarding of animals, except
for indoor boarding directly related to medical treatment;



         (d)   Verification is provided to the city that the
building design or construction will prevent noise from animals being audible
from adjacent properties or tenants; and



      (31)   Funeral or mortuary service establishments, including
accessory crematories, provided that all accessory crematories shall be
permitted only by planned use, subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   Crematories shall be permitted only as an
accessory use to an existing funeral or mortuary services use subject to
securing and maintaining all required IEPA permits, licenses and
certifications and compliance with other applicable city requirements.



         (b)   Crematories shall not emit any noticeable odor or
particulates.



         (c)   Crematories shall have emission stacks covered or
shrouded with materials safe for such uses and that are compatible in design
and architecture with the existing funeral home and the building housing the
crematory. The crematory facility and emission stack shall be compatible with
surrounding properties, including residential properties.



         (d)   Decorative vinyl fencing or other site-proof
fencing or landscaping approved by the city on a site plan and located
between the crematory and adjacent residential properties shall be provided.



      (32)   Video gaming licensed establishment, subject to the
additional requirement that all video gaming licensed establishments must
comply with all state, municipal and any other requirements of a video gaming
licensed establishment.



      (33)   Cluster/conservation development in the RR, SR-1,
SR1-B, SR-2. and SR-3 residential zoning districts, as defined in § 158.016.



      (34)   Modular building structures as a permitted principal
structure in the SR-3 zoning district.



   (C)   For purposes of this division (C), resumption of a
previously-abandoned use shall be deemed a “new” use, except where the
resumed use seeks only to reoccupy an existing building for a restaurant,
place of public assembly or child care facility; and, provided that, no use
or building expansion occurs and no intervening use occurred between the
abandonment and resumption and the Director certifies that the new use meets
the intent of this code including, but not limited to, the intent of this
division (C) that no resumed use cause a greater impact or intensity than the
prior use in light of the current circumstances.



   (D)   Unlisted uses. The table of uses contained in this chapter and
the specific uses or circumstances set forth in this subchapter for planned
uses do not necessarily reflect all of the regulations that may apply to
particular uses or districts. However, any use not listed herein nor shown in
the table of uses as a special use, planned use or a use permitted by right
in the applicable zoning district or authorized as an accessory use, shall be
prohibited unless the City Council, after review by the Planning Commission,
determines that the proposed use is sufficiently similar to a use expressly
authorized in the applicable district and is not otherwise prohibited or
intended to be prohibited by this chapter or other applicable regulations and
such determination is approved by the City Council. Except as provided in
this division (D), uses not listed and expressly authorized have been
determined either not to be appropriate in any district, incompatible with
certain existing uses, or sufficiently rare or unexpected as to be incapable
of being listed at the time of adoption of this chapter. Any use not
delineated in this chapter as a use permitted by right, a special use or a
planned use in any zoning district, but which nevertheless constitutes a use
that is required by law to be permitted within the city, shall be authorized
only in the Industrial District subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The use shall be permitted only to the extent required
by law to be permitted;



      (2)   The use shall be approved only as a planned use, except
if, by law, it is required to be permitted by right;



      (3)   The use shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from
any residence, residential property, park, school or church, except as may be
modified by the City Council through a planned use procedure;



      (4)   The use shall maintain a distance of at least 1,000 feet
from any other such use; and



      (5)   No use shall occupy a structure in excess of 5,000
square feet without an approved alternate parking plan designed for that use
and supported by a traffic study submitted to and approved by the City
Council.



   (E)   Planned Use Exemption: Regency Park and Central Park
Commercial area. For property zoned B-1 or B-1(p) having frontage along the
Regency Park Drive, Central Park Drive, Central Park Circle or Park Plaza
Drive, the following use(s) shall not be subject to planned use requirement,
and may be approved administratively by Site Plan, unless a planned use is
required by other aspects of the use:



      (1)   Restaurants, including liquor sales and consumption on
premise, not having a drive through;



Any exempt use shall conform with the Commercial Design Handbook and all
other code requirements to qualify for the exemption. Where the Director
reasonably believes a use exempted under this provision is not fully
compliant with all applicable requirements and standards or creates a risk to
safety or property, the Director may require the use to be submitted as a
planned use notwithstanding this exemption. Otherwise, where the Director
determines that the Site Plan is also fully compliant, the Site Plan shall be
submitted to the City Council for administrative approval, denial or
condition by resolution or motion. Additional information as may be required
by the Director including, but not limited to, traffic impact study, access
management plan, geologic hazard study, environmental impact report, historic
inventory study and data which estimates and document how the project will
affect population, employment, schools, parks streets, utilities, public
safety and other city services.



(Ord. 3471, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 3483, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 3583, passed
7-21-2008; Ord. 3643, passed 11-2-2009; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
3832, passed 6-2-2014; Ord. 3941, passed 7-5-2016; Ord. 3997, passed
7-17-2017)



§ 158.117  PLANNED USES; GENERAL PROCEDURE.



   An applicant for a planned use shall submit an application satisfying
the requirements for a change in zoning district regulations and satisfying
the requirements of § 158.118 of this chapter. The planned use application
and preliminary site plan shall be subject to hearing, notice and review by
the Planning Commission and approval by ordinance by the City Council as
provided for in §§ 158.240 through 158.243, 158.255 through 158.257 and
158.270 through 158.282 of this chapter for rezoning applications. A final
site plan approval is required prior to commencement of the planned use or
construction.



(Ord. 3471, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 158.118  APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Preliminary site plan. A preliminary and final site plan shall
be required for any use or circumstance identified in § 158.116 of this
chapter. The preliminary site plan shall satisfy all requirements of §§
158.050 through 158.060 of this chapter and shall be submitted with the
zoning application.



   (B)   Exterior building sketches. The application shall include
preliminary sketches depicting the general style, size and exterior
construction materials of the buildings proposed. Where several building
types are proposed on the plan, such as apartments and commercial buildings,
a separate sketch shall be prepared for each type. Such sketches shall
include elevation drawings, but detailed drawings and perspectives are not
required.



   (C)   Statement of need for modification from district regulations.
A narrative statement that explains the need for modification of the
applicable zoning district regulations, if requested, shall be submitted in
support of the application for the preliminary site plan approval. The
statement shall specifically address the precise modification requested, what
compensating factors support the modification and how the criteria for
approval herein are satisfied. Any site features or improvements intended to
justify a modification in the underlying district regulations shall be
clearly identified on the site plan.



(Ord. 3471, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 158.119  CONSIDERATION OF A PLANNED USE.



   (A)   Procedure. Except as established by this section, the
procedures and requirements for filing, review and approval of a planned use
and a preliminary site plan shall be as specified in §§ 158.240 through
158.243, 158.255 through 158.257 and 158.270 through 158.282 of this chapter
for approval or review of amendments to a zoning district classification or
boundary, and additionally all such other requirements as provided in §§
158.050 through 158.060 of this chapter for application and review of 
preliminary site plans.



   (B)   Criteria for approval.



      (1)   The Planning Director and City Council shall use the
applicable zoning district regulations and this subchapter as criteria for
review of the proposed planned use and preliminary site plan. The City
Council may permit modification from the underlying district regulations, but
except as so expressly modified, the underlying district regulations shall
continue to apply to any approved planned use. Use regulations, however,
shall not be modified so as to allow uses not otherwise permitted by this
chapter in the underlying zoning district governing the property, or
underlying regulations of the applicant’s proposed rezoning. If the City
Council imposes conditions or restrictions on a preliminary site plan, it may
designate specific requirements that must be met before an applicant may
submit a final site plan application.



      (2)   In considering any planned development and preliminary
site plan application, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall
give consideration to the additional criteria stated below, to the extent
they are pertinent to the particular application:



         (a)   The criteria governing the rezoning of the
property and approval of site plans, as set forth in the standards and
requirements found elsewhere in the zoning code or in other applicable law;



         (b)   The physical design of the proposed plan and the
manner in which said design makes adequate provisions for public services,
provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects
designated common open space and park dedication, and furthers the amenities
of light, air, recreation and visual enjoyment;



         (c)   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed
plan to adjacent properties and the surrounding neighborhood;



         (d)   The conformity with the standards and principles
of the Comprehensive Plan and all other adopted regulations, including the
Commercial Design Handbook, dated 7-6-2009, and on file with the City Clerk;



         (e)   The use(s) are designed, located and proposed to
be operated so that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;



         (f)   An identified community need exists for the
proposed use;



         (g)   The proposed use(s) will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property, nor impair
the use, enjoyment or value of neighboring properties;



         (h)   The degree of harmony between the architectural
quality of the proposed building and the surrounding neighborhood; and



         (i)   The appropriateness of the minimum dimensions and
areas of lots and yards set forth in the applicable zoning district
regulations.



   (C)   Planned use approval; conditions. A planned use shall be
approved only by ordinance pursuant to the procedures for rezoning set forth
in §§ 158.240 through 158.243, 158.255 through 158.257 and 158.270 through
158.282 of this chapter, setting for the specific the requirements of the
approval. The approving ordinance shall approve a preliminary site plan,
subject to any changes or conditions required by the City Council and may
specifically set forth the specific uses, authorized density and/or building
coverages, design requirements, public improvements and other conditions or
requirements of the approved preliminary development plan. Consistent with
the purposes of this subchapter, the city may approve a preliminary
development plan subject to conditions as may be necessary to address any
impacts of the development on the public, achieve the purposes of this
subchapter or as necessary to warrant a requested modification of the
underlying zoning district regulations. Such conditions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The type and extent of improvements and landscaping;



      (2)   The methods or types of development practices,
improvements and common ground required;



      (3)   Maximum bulk of dwelling unit in relationship to lot
size or dimension;



      (4)   Dedication of land, improvements or payment of fees for
public open space, civic space, road improvements, schools or for other
infrastructure or public facilities impacted by the development;



      (5)   Required provisions for funding of maintenance
agreements or trust indentures, including requiring the establishment of an
agency for the ownership and maintenance of any common open space, financial
guaranty and/or limitation on the sale or use of any common open space;



      (6)   Architectural materials or design guidelines as
described in the Commercial Design Handbook, dated 7-6-2009 and on file with
the City Clerk;



      (7)   Regulation of permissible uses, mix of uses, hours of
operation or other use restrictions; and



      (8)   Regulation of the duration of approvals, uses, site
characteristics or non-conformities.



   (D)   Change of underlying zoning. A planned use application may be
submitted with an application to change the zoning district category. Any
site plan approved for a planned  use, concurrent with such application,
shall become part of the ordinance that amends the zoning district category
of the property.



   (E)   Modification of zoning map. Any approved planned use and
preliminary site plan shall be reflected on the zoning map as an amendment of
the District by designation of “(P)” after the district abbreviation of
the district in which the plan was approved.



   (F)   Duration of validity. The approval may specify the duration of
a planned use's validity, but in no event shall an approved preliminary site
plan be valid for a period longer than two years from the date of such
approval. The City Council may grant no more than three extensions not
exceeding 12 months each upon written request. The approval of a revised
preliminary site plan shall not automatically extend the time period during
which the planned use is valid. In instances where there is another binding
agreement between the city and the development with a longer duration of
validity, the provisions of this section will not apply.



(Ord. 3471, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 3665, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 3857, passed
1-20-2015)



§ 158.120  FINAL SITE PLANS; APPROVAL, MODIFICATION, EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Approval required. Approval of a final site plan is required
any time a preliminary site plan is required. No building permit shall be
issued for any structure on the property until a final site plan is approved.
Approval of a final site plan shall be made by the Director in writing to the
applicant upon submission and acceptance of all required materials and
information from the applicant.



   (B)   Sections 158.050 through 158.060 of this chapter applicable.
All requirements for final site plans set forth in §§ 158.050 through
158.060 of this chapter, including changes and modifications, shall apply to
a final site plan for a planned use.



   (C)   Final site plan expiration. Final site plan approval shall,
unless a shorter time is specified, be valid for a period of 12 months from
the date of such approval, unless within such period a building permit is
obtained and substantial construction is commenced and all additional
building permits necessary to complete the project as approved in the final
site plan schedule are obtained in a timely fashion, as determined by the
Building Official.



(Ord. 3471, passed 8-21-2006)



§ 158.121  PLANNED USE; AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION OR CONVENIENCE STORE.



   An automotive service station or convenience store shall require a
final site plan and shall be subject to the following conditions and
restrictions.



   (A)   Fuel tanks. All tanks shall be below the surface of the
ground, except propane tanks, which shall be subject to approval by the Fire
Department.



   (B)   Fuel pumps. Fuel pumps shall be set back 20 feet from the
right-of-way line and 200 feet from a residential dwelling. The design,
location, covering, colors and screening of the gas pumps shall be compatible
with the design of the structures.



   (C)   Vehicle rentals and leasing. Leasing or renting of vehicles or
trailers shall not occur unless specifically approved as part of the
development plan.



   (D)   Traffic. The development shall be located with at least one
direct access to an arterial street, or on a collector street with at least
one access drive within 500 feet of an arterial street. A traffic study shall
be required for all automotive service stations or convenience stores. The
person preparing the report must be a certified engineer qualified to do
traffic analyses in the state. The cost of the study shall be borne by the
applicant. The traffic study shall address potential external and internal
traffic circulation concerns, and the development plan shall not be approved
unless all traffic concerns are adequately addressed to promote safety and
reasonable traffic flow.



   (E)   Residential screening. If the applicant intends to remain open
for business past 10:00 p.m., the city may require a buffer if vehicle
headlights from any vehicles entering, parking, standing or exiting would
shine onto residentially zoned property. If the site cannot be screened from
residentially zoned property such that vehicle headlights will not shine onto
residentially zoned property, or if the development would otherwise create a
nuisance for neighboring properties, the hours of operation may be restricted
to preclude operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or any
portion thereof as determined by the Commission and/or governing body.



   (F)   Use authorization. Applicant shall indicate whether the
business will sell alcoholic beverages, maintain video games for use by
customers, sell prepared food for consumption on the premises or off the
premises, provide car washing services, perform mechanical repairs on motor
vehicles, provide an automatic teller machine or sell grocery type items. The
development plan shall specify whether or not the business shall be
authorized to perform any or all of these functions. In evaluating the
development plan application, the impact of any of the foregoing uses on the
surrounding area may be considered.



   (G)   Screening. All rooftop or ground-level mechanical equipment,
trash and refuse collection areas, loading areas and outdoor public restrooms
shall be screened from public view with materials and with such design as
shall be approved by the city.



   (H)   Outside sales. The outside sale of merchandise shall be
prohibited.



   (I)   Additional standards. The development shall also be subject to
such other applicable standards and requirements as may be found elsewhere in
the zoning code or other applicable law.



(Ord. 3471, passed 8-21-2006)  Penalty, see § 158.999




ARTICLE 7:
PARKING AND LOADING




§ 158.135  VEHICLE PARKING; WHEN REQUIRED.



   (A)   At the time of the establishment of any new use, changed use
increasing parking requirements, erection of any building, site plan approval
or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by
adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, there shall be
provided permanent vehicle parking spaces improved with an asphalt or
concrete surface in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   The parking spaces may be provided both in an off-street
parking lot and as parallel or other approved parking along streets that are
internal to a development. Parking in the public right-of-way, if available,
shall not count toward satisfying the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.136  REQUIREMENTS; HOW CALCULATED.



   (A)   Required parking spaces.



      (1)   Parking requirement calculations shall be based on gross
square footage of each land use type, unless otherwise specified. Except as
may be established by an approved alternate parking plan, approved pursuant
to § 158.138 of this chapter, parking spaces shall be provided in not less
than the number of spaces (rounded up to the next whole number) necessary to
address the applicable use as set forth on the table entitled, “Minimum
Parking Guidelines, By Use”. Developments containing two or more of the
uses listed on the table shall provide the combined number of spaces required
for each use, except as may be reduced under § 158.138(C) of this chapter.



      (2)   Required additional off-street parking spaces for
enlarged or expanded uses or buildings shall be calculated based only the
increased use or building, provided that in all cases the number of
off-street parking spaces provided for the entire use (preexisting, plus
expansion) must equal at least 75% of the minimum ratio established in the
table entitled, “Minimum Parking Guidelines, By Use”. In cases of
expansion to parking areas, gravel lots anywhere on the site shall be
upgraded to an asphalt or concrete surface.



   (B)   Calculation of required spaces. For purposes of calculations
set forth in the table, the following terms and methods shall govern.



      (1)   Gross leasable area (“GLA”) shall be determined by
the total area in square feet (“SF”) of all floors intended for occupancy
and the exclusive use of tenants, specifically excluding public or common



areas such as utility rooms, stairwells, enclosed malls and interior
hallways; gross floor area (“GFA”) is determined by the total area in
square feet of all floors, measured between the exterior walls of a building.



      (2)   Parking requirements based on employees or capacity
calculations shall be based on the largest number of persons working on any
single shift or the maximum fire-rated ICC occupant load, whichever is
applicable and results in the greater number of spaces.



      (3)   Parking requirements for churches, theaters or other
similar assembly uses shall be based on a ratio of one parking space required
for each two and one-half seats permanently and/or temporarily placed for the
largest aggregate assembly or assemblies on-site. If seating is horizontal,
as with a pew, one seat is measured as 30 horizontal inches.



      (4)   The required number of stacking spaces for drive-thru
establishments shall include the automobile already located at the window,
teller, bay or other applicable drive-thru structure.



 


Table: Minimum Parking Requirements, By Use



Use
 

Number of Parking Spaces

 
Required for Each




RESIDENTIAL



   Group quarters: fraternity and sorority houses, dormitories and the like

 

1

 
Room to be rented, plus 1 per 2 employees



   Multi-family residence

 

2

 
Dwelling unit



   Retirement facility

 

1

 
Bed



   Single-family residence, attached and detached; includes mobile and
modular homes

 

2

 
Dwelling unit



   Two-family residence

 

2

 
Dwelling unit


COMMERCIAL



   Automobile, truck, recreation vehicle, manufactured home or utility
structure sales

 

3

 
1,000 SF of indoor sales area, plus



1

 
2,500 SF of outdoor display, plus



3

 
Service bay



   Banks

 

4

 
1,000 GFA, plus 4 stacking spaces for each bank teller drive thru window or
ATM machine



   Bowling center

 

4.5

 
Lane



   Building supplies, brick or lumber yard

 

2

 
1,000 SF of indoor sales area, plus



1

 
2,500 SF of outdoor display



   Day care center

 

1

 
400 GFA, or



2

 
Per each employee, or



1

 
For each 6 children, whichever is greater





 
* Additional requirement - a day care requires an unobstructed pick up area
to include either a minimum of 2 dedicated spaces, a pull off lane or other
dedicated pick-up area, in addition to a safe pedestrian walkway



   Funeral home

 

35

 
Per viewing room, or



1

 
For 4 seats, whichever is greater



   Furniture or carpet store

 

3

 
1,000 GFA of showroom space, plus



2

 
For each 3 employees



   Hotel or motel:

 



 




      Convention hotel or a motel with a restaurant or lounge

 

1.5

 
Room, plus



2

 
For 3 employees



      Non-convention hotel or a motel with no restaurant or lounge

 

1

 
Room, plus



2

 
For 3 employees



   Mini-warehouse

 

4

 
1,000 SF of office space,



1

 
5 storage units in an interior space



   Offices:

 



 




      General and professional offices, insurance and real estate
offices

 

4

 
1,000 GFA



      Medical and dental

 

4.5

 
1,000 GFA, or 4 per doctor, plus 1 per each additional employee, whichever is
greater



   Restaurant, custom service

 

9

 
1,000 GFA



   Restaurant, fast food

 

9

 
1,000 GFA, or



1

 
For each 2 seat plus 2 for every 3 employees, whichever is greater, plus



8

 
Stacking spaces for each drive-through lane



   Retail sales area or service establishments not listed elsewhere

 

4

 
1,000 GFA, plus



3

 
Stacking spaces minimum, for any retail or service use with a drive-up
facility



   Retail, general

 

4

 
1,000 GFA



   Service station, gas station, auto repair shop or garage, convenience
store or car wash

 

3

 
Service bay, plus



1

 
Fueling position, plus



4

 
1,000 GFA of retail space, plus



5

 
Stacking spaces per automatic car wash bay, plus



4

 
Stacking spaces per self-service car wash bay



   Supermarket

 

4

 
1,000 GFA



   Tavern/bar/nightclub

 

10

 
1,000 GFA, or



1

 
3-person capacity based on ICC occupant load, whatever combination is
greatest, plus



2

 
Each 3 employees, whichever is greater


INDUSTRIAL - INCLUDING STORAGE, WHOLESALE AND MANUFACTURING



   Open storage of sand, gravel, petroleum and the like

 

1

 
2,500 SF of outdoor sales area, or



1

 
per 3 employees



   Wholesale warehouse, office-warehouse, manufacturing warehouse,
transfer and storage

 

2.5

 
1,000 SF of office space, plus



1

 
per each employee


INSTITUTIONAL AND OTHER



   Auditoriums, churches, theaters, stadiums and other places of assembly

 

1

 
2.5 seats, or



1

 
3-person capacity based on ICC occupant load, whatever combination is greatest





 
Note: see § 158.136(B)(3)



   Civic clubs, cultural facilities, fraternal lodges and the like

 

5

 
1,000 GFA, or



1

 
Per 3 person capacity based on ICC occupant load, whatever combination is
greatest



   College (instructional space)

 

10

 
Classroom



   Elementary and junior high schools

 

2

 
Per classroom, or 1 per employee, or



1

 
Per 2 seats in the gym, individually or as measured on horizontal benches at
30", whichever is greater



   Hospital

 

2

 
Bed, plus 1 for each doctor and employee



   Senior high schools

 

6

 
Per classroom, plus



1

 
Per employee



   Technical college, trade school

 

10

 
Per classroom


RECREATION/ENTERTAINMENT



   Amusement parlor, recreational attraction, roller skating or ice
skating rink

 

10

 
1,000 GFA



   Entertainment event, major

 

1

 
3-person capacity based on ICC occupant load



   Golf course or country club

 

2

 
Hole, plus



1

 
2 employees



   Golf driving range

 

2

 
Tee



   Golf, miniature

 

2

 
Hole



   Health club or fitness center

 

4.5

 
1,000 GFA



   Movie theater

 

1

 
2.5 seats




 



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.137  UNLISTED USES.



   Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically
listed in the off-street parking table organized by use, the Director shall
apply the off-street parking standard specified for the listed use that is
deemed most similar to the proposed use unless an alternate parking plan is
approved.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.138  ALTERNATE PARKING PLAN.



   (A)   General. The parking requirements established in this
subchapter may be modified by the City Council pursuant to an alternate
parking plan, which shall include a detailed site plan satisfying the minimum
requirements of §§ 158.050 through 158.060 of this chapter, and reflecting
the parking areas, parking space dimensions, driving aisles, access ways and
associated landscaping. An alternate parking plan may be approved only upon
evidence supported by a parking study that the circumstances justify
modification, satisfy the objectives of this subchapter, and are in the
public interest.  A parking study must include estimates of parking demand
based on recommendations of an IC registered P.E. experienced in parking
studies provided by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE),  or
other acceptable estimates as approved by the Director and should include
other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the
same as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined
by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location. The study must
document the source of data used to develop the recommendations An alternate
parking plan may be subject to any appropriate conditions determined by the
City Council to be necessary to fully mitigate the impact of any modification.



   (B)   Off-street parking reductions for large developments. In order
to prevent the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces than
actually needed to meet the particular needs of large developments of over
150,000 square feet of gross floor area, a reduction in the number of
required off-street parking spaces may be permitted by the Director.
Reduction shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Maximum reduction. A maximum reduction of one parking
space per every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 20% of the total
spaces required (whichever is the lesser reduction) may be permitted. The
site plan shall indicate the location and dimensions of the parking area
provided.



      (2)   Reservation. Sufficient area shall be reserved to
accommodate the total number of off-street parking spaces otherwise required
by this section. The purpose of this reservation is to ensure adequate area
is available to meet any future need for additional parking spaces. The
reserved area shall be located on the same site and noted on the site plan.
The reserved parking area shall not include areas for required landscaping,
setbacks or areas that would otherwise be unusable for parking due to the
physical characteristics of the land or the requirements of this subchapter.
Any uses being requesting and approved for a parking reserve shall have an
annual occupancy inspection performed to determine continued compliance with
this section.



      (3)   Installation of additional spaces. The Director shall be
authorized to require that the developer install additional parking spaces,
up to the total number otherwise required by this section, if the Director
determines that at their sole cost additional parking spaces set aside in the
reserve area are necessary to satisfy the off-street parking needs of the use
at any time in the future.



   (C)   Guidelines; shared parking. Required parking spaces shall be
provided for and assigned to each use, except for “shared parking”, which
may be approved subject to each of the following requirements:



      (1)   Parking spaces that are proposed for shared parking
among two or more uses must be clearly available to each use and not appear
in any way to be serving a particular use, either through signage dedicating
the spaces or through design techniques that would tend to orient use of the
spaces to a particular business or building;



      (2)   Sites used for shared parking shall be in common
ownership with the uses or consist of not more than two contiguous parcel
within or adjacent to such uses and subject to a shared access and a written
joint-maintenance agreement binding and benefitting each proposed use, as
approved by the Director. The approved agreement shall be recorded and a copy
supplied to the Director. Any uses requesting and approved for a parking
reserve shall have an annual occupancy inspection performed to determine
continued compliance with this section;



      (3)   All shared parking spaces on the site(s) shall comply
with the minimum requirements for dimensions required in this subchapter; and



      (4)   The application of shared parking shall not reduce the
total parking spaces provided to the combined uses to less than 50% of what
would have been required for the combined uses without application of shared
parking.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.139  GUIDELINES; DOWNTOWN DISTRICT PARKING.



   (A)   “Downtown District” defined. For purposes of this section,
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT shall mean the “Downtown District” zoning
classification as established in this code, or such other districts as
established for use or authorized in the Downtown Planning Sub-Area of the
City Comprehensive Plan.



   (B)   Residential uses. No on-site vehicle parking shall be required
for existing or re-developed second story dwelling units located within
existing buildings in the Downtown District. For construction of a new
building with more than two dwelling units, parking shall be provided on-site
for the property at the rate of one and one-quarter spaces per dwelling unit
(rounded up to the nearest whole number of spaces).



   (C)   Non-residential uses.



      (1)   Vehicle parking.



         (a)   In the Downtown District, the vehicle parking
space number requirements of this subchapter for non-residential uses shall
apply only to the net increase in floor area or use intensity created by new
construction or building expansion. For any increase in parking required
through new construction or expansion of existing non-residential buildings,
the applicant must submit a parking study per this code to determine the
number of parking spaces to be required on-site.



         (b)   Any existing vehicle parking spaces that are
eliminated by new construction or expansion must be replaced by that business
or use, unless such spaces are in excess of the total requirements for that
business or use being served, and are in the same ownership.



      (2)   Loading. In the Downtown District, uses that prefer to
provide loading from the street may have the option of applying for a permit
for a curb loading zone as provided for by the city.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.140  DEDICATION TO PARKING USE.



   (A)   Parking spaces provided to meet the minimum requirements of
this subchapter, along with the aisles and driveways necessary to provide
access to those spaces, shall not be used for any other purpose than the
temporary vehicle parking unless a special event permit is obtained pursuant
to this code which specifically provides that parking spaces may be used or
occupied by the temporary event.



   (B)   Specifically, no such parking area may be used for the sale of
vehicles or for the sale, display or storage of equipment, goods, materials
or supplies without a special event permit.



   (C)   No repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles is
permitted unless authorized as part of the permitted use of the property.



   (D)   Unless otherwise approved by zoning or permit, parking areas
shall not be used for overnight parking of trucks, recreational vehicles or
occupied vehicles.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.141  PROXIMITY OF VEHICLE PARKING SPACES TO USE.



   (A)   Parking spaces shall be located on the same property
containing the use for which they are required unless specifically authorized
by variance of the City Council.



   (B)   In the event a parking variance is received the following
shall in all cases apply.



      (1)   The parking must be provided on a property with the same
zoning classification as the property that the spaces serve, or a less
restrictive zoning classification.



      (2)   No required parking spaces may be located across any
state or U.S. highway from the use they are intended to serve.



      (3)   Off-property variances may be granted up to 200 feet
away in RR, SR, MR, MH or B-1 or B-2 Districts or within 500 feet in
Agricultural or Industrial Districts.



   (C)   Existing buildings in the Downtown Business District may
satisfy their parking space number requirement if their front door is within
500 feet of a municipal parking lot.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 158.142  REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN OF PARKING LOTS.



   The provisions of this section apply to all vehicle parking spaces and
parking areas, whether the parking meets or exceeds the number of spaces
established in this subchapter to serve a particular use or the parking lot
is operated as a principal use on a property and not dedicated to serving a
particular use.



   (A)   Orientation to street. Except for parcels of land devoted to
one-family, two-family or townhouse residential uses, all areas devoted to
vehicle parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is
required to back into a public street to obtain access.



   (B)   Vehicle parking spaces.



      (1)   No parking spaces shall be accessible from an access
driveway within the first 20 feet of the driveway back from the street
right-of-way line.



      (2)   (a)   Every parking space shall provide a useable
rectangular area at least ten feet wide by 19 feet long.



         (b)   Access aisles shall not encroach into this minimum
rectangular area.



         (c)   Every parking space shall be clearly demarcated by
lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface.



         (d)   Full parking modules shall be 62' in width
(19'+24'+19'=62').



   (C)   Access and circulation.



      (1)   Access aisles in parking lots and other parking space
dimensions shall conform to the table in this division (C).



      (2)   Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be by means of
paved driveways from the adjoining street. The minimum width of driveways for
ingress and egress shall be the same as those specified above for aisles.
Driveway width, for the purpose of this section, shall include only the
pavement and not the curbs and gutters.



      (3)   The distance of a parking area entrance drive from the
intersection of two streets, and the distance between curb cuts, shall be
based on the street design standards set forth in a policy memorandum on file
with the Director. All measurements shall be taken along the right-of-way
lines.



 

Table: Parking Table


Parking Angle (A)
 
Stall Width

(B)
 
Stall to Curb (C)
 
Aisle Width* (D)
 
Curb Length (E)
 
Curb to Curb (F)
 
Center to Center (G)


60 degrees
 
10.0'
 
20.8'
 
16.0'
 
11.2'
 
57.6'
 
53.3'


75 degrees
 
10.0'
 
21.0'
 
20.0'
 
10.4'
 
62.0'
 
59.2'


90 degrees
 
10.0'
 
19.0'
 
24.0'
 
10.0'
 
62.0'
 
-----



 







 



   (D)   Lighting of parking areas. Any lights used to illuminate the
parking area shall be arranged, located or screened to direct light away from
any adjoining residential use so as to not cause glare or excessive light
spillover. Lighting in parking areas shall meet the minimum requirements of
§ 158.143.



   (E)   Improvement of parking areas.



      (1)   Surfacing and curbing.



         (a)   All vehicle parking areas and all access drives
shall be improved with a permanent dust-free surface consisting of a minimum
of a six-inch rolled stone base overlaid with a two or more inch asphalt
surface, or a four-inch asphalt base overlaid with a two-inch asphalt
surface. Concrete parking areas and driving aisles shall be a minimum of six
inches in thickness.



         (b)   In the Industrial Zoning Districts, the following
alternative surface will be allowed in areas limited to vehicle, material and
equipment storage areas, except areas specifically used for loading and
unloading: a six-inch rolled stone base, sealed with a bituminous seal. The
sealer is to be covered with a dust-free chipped rock surface of sufficient
depth to prevent pick-up of the sealer coat by vehicle tires, at least
three-eighths inches thick.



         (c)   All vehicle parking areas and all access drives in
office, commercial and industrial zoning districts shall have a boundary
constructed of vertical concrete curbing (Type CG-1) or an integral concrete
sidewalk and curb with a vertical face.



      (2)   Maintenance. Vehicle parking areas shall be maintained
in proper repair with a dust-free surface.



      (3)   Drainage facilities. For any use that will require a
parking area to be newly constructed, added to, or altered so as to affect
drainage either on or off the site, as determined by the Director, storm
water drainage plans, including grading plans, shall be submitted to and
approved by the Director, prior to the issuance of a building permit or
certificate of occupancy. Appropriate detention/retention may be required in
accordance with the land development and storm water drainage requirements of
the city.



      (4)   Permit required. No person shall initiate construction
of a new parking lot or expansion of an existing parking lot, without first
obtaining a permit from the Director. Application for a permit shall be made
upon the form provided and shall be accompanied by such information, plans
and specifications as may be required. A permit shall not be required for
resurfacing an existing parking area unless major reconstruction of the
surface and base are required which may indicate subsurface deficiencies
needing to be addressed by upgraded design standards; and a permit shall not
be required for construction or alteration of customary driveways for
single-family and two-family residential dwellings unless construction shall
occur in the public right-of-way and cause the sidewalk and/or curb to be
modified.



      (5)   Time limit. All required vehicle parking areas shall be
ready for use, including the above surfacing requirement, before the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy (in the case of a new building or addition).
Relief from the time limitations of this division (E)(5) may be granted by
the Director due only to adverse weather conditions. In the event such relief
is granted, a letter of credit or performance bond shall be required to be
posted in accordance with the requirements of the city.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.143  LIGHTING.



   (A)   Illumination levels shall be measured with a photoelectric
photometer having a spectral response similar to that of the human eye,
following the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve adopted by the
International Commission on Illumination.



   (B)   All outdoor lighting shall comply with the following standards.



      (1)   All illumination structures, except for approved street
lights, shall be shaded, shielded or directed to prevent direct light from
being cast upon any adjacent property or public right-of-way and to prevent
glare or other objectionable problems to surrounding areas.



      (2)   No light fixture shall have any blinking, flashing or
fluttering lights or other illuminating device which has a changing light
intensity, brightness or color, nor shall any beacon or spot lights be
permitted.



      (3)   Neither the direct, nor reflected light from any light
fixture shall create a disabling glare causing traffic hazards to motor
vehicle operators on public roadways.



      (4)   Any non-residential off-street parking or loading area
in use at night shall contain a system of lighting to provide an adequate
standard of at least one foot-candle of illumination over the area of the
parking area to be used.



      (5)   Lighting shall be designed so as not to create more than
one foot-candle of illumination at any residentially zoned property boundary,
or more than five foot-candles at any commercially zoned property boundary.



      (6)   Light fixtures used to illuminate objects mounted on a
pole, platform or pedestal shall not use a spotlight that will extend beyond
the illuminated object. Uplighting of these structures shall cease after
11:00 p.m., except for uplighting of the American flag, or unless otherwise
regulated.



      (7)   All parking area lighting shall be located within a
landscaped area or island.



      (8)   (a)   All exposed portion of pedestals or platforms
on which parking lighting may be mounted shall be designed with an approved
decorative material or finish so as to eliminate exposed concrete finish
appearance. All other outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed prior to and
operable on the effective date of this chapter are exempt from all
requirements unless:



            1.   Existing outdoor lighting fixtures are
replaced, removed or reinstalled; or



            2.   Existing outdoor lighting systems are judged
to be a nuisance due to excessive, objectionable light emission as assessed
by the Director; or if the emissions cause unsafe or hazardous conditions.
Upon notice by the Director, the owner of such lighting system will have 30
days to comply with the provisions as set forth in this section. A 30-day
extension may be granted by the Director.



         (b)   The Director may require a special inspection to
ascertain compliance with this ordinance.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.144  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.



   Parking lot landscaping shall be provided within any parking lot
designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more, in accordance with the
following.



   (A)   Type of tree and method of installation shall be consistent
with the requirements of §§ 155.070 through 155.076 of this code.



   (B)   All planting areas within a parking lot or vehicular use area
shall be curbed with a minimum six-inch high rolled or vertical concrete
curbs.



   (C)   Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well
drained and contain suitable soil and irrigation characteristics for the
planting materials they contain; in ground irrigation systems may be required
as determined by the City Council.



   (D)   Landscape islands.



      (1)   Single island. There shall be an island with a minimum
landscape width of seven feet and a minimum area of 120 square feet, placed
at the ends of a single row of parking, each containing at least one
deciduous tree. The island shall contain a minimum of one deciduous tree and
one shrub and include grass, or ground cover, except for those areas that are
mulched.



      (2)   Double island. There shall be a double island of 240
square feet placed at the ends of double row of parking. Two deciduous trees
and two shrubs are required per double landscape island.



      (3)   Parking rows. Parking rows shall be interrupted by an
intermediary landscaped island every 20 contiguous, side by side spaces, with
the island meeting the minimum landscape width, area, and tree count as
identified in divisions (D)(1) and (2) above.



      (4)   Median. For every five parking modules (62-foot minimum
per module) included in a site, a seven- foot wide landscaped median shall be
required, for the length of a centrally located row to visually break up and
segment expansive parking lots. A deciduous tree shall be planted at
intervals of 50 feet.



   (E)   All parking lots containing more than five parking spaces
shall be screened from public streets and sidewalks, public open spaces and
adjacent properties by complying with one of the following perimeter
landscaping options or an alternative compliance plan which has been approved
pursuant to § 158.188 of this chapter:



      (1)   The outside perimeter of all parking areas and drive
aisles shall include a landscaped area seven feet in width. One tree selected
from the city’s list of acceptable street trees or as otherwise approved by
the city, shall be planted every 50 feet on center within the landscape
perimeter. When a parking lot tree planting strip abuts a public right-of-way
containing an existing or proposed street tree planting area, the city may
grant an exception on a case by case basis if it is determined that a
duplication may occur; or



      (2)   A minimum five-foot wide perimeter-landscaped area with
ornamental fencing, masonry wall or opaque hedge and an approved street tree
planted every 50 feet. A two-foot car overhang area shall be provided in any
planting area adjacent to parking stalls.



   (F)   All landscape areas required by this chapter are to be
maintained in good condition in a manner consistent with the plan approved
for the site.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3489, passed 11-20-2006)



§ 158.145  HANDICAP ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   The below requirements pertain only to the dimensions, slope
and number of handicap accessible parking spaces. They are for reference
only. All handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the most
current Illinois Accessibility Code.



   (B)   Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be 16 feet wide,
consisting of an eight-foot wide space adjacent to an eight-foot wide aisle.
Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated by diagonal
lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface.







 



   (C)   Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be located on a
surface with a slope not exceeding one foot vertical in 50 feet horizontal,
or 2%.



   (D)   Handicap accessible spaces shall be provided in each parking
lot in the following ratio to the total number of spaces required for the use:



 

Table: Handicap Accessible Spaces Required (From Illinois Accessibility Code)


Spaces Required for Use
 
Minimum Number of Handicapped Spaces




1 to 25
 
1


26 to 50
 
2


51 to 75
 
3


76 to 100
 
4


101 to 150
 
5


151 to 200
 
6


201 to 300
 
7


301 to 400
 
8


401 to 500
 
9


501 to 1,000
 
2% of total


1,001 and over
 
20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000




 



   (E)   Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be counted as part of
the total number of parking spaces required by this subchapter.



   (F)   All handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of
the most current version of the State Accessibility Code.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.146  LOADING.



   Any business or industrial building, hospital, institution or hotel
hereafter constructed, reconstructed or expanded, in any zoning district,
shall provide adequate vehicle facilities for the loading and unloading of
merchandise and goods within or adjacent to the building. Such loading
facilities, if provided, shall not obstruct freedom of vehicular traffic or
pedestrian movement on the public streets, sidewalks or alleys.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)




ARTICLE 8:
SIGNS




§ 158.160  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter establishes comprehensive regulations
for the control of signs in order to preserve, protect and promote the public
health, safety and general welfare. More specifically, this subchapter is
intended to assist in achieving the following objectives:



      (1)   To authorize the use of signs that are:



         (a)   Compatible with their surroundings and the zoning
district in which they are located;



         (b)   Expressive of the image the city desires to
project;



         (c)   Appropriate to the type of establishment or
activity to which they pertain;



         (d)   Legible in the circumstances in which they are
seen; and



         (e)   Not distracting or cluttered in a manner that
disturbs the safe and free flow of traffic or in a manner that may be fully
or partially attributable to an increased risk of traffic accidents.



      (2)   To foster high quality commercial and industrial
development, and to enhance the economic vitality of existing
businesses/industries by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective
display of signs;



      (3)   To encourage sound sign display practices, and to
mitigate the objectionable effects of competition in respect to the size and
placement of signs;



      (4)   To enhance the physical appearance of the city by
protecting the human-made and natural beauty of the area;



      (5)   To preserve the value of private property by assuring
the compatibility of signs with nearby land uses; and



      (6)   To enable fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations.



   (B)   Scope.



      (1)   This subchapter contains regulations applicable to all
signs in all zoning districts within the city, subject to any exceptions as
may be authorized for preexisting signs governed by the regulations set forth
in §§ 158.075 through 158.084 of this chapter.



      (2)   These regulations are supplemented and qualified by the
regulations of the particular zoning district in which a sign may be located
and by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.



      (3)   Regulations for any signs may be made more or less
restrictive in the conditions of the ordinance governing a particular Planned
Use District.



      (4)   The requirements of this subchapter may be modified as
part of any Planned Development District ordinance where alternative
materials, design or types of signage are proposed that meet or exceed the
quality and other purposes of this chapter.



      (5)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to prohibit
lawful non-commercial speech on a signage otherwise specifically authorized
or designated for commercial purposes.



   (C)   Interpretation. Every provision of this subchapter shall be
construed liberally in favor of the authority of the city to the extent
permissible by applicable law. Nothing herein shall be construed to be
applied or enforced contrary to any superseding applicable law.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3786, passed 12-17-2012)



§ 158.161  SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED; ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Enforcement Officer duties. The Director and his or her
designee are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Sign permits. Unless subject to an exception set forth in this
subchapter, no sign shall be erected, constructed, posted, altered, enlarged
or relocated until a sign permit has been issued by the Director.



      (1)   Before any zoning authorization is issued, an
application shall be filed, together with drawings and specifications as may
be necessary to fully advise and acquaint the Director with the location,
construction, materials, manner of illuminating and securing or fastening of,
and the wording or delineation to be carried on, any sign. All signs that are
to be illuminated by one or more sources of artificial light shall require a
separate electrical permit and/or inspection unless work is performed as part
of a current, permitted building project.



      (2)   No sign shall be approved for use unless it has been
inspected by the Director and is found to be in compliance with all the
requirements of this subchapter and applicable technical or building codes.
Upon receipt of a fully completed application and determination by the
Director that the sign complies with all applicable requirements, the
Director shall issue a sign permit, subject to compliance with the
requirements herein. If the decision has not been issued within 14 days of
the filing of the application, the application shall be deemed denied.



   (C)   Application. Every applicant for a sign permit shall submit to
the Director, in narrative and/or graphic form, all the items of information
listed below:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant;



      (2)   Name and address of the owner of the zoning lot(s) on
which the sign is to be erected, if different from that of the applicant;



      (3)   If applicant is different from owner, provide written
authorization of the proposed signage by the owner;



      (4)   Parcel ID of the subject property;



      (5)   Location of the building, structure or lot where the
proposed sign is to be erected, and the zoning district classification of the
zoning lot;



      (6)   Description of the proposed sign indicating proposed
location, dimensions, area, overall height, illumination and method of
support/ attachment;



      (7)   Stamped structural drawings of the footing/structure for
freestanding signs of ten feet in height or over or as otherwise required by
the current adopted Building Code;



      (8)   Location of the proposed sign in relation to nearby
traffic-control devices;



      (9)   Amount of street frontage that the establishment that
proposes to display the sign has, and the total area of all existing signs on
the zoning lot; and



      (10)   Such other information as the Director shall reasonably
require to determine compliance of the application and the sign with this
subchapter.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3786, passed 12-17-2012)



§ 158.162  GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General prohibition. Any sign not expressly permitted by this
subchapter shall be deemed prohibited in the city, unless expressly
authorized by a Planned Use District ordinance. All signs are subject to the
general sign regulations provided in this section, to setback, height and to
all other underlying district regulations, and other applicable ordinances of
the city, except as may be provided herein or expressly modified by a Planned
District ordinance.



   (B)   Exempt signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter; provided, however, setback and height
requirements for all private structures, where applicable, shall be in accord
with the regulations of the particular zoning district in which the structure
is located:



      (1)   Public notices and legal notices required by law;



      (2)   Signs exempted by federal, state or local law;



      (3)   Official traffic or government signs, including safety
or directional signs, plaques and signs of historic interest, or any sign
otherwise authorized by the city and subject to approval by any applicable
government or other owner having control or jurisdiction over the property on
which the sign is located;



      (4)   (a)   Holiday or seasonal displays: decorations and
displays placed on private property celebrating or denoting holidays or
events, the seasons of the year, state and national holidays, and similar
occasions; provided, such seasonal display:



            1.   Is in place for no more than 90 days;



            2.   Contains no commercial advertising message or
name or logo of a business; and



            3.   Does not cause a nuisance to neighboring
property owners by noise, light, traffic generation or other aspects.



         (b)   Seasonal displays failing to meet these
qualifications shall not be exempt.



   (C)   Materials; location.



      (1)   (a)   All signs, including its sign face, cabinet,
structure, trim, base and frame must be kept in good repair. All permanent
signs and their supporting members shall be constructed of flame-resistant
and weather- resistant materials appropriate for permanent sign construction.
Permanent signs shall not be of a fabric material or banner, except in the
case of awnings.



         (b)   Signs not kept in good repair and appearance are
hereby declared prohibited and a nuisance. The Director shall be authorized
to establish prohibited materials and other regulations relating to
acceptable sign components and construction consistent with this subchapter.



      (2)   All signs shall be located so as not to impair the
visibility of any official highway sign or marker and no non-governmental
sign shall be placed so as to unnecessarily obstruct the visibility of any
other sign.



      (3)   Signs, may not be placed on any private or public
property without the consent of the owner or person having authority to grant
consent to use the property for such purpose.



      (4)   Signs shall not be located in a public right-of-way or
within the sight distance triangle, except as otherwise exempted in this
chapter.



      (5)   Permitted signs may be either a flat sign permanently
affixed to the face of a building, awning or canopy, wall or projecting sign,
or freestanding sign. Signs affixed to buildings shall not project above the
eave line of the roof, except as an integral roof sign.



   (D)   Removal. All sign faces authorized by sign permit for
non-residential zoning lots shall be removed within 90 days of the cessation
of the use of a property, building or tenant space, authorizing such signage.
If removal of the sign face reveals bare lighting, electrical or structural
components, a blank face of a white or gray color made of durable,
weatherproof material shall be applied to cover such components. No vacant
open sign cabinets or boxes are allowed.



   (E)   Calculation of sign area. The area of every sign shall be
calculated as:



      (1)   Framed sign. The sign area of a wall, projecting or
freestanding sign shall include the area within a continuous perimeter
enclosing the limits of writing, graphic representation, logo and any figure
or similar character, together with the outer extremities of any frame and
other material or color forming an integral part of the display that is used
as a background for the sign.



      (2)   Unframed sign. The area of a wall, projecting or
freestanding sign of individually cut-out writing, graphic representation,
logo and any figure or similar character that is not enclosed by framing is
the area of a polygon with a maximum of ten sides necessary to enclose each
writing, graphic representation, logo and any figure or similar character,
including the space between individual letters.



      (3)   Double-faced signs. Only one side of a double-faced sign
shall be included in calculating the sign area. If the two faces of a
double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be the area
of the larger face.



      (4)   3-D shapes. The area of signs of three-dimensional,
shapes having 360 degrees of sign face, such as globes, cylinders or
pyramids, shall be computed as one-half of the total of the exposed surfaces.



      (5)   Lots with double street frontage. Unless otherwise
provided, if any establishment has frontage on two or more streets, each side
of the property having frontage shall be considered separately for
determining the permitted total sign face area and number of allowable signs,
unless otherwise governed by this subchapter. However, the sign area
allowances shall not be aggregated so as to allow any establishment to
display on any frontage a greater sign face area than that single frontage
would otherwise permit.



      (6)   Exceptions. The total sign area for any freestanding
signs shall be exclusive of any decorative trim, frame and/or structure. Said
trim, frame and/or structure shall not exceed 30% of the sign area as
determined in accordance with this section.



   (F)   Movement prohibited. No sign shall revolve, rotate or
mechanically move in any manner.



   (G)   Illumination. Illumination of signs is permitted, subject to
the following requirements.



      (1)   No red, yellow, green or other color light shall be used
at any location in such a manner as may confuse or interfere with vehicular
traffic or pedestrian crosswalk traffic.



      (2)   No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering
lights or other illuminating devices that have a changing light intensity,
brightness or color. Beacon lights, searchlights and illumination by open
flame are prohibited.



      (3)   The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded,
shielded, directed or reduced in brightness so as to avoid the creation or
continuation of any nuisance or traffic hazard. No glare is allowed.



      (4)   Any illumination of an exterior sign requires an
electrical permit.



      (5)   No exposed reflective type bulb, and no strobe light or
incandescent lamp shall be used in such a manner as to expose the face of the
bulb, light or lamp to any public street or to adjacent property.



      (6)   When sign illumination is desired, it shall be arranged
so as to not cast light directly from any source of illumination on to any
public right-of-way or on to adjoining properties in any residential or
agricultural district.



      (7)   Illumination created from the lighting of signs must
adhere to the lighting requirements set out in § 158.143 of this chapter as
they pertain to impacts on adjacent right-of-way and neighboring properties.



   (H)   Signs not to be hazardous.



      (1)   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as
to prevent access to, ingress through or egress from, any door, window, fire
escape or driveway.



      (2)   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained in
such a manner that it interferes with, obstructs the view of, or is likely to
be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.



      (3)   Signs shall not be located within the sight distance
triangle (as defined in § 158.016 of this chapter) or otherwise located so
as to cause a traffic hazard.



   (I)   Changeable copy; limitations. All signs authorized by permit
may be designed to be capable of changing the message thereon, including such
as for time or temperature, either manually or electronically; provided, the
following requirements are satisfied for such changeable copy area:



      (1)   No more than one such sign per establishment;



      (2)   Such sign may occupy no more than 30% of the applicable
sign face;



      (3)   Such sign is of no greater width as the attached
principal sign face;



      (4)   No animation or movement of any content is permitted; and



      (5)   Each message displayed thereon must remain visible in at
least two and one-half second intervals before being reset or replaced with
another message.



   (J)   Compliance with International Building Code (IBC). No sign
shall be erected, relocated or maintained as to conflict with the
requirements of the adopted IBC.



      (1)   Every sign shall be designed and constructed in
conformity with the applicable provisions of the current adopted Building
Code of the city. Where sections in the Building Code conflict herewith, this
subchapter shall apply.



      (2)   The electrical component of any illuminated sign shall
conform to the applicable requirements of the current N.E.C. Electrical Code
of the city.



   (K)   Setback calculation. Calculation of the setbacks for signs as
established in this subchapter shall be measured from a vertical line of the
closest part of the sign to the property line.



   (L)   Non-conforming signs. Any sign not conforming to this
subchapter on the date of enactment shall be subject to the requirements of
§§ 158.075 through 158.084 of this chapter; provided that, a sign face of a
non- conforming sign may be altered if the sign is not otherwise determined
to be abandoned.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3587, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 3786, passed
12-17-2012)



§ 158.163  SIGNS AUTHORIZED WITHOUT PERMIT; ALL ZONING LOTS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   General. Every sign enumerated below that complies with the
indicated requirements, unless otherwise stated, may be erected on any zoning
lot within the city, without a sign permit; provided, such signs comply with
all other applicable requirements of this subchapter. The area of such signs
shall not be debited against the sign area allowance. Except where otherwise
expressly provided, no sign authorized by this section shall be placed on a
vacant property.



      (1)   Flags. Up to three flags containing no commercial
message, such as flags of nations, an organization of nations; states;
cities; and fraternal, religious and civic organizations. Flag lengths shall
not exceed ten feet, with a pole height not to exceed 35 feet. Flag poles
exceeding 35 feet may be permitted as a special use and shall be subject to
sign application, permit and inspection requirements. No sign permit shall be
required for flagpoles under 35 feet in height. Flags shall be removed upon
becoming faded, weathered or tattered.



      (2)   Monuments. Statues, artwork and historical monuments and
also commemorative tablets and monument citations of less than ten square
feet that are an integral part of a permanent structure.



      (3)   Address and residential occupant signs. One permanently
affixed sign per street frontage containing address numbers and/or
residential occupant identification located on the zoning lot, including
vacant properties, to which the sign pertains. Such signs shall not exceed
three square feet in area for single-family dwellings, nor six square feet
for multiple-family dwellings.



      (4)   Temporary non-commercial signs. One or more signs made
of paper, cardboard or other lightweight materials with comparable temporary
stakes or support materials designed for temporary display of non- commercial
messages, except as provided below, including, but not limited to, political
issue signs, electioneering signs, charitable or public interest signs, or
other similar types of signs typically found in residential areas may be
placed within any non-vacant zoning lot with the property owner’s consent.
The aggregate area of all temporary non-commercial signs (counting only one
face if double-sided) on a single lot shall be no greater than 18 square
feet. No individual sign may exceed six and one-quarter square feet in area.
Temporary signs must be removed before they become faded or deteriorated, but
in no event shall such temporary signs remain longer than 60 days. However,
outdoor political campaign signs are permitted as of right during any period
of time pursuant to state law.



      (5)   Temporary non-commercial signs; garage sales. A
temporary sign not exceeding six and one-quarter square feet in area used to
advertise garage sales or other lawful commercial activity on residential
zoning lots shall also be permitted, but may be posted for no longer than
three days at a time, up to four times per year.



      (6)   Temporary construction and home improvement signs.
Construction signs identifying the architects, engineers, contractors and
other individuals or firms involved with the construction, and/or announcing
the character or purpose of the work or building, but not advertising any
product. Commercial properties shall be limited to two such signs, each not
to exceed 32 square feet in area nor eight feet in height unless otherwise
approved by City Council. Residential properties shall be limited to one such
sign not to exceed six and one-quarter square feet in area. Such temporary
signs shall be confined to the site of the construction and may be installed
following city issuance of a building permit, or start of construction. Signs
shall be removed within 14 days of initial occupancy or completion of the
project. Temporary construction signs may also be installed following
approval of a commercial use, but if after six months construction has not
commenced, the sign(s) must be removed unless otherwise authorized by the
city.



      (7)   Real estate signs.



         (a)   Signs indicating the sale, rental or lease of the
zoning lot on which they are located, including vacant properties. Such signs
on residential property shall not exceed six and one-quarter square feet in
area; on other property, such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
Not more than one real estate sign per street front shall be erected on any
lot. Such signs shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, rental or lease
of such lot. Real estate open house directional signs are permitted on
weekends only from 12:00 p.m., Friday, through 6:00 p.m., Sunday, with the
maximum size for each such sign being six and one-quarter square feet in
area. Such real estate signs and directional signs shall be in lieu of and
count against the amount of signage permitted for temporary signs authorized
for the subject zoning lot.



         (b)   In addition to the real estate signage allowed
above, lots located adjacent to and having frontage along Interstate 64 are
permitted one real estate sign not to exceed 120 square feet in sign area.



      (8)   Property regulation signs. Signs such as no trespassing,
no hunting, no fishing and the like, so long as such signs do not exceed
three square feet in area, including vacant properties, and which shall count
against any temporary signage amount permitted.



      (9)   Utility signs. Utility company signs that serve as an
aid to public safety or that show the location of public telephones, and/or
underground cables, and underground pipes and pipelines. Signs greater than
one square foot shall require a sign permit and shall be permitted only if
the need for the size is demonstrated by evidence of industry or safety
standards.



      (10)   Scoreboards. Scoreboards on athletic fields, subject to
inspections and other permits required by city ordinance (e.g., electrical
permits).



      (11)   Other signs. Any other sign required by law to be
allowed in all districts and not otherwise authorized by this chapter as so
required; provided that, a sign permit shall be required to the extent not
inconsistent with such applicable law.



   (B)   Temporary signs; all non-residential zoning lots. In lieu of
such temporary non-commercial signs as are permitted without a sign permit
elsewhere in this section, each establishment may display one temporary sign
made of paper, cardboard or other lightweight materials with comparable
support materials designed for temporary display of messages under this
division (B) without a permit. Such temporary sign may be displayed on
Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays, as well as Monday when it is a
federally-recognized holiday. Such temporary sign shall not exceed 24 square
feet if affixed to the building wall or six square feet if affixed to the
ground. Such temporary sign must be located entirely on the zoning lot where
the establishment is located and must be outside of the sight distance
triangle.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3587, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 3786, passed
12-17-2012; Ord. 3857, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 158.164  SIGNS AUTHORIZED ONLY BY PERMIT; RESIDENTIAL ZONING LOTS.



   In addition to the signs authorized without a sign permit pursuant to
§ 158.163 of this chapter, each of the following types of signs may be
placed or erected on residential zoning lots with a sign permit, subject to
the other applicable restrictions provided herein.



   (A)   Subdivision entry signs. At each major entrance to a
residential development, residential development identification structures
designed to identify a residential subdivision, apartment complex or planned
unit development, containing no commercial advertising, and having a sign
area not to exceed 40 square feet and not to exceed ten feet in height. Such
signs or structures cannot be located on any public rights-of-way or within
the sight distance triangle of intersecting streets. The sign and structure
shall be located within an outlot or sign easement.



   (B)   Temporary subdivision promotion signs. One directional sign
for sales of lots or houses located on-site within a subdivision is allowable
on any zoning lot within such subdivision, and one additional such sign
located outside the subdivision for subdivisions of 25 or more lots, provided
that the following conditions have been met.



      (1)   The approved final plat of the subdivision must contain
five or more lots.



      (2)   Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, nor
exceed ten feet in height above the average existing finished grade. A sign
exceeding 32 square feet, but not more than 64 square feet, of sign face area
may be approved only with the consent of the City Council.



      (3)   An approved sign permit has been obtained for the sign
and the sign is posted off public rights-of-way and only with written
permission of the property owner.



      (4)   The sign must be removed when building permits have been
issued for 75% or more of the lots within the subdivision.



      (5)   Any off-site sign shall be permitted only at such
locations approved by the City Council that do not impair safety, visibility
from neighboring properties and are landscaped or otherwise treated to be
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.



   (C)   Temporary flags. One residential subdivision promotion flag
(e.g., avenue banner or flag for subdivisions and the like) for every ten
feet of street frontage, with a maximum of ten flags, shall be authorized
within 50 feet of the residential subdivision street entrance of a newly
platted subdivision that contains 25 or more new lots. Each such flag shall
not exceed 35 square feet, with a pole height not to exceed 20 feet. Such
subdivision promotion flags may be displayed for a period not to exceed 24
months and only during the 24-month period following the initial issuance of
a residential building permit within such subdivision. One extension may be
requested beyond such time period and such request may be granted by the City
Council and shall not exceed 12 months.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3786, passed 12-17-2012)



§ 158.165  SIGNS AUTHORIZED ONLY BY PERMIT; NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING LOTS.



   In addition to the signs authorized without a sign permit pursuant to
§ 158.163 of this chapter, each of the following types of signs may be
placed or erected on non-residential zoning lots with a sign permit, subject
to the other applicable restrictions provided herein.



   (A)   Primary signage.



      (1)   Freestanding sign. Each non-residential zoning lot shall
be permitted to have one freestanding sign, except as otherwise permitted by
§ 158.166(A) of this chapter (i.e., lots with double frontage, alternative
tenant identification signs and development identification signs).



      (2)   Wall sign. Each establishment shall be allowed to have
one wall sign, subject to § 158.166(B) of this chapter, for each wall of
such establishment facing an on or off-site parking lot or street frontage,
up to a maximum of three wall signs.



      (3)   Projecting sign. Any establishment may choose to use a
portion of its wall sign allowance, as determined by § 158.166(C) of this
chapter, for a projecting sign.



   (B)   Special signage.



      (1)   Directional signs. Directional and informational signs
erected for the convenience of the public, such as identification of
entrances, exits, parking and no parking areas, restrooms, walkways and
similar features or facilities of up to one square foot per face shall be
allowed without a sign permit, and up to four square feet in per face may be
allowed with a sign permit. Freestanding directional signs shall not extend
more than three feet above the elevation of the adjacent street or elevation
of the average existing finished grade at the base of the sign, whichever is
higher. All supports for such signs shall be entirely enclosed with a
compatible material.



      (2)   Temporary signs.



         (a)   All non-residential zoning lots.



            1.   Each establishment may display, in lieu of
such temporary non-commercial signs as are permitted without a sign permit
under § 158.163 of this chapter, one temporary sign made of paper, cardboard
or other lightweight materials with comparable support materials designed for
temporary display of messages under this division (B)(2)(a)1. by permit. Such
temporary signs must be located on the same zoning lot as the establishment
and outside of public right-of-way. Such temporary signs may be authorized
for a maximum of 45 days cumulatively during one calendar year with not more
than three sign permits authorized per year. Temporary signs without a permit
as authorized by § 158.163 of this chapter shall not be debited against the
maximum number of days. Such temporary sign shall not exceed 24 square feet
if affixed to the building wall or six square feet if affixed to the ground.



            2.   Exception: a temporary sign associated with
an approved special event permit may be a maximum of 24 square feet if
affixed to the building wall or to the ground.



         (b)   Temporary “grand opening” signs. Any business
enterprise consisting of retail sales and/or rendering of services directly
to the public shall be authorized to use temporary banners, signs or
inflatables for promotional activities for a period not to exceed 30 days and
only immediately following the initial opening of each such business
location. Such device(s) shall be exclusive of the temporary sign
requirements of non-residential zoning lots per division (B)(2)(a) above.
Such device(s) shall not collectively exceed 48 square feet. No banner
dimension shall exceed 12 feet. Any inflatable sign or sign affixed to a
tethered balloon, where such sign is visible from the property line should be
permitted. Such inflatable signs shall not exceed the height of the principal
structure or 25 feet, whichever is less. Temporary signs, banners and
inflatables/balloons used in accordance with this division (B)(2)(b) shall be
confined to property on which the business enterprise is located, and mounted
and secured properly to ensure the public health and safety.



         (c)   Highway corridor non-residential lots; outdoor
display. On each non-residential lot of at least one acre in size located
within 1,500 feet of an interstate highway and used primarily for outdoor
sales or product display (51% of sales), the following additional temporary
signage shall be authorized:



            1.   Temporary banners. Temporary banners up to 50
square feet in area in aggregate per public street frontage of each qualified
zoning lot, with a maximum of 100 square feet. Banners may be displayed for a
maximum 130 days cumulatively per calendar year. Banners used in accordance
with this division (B)(2)(c)1. shall be confined to the lot on which the
business enterprise is located and shall be mounted and secured properly to
ensure the public health and safety.



            2.   Temporary inflatable signs/ balloons. One
inflatable sign or sign affixed to a tethered balloon per qualified zoning
lot. Such signs shall not exceed the height of the principal structure or 25
feet, whichever is less. Temporary inflatable signs/balloons may be displayed
for a maximum of 15 days cumulatively per calendar year. Inflatable
signs/balloons used in accordance with this division (B)(2)(c)2. shall be
confined to the lot on which the business enterprise is located and shall be
mounted and secured properly to ensure the public health and safety. The
setback of the inflatable signs/balloons shall be equal or more than the
height of the temporary sign. This division (B)(2)(c)2. shall not apply to
party balloons or similar balloons of less than 17 inches in diameter or to
vehicle signage, which shall be deemed an authorized accessory use of such
qualified zoning lots subject to this division (B)(2)(c)2.



            3.   Avenue flags. A maximum of ten flags per
establishment having no text, message, or content and positioned a minimum of
ten feet apart may be displayed for a maximum of 130 days cumulatively per
calendar year. Each avenue flag shall not exceed 45 square feet in area.



            4.   Light pole banner. A maximum of four flags or
banners mounted on existing private lighting structures. Each light pole
banner shall not exceed 24 square feet in area and no more than two such
light pole banners may be mounted on any one private lighting structure.



            5.   Sky buster balloons. One floating device
tethered to the ground and maintained up to 120 feet in height; provided
that, such device is set back from the lot line a distance equal to or
greater than the height of such device.



            6.   Annual permit. In lieu of individual permits
for signage authorized in this division (B), an aggregate permit for all
proposed supplemental signage authorized in this division (B) may be issued
by the city subject to a single sign application fee.



      (3)   Permit exception, temporary sandwich board signs. A
temporary sandwich board sign shall be permitted on each non-residential
zoning lot containing one or more lawful retail commercial establishments
without a permit subject to the requirements of this division (B)(3). A
sandwich board sign shall be comprised of an A-frame sign, which stand with
self-supporting elements and are not permanently affixed to the ground. Such
signs shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic or be located in parking areas.
Temporary sandwich board signs shall be no greater than six square feet in
sign area and exceed four feet in height. Such signs shall be displayed
during business hours only. Such signs shall be located no more than ten feet
from the primary door entrance of the establishment. Only one sandwich board
sign shall be allowed per establishment. No sign permit shall be required for
a sandwich board sign.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3587, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 3684; passed
9-7-2010; Ord. 3786, passed 12-17-2012)



§ 158.166  SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS BY TYPE; NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING
LOTS.



   (A)   Freestanding sign regulations. The supplemental provisions of
this division (A) shall apply to the freestanding signs authorized pursuant
to § 158.165 of this chapter.



      (1)   General provisions.



         (a)   If a non-residential zoning lot has frontage on
two or more collector and/or arterial streets, one additional sign, of a
monument sign style only and erected in accordance with the provisions of
this section, may be located on such collector or arterial street frontage,
in addition to the freestanding sign otherwise permitted. Such lot may have
no more than two freestanding signs.



         (b)   The supports of every freestanding sign, except
within I-64 frontage lots, shall be designed so as to obscure the bare pole
or other support by the use of architectural features such as masonry or
other covering of such bare pole or other sign supports.



      (2)   Location. Freestanding signs may be located adjacent to
the front property line of the zoning lot on which it is situated, but shall
be set back 20 feet from the side abutting another lot and from rear property
lines. Freestanding signs shall not overhang the property line or a
right-of-way. All freestanding signs must be completely constructed on or in
a landscaped island or landscaped area.



      (3)   Size and height.



         (a)   A freestanding sign, including its cabinet,
structure and/or trim, shall not exceed six feet in height above the average
existing finished grade at the base of such sign, or the elevation of the
adjacent street, whichever is higher. Any building-up or mounding of land at
the base of such sign generated to “lift” such sign above a consistent
grade with the lot shall be debited against the permitted sign height. For
each additional four-foot setback from the front property line, the sign
height may increase by one foot for a maximum of ten feet in height.



         (b)   Sign faces shall not exceed a width of 12 feet.



         (c)   The total sign area shall be four-tenths square
feet of signage per linear foot of street frontage and shall not exceed 100
square feet. Ex: 150' Frontage x 0.4 = 60 sq. ft. sign. The Frontage length
shall be measured along the front yard Building setback.



         (d)   The sign shall be attached to a proportionate
enclosed base, integrated planter or structural frame, the width of which
shall be a minimum of three-quarters the width of the widest part of the
sign. The sign, including its base, shall be of permanent materials
compatible with the primary structure. The base shall be placed in or at
ground level with the top of the enclosed base extending up to a height of
one to three feet above the average existing finished grade at the base of
the sign.



         (e)   The supports of all freestanding signs shall not
extend farther than 20 inches beyond the horizontal width of either edge of
the sign.



         (f)   V-shaped signs shall have an exterior angle
between faces of not more than 30 degrees with a distance between faces of
such signs at their farthest point not exceeding six feet.



         (g)   Exceptions: the following freestanding signs shall
be subject to the requirements above for other freestanding signs except as
specifically noted as follows.



            1.   I-64 frontage lots. Lots located adjacent to
and having frontage along Interstate 64 are permitted one freestanding sign
not to exceed 35 feet in height in lieu of the freestanding sign otherwise
permitted above. Such sign shall be located along the Interstate 64 frontage
and shall not exceed a sign area of 250 square feet. The maximum length of
any dimension of such sign shall be 21 feet.



            2.   Highway 50 lots. The freestanding sign for
non-residential lots located adjacent to and having frontage along West
Highway 50 between Old Collinsvilie Road and the intersection of Highway 50
and State Street (the “Spur”) may be up to 20 feet in height and up to
126 square feet in sign area, subject to all other applicable regulations
regarding freestanding signs; except that, such signs shall be set back from
the property line of the lot one foot for each additional foot of sign height
over six feet. The outer width of the sole or joint supports for such
freestanding sign shall be a minimum of one-third the width of the widest
part of the sign. In lieu of a required base, the Department may approve a
landscaped or otherwise appropriately designed ornamental or architectural
feature concealing the base of the supports.



            3.   Residential conversions. Any establishment
operating from a building that was designed for and originally used as a
residential dwelling unit, and which exterior structure has not been
substantially altered to conform it to a commercial building, shall be
limited by the additional restrictions in this division (A)(3)(g)3. in that
any freestanding sign shall be:



               a.   No larger than 32 square feet of sign
area;



               b.   No greater than eight feet in width; and



               c.   No greater than six feet in height.



            4.   Tenant identification signs (multiple tenant
lots). A zoning lot that serves multiple buildings and/or multiple tenants
may substitute its permitted freestanding sign with a “tenant
identification sign” pursuant to the following requirements.



               a.   Tenant identification signs shall
adhere to the requirements for freestanding signs, except as otherwise
identified herein.



               b.   Sign area shall be calculated at a rate
of five-tenths of one square foot of signage per linear foot of street
frontage and shall not exceed 132 square feet. (Ex: 150-foot frontage x 0.50
= 75 square foot sign.)



               c.   The maximum top-of-sign height at the
property line shall be eight feet.



               d.   For each additional four-foot setback
from the front property line, the sign height may increase by one foot for a
maximum of 12 feet in height.



               e.   Tenant identification signs shall
include dedicated areas for each business, tenant or building currently in
use on the lot. Such sign shall not be solely dedicated for display of a
single business.



      (4)   Development identification signs (large developments).



         (a)   A single commercial, industrial or mixed-use
development or subdivision that is in excess of 20 acres in size or contains
ten or more lots shall be permitted a development identification sign at each
main entrance to the subdivision or development identifying the name of the
project and/or containing a directory of tenants. The sign may include the
name and/or logo of the development or subdivision. Such sign may be located
within an easement on any platted lot or on common ground of the subdivision.
Such sign may also be located on any unplatted portion of the subdivision
identified as part of a particular development on an approved preliminary
subdivision plat, site development concept plan, site development section
plan or site development plan.



         (b)   A development identification sign shall not exceed
30 feet in height above the average existing finished grade at the base of
the sign or elevation of the adjacent street, whichever is higher, with the
total sign area per face not to exceed 288 square feet.



         (c)   The standard height versus width regulations for
freestanding signs shall not apply to development identification signs.
Development identification signs shall be a maximum of 14 feet wide.



         (d)   The sign face of development identification signs
shall be no greater than 12 feet in width and 24 feet in height.



         (e)   The bottom of the sign face shall not exceed a
height of six feet above the average existing finished grade at the base of
the sign, or elevation of the adjacent street, whichever is higher.



         (f)   The support for such sign shall either:



            1.   Be attached to a proportionate enclosed base,
integrated planter or structural frame, the width of which shall be a minimum
of three-quarters of the width of the widest part of the sign face; or



            2.   Feature two vertical supports architecturally
integrated and located at the edges of the sign in lieu of the proportionally
enclosed base.



         (g)   Exceptions: developments that contain lots located
adjacent to and having frontage along Interstate 64 may increase the height
and size of the development identification sign by decreasing the number of
permitted freestanding signs along Interstate 64 with approval of the City
Council. The maximum size of one sign utilizing this exception shall be 55
feet in height and 450 square feet of sign area per face. These requests for
exemption must be approved on a case-by-case basis by the City Council as
part of a special use permit.



   (B)   Wall sign regulations. The supplemental provisions of this
division (B) shall apply to the wall signs authorized for each establishment
pursuant to § 158.165 of this chapter.



      (1)   Size.



         (a)   The sign area of each such sign and the total
cumulative wall signage shall not exceed 10% of the wall area of the face of
the building on which the sign is attached. No individual sign shall exceed
300 square feet in sign area.



         (b)   Countable wall area shall include the entire
surface of a wall, such as gable and similar areas, and the vertical face of
a mansard wall, whether real or artificial, which extends above the wall of
the business on which the sign is attached. However, the countable area of
mansard walls shall be limited to the area not greater than six feet above
the eave line of the roof multiplied by the length of the associated wall.



      (2)   Specific regulations and exceptions.



         (a)   No wall sign shall project more than 18 inches
from the wall or surface to which it is attached, except for projecting signs
as permitted herein.



         (b)   Wall signs may not overlap or cover doors, windows
or architectural details.



         (c)   Signs on awnings, canopies or marquees: signs
mounted, painted or otherwise placed flush against any awning, canopy or
marquee shall be considered wall signs, and shall comply with the regulations
of this division (B). Signs suspended beneath any awning, canopy or marquee
shall be considered projecting signs and shall comply with the regulations of
division (C) below.



         (d)   Window signs: any establishment may display window
signs. Window signs shall cover no more than a total of 20% of any window.
Window signs shall not require a sign permit unless such sign includes
structural supports.



   (C)   Projecting sign regulations. An establishment shall be
permitted to display up to one  wall sign in the form of a projecting sign
facing street frontage subject to the following additional restrictions.



      (1)   A projecting sign shall not project more than six feet
from the building to which it is attached;



      (2)   No projecting sign shall extend vertically past the
roofline;



      (3)   A projecting sign shall not project over a street, alley
or driveway, nor be closer than two feet from the curb or edge of any such
vehicular way;



      (4)   Such sign shall not extend below a point eight feet
above the ground or pavement.



      (5)   The size of a projecting sign shall be debited against
the sign area allowance for wall signs.



      (6)   The sign area of a projecting sign shall be no larger
than 16 square feet.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3587, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 3786, passed
12-17-2012)



§ 158.167  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   (A)   The following signs are strictly prohibited in all zoning
districts in the city, unless otherwise expressly authorized elsewhere in
this code.



   (B)   A sign shall be deemed prohibited if any aspect of the sign,
including an otherwise authorized sign, contains or meets the definition of a
prohibited sign:



      (1)   Billboards, other than those lawfully existing on the
effective date of this chapter subject to the regulations of §§ 158.075
through 158.084 to the maximum extent permitted by law;



      (2)   All temporary and permanent signs advertising any
commercial activity not related to the zoning lot on which such sign is
located, unless otherwise protected by law;



      (3)   Any streamer, pennant, propeller, bunting or artificial
device, figure, shape, color, sound, light or exhibit, whether live, animated
or still, that is intended to attract attention to the use or business being
conducted on the zoning lot;



      (4)   Balloons and inflatable signs, unless authorized by
special event permit or temporary sign permit;



      (5)   Any beacon lights, searchlights and illumination by open
flame;



      (6)   Any person or persons with a commercial sign and/or
dressed in a commercially-identified costume (e.g., mascot) that is intended
to attract attention to the use or business being conducted on the zoning lot;



      (7)   Portable signs;



      (8)   Pole sign;



      (9)   A sign with any moving, flashing, blinking or otherwise
animated component;



      (10)   No sign shall impede or block any pedestrian accessway;



      (11)   Signs attached to any public utility pole or structure,
bench, street tree, fence, fire hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk or other
location on public property;



      (12)   Signs, including posts and other supports, that
advertise or identify an activity, business or service no longer in business
or no longer conducted on the zoning lot where such sign is located. See §
158.162(D) of this chapter;



      (13)   Signs placed on vehicles or trailers that are parked or
located for the purpose of displaying such sign; provided that, this does not
apply to authorized temporary signs or signs and lettering on buses, taxis or
other vehicles, operating during the normal course of business and incidental
to other lawful business. Trailers associated with an establishment may not
be parked in required parking areas. Trailers must be parked on an improved
surface and be located no closer to the street frontage than the building
face. All vehicles and trailers associated with an establishment and located
on the premises must be licensed and operable;



      (14)   Signs and/or related supports or structures located in
or above any public property or rights-of-way, unless authorized by
applicable city, state or federal law and the governmental jurisdiction
controlling such rights-of-way or public property;



      (15)   Rooftop signs. Signs or sign structures, other than
freestanding signs, which extend above the parapet, building roof line or
canopy/awning against which such sign is located;



      (16)   Signs painted directly on the exterior covering
materials of any structure;



      (17)   Signs or sign structures constructed, repaired or
altered having no validly issued sign permit, except where exempted herein;



      (18)   Signs on vacant properties, except as expressly
authorized in these sign regulations; and



      (19)   Any other sign that is not authorized by or does not
comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of these sign regulations.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3684, passed 9-7-2010; Ord. 3786, passed
12-17-2012)



§ 158.168  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AWNING. Any roof-like structure made of cloth, metal or other material
attached to a building and erected over a window, doorway and the like in
such a manner as to permit its being raised or retracted to a position
against the building when not in use.



   AWNING, CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN. A Sign that is mounted on, painted on,
or attached to, an awning, canopy or marquee. No such signs shall project
above, below or beyond the awning, canopy or marquee unless otherwise
permitted in the Downtown District.







 



   BEACON LIGHT. A light used primarily to attract attention to a
location, whether moving or stationary, other than when required by law to
meet applicable safety requirements.



   BILLBOARD. Any temporary or permanent sign or sign face used for
placing messages or authorizing others to place messages in exchange for rent
or other consideration. Tenant identification and development identification
signs shall not be considered BILLBOARDS solely because the use of the sign
area may be included as a right associated with lease of the tenant or
development space giving rise to such authorized sign.



   CANOPY. A roof-like structure similar to an awning; except that, it
cannot be raised or retracted to a position against the building.



   COMMERCIAL SIGN. Any sign wording, logo or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises or otherwise calls attention to a
business product, service, idea or commercial activity.



   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. Include those signs where the sign faces are
parallel or where the interior angle formed by the faces of a V-shaped sign
is 60 degrees or less.



   EAVE LINE. A line following the part of the roof that extends beyond
the exterior side wall, generally located on the projecting lower edge of a
roof where the gutters may be located.



   ESTABLISHMENT. Either of the following:



      (1)   An institutional, business, commercial or industrial
activity that is the sole occupant of one or more buildings; or



      (2)   An institutional, business, commercial or industrial
activity that occupies a portion of a building, and the activity is a logical
and separate entity from the other activities within the building and not a
department of the whole, and the activity has either a separate entrance from
the exterior of the building, or a separate entrance from a common and
clearly defined entryway that has direct access to the exterior of the
building.



   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign on a non-residential zoning lot supported by
one or more uprights, poles or braces or foundation in or upon the ground in
a permanent manner, but not including pole signs.



   FRONTAGE. The lineal extent of a zoning lot abutting a street or public
roadway, or the lineal extent of a zoning lot abutting a public parking area
if such lot has no street frontage.



   INTEGRAL ROOF SIGN.



      (1)   Any sign erected or constructed as an integral part of a
normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign:



         (a)   Extends vertically above the highest portion of
the roof; and



         (b)   Is separated from the rest of the roof by a space
of more than six inches.



      (2)   No integral portion of a roof shall extend more than
five feet above the structural roof.



   MARQUEE. Any canopy that is made of durable materials and is a
permanent fixture of the building to which it is attached.



   MESSAGE. A communication of identification or advertising information
visually perceived. Said communication may consist of words, abbreviations,
numbers, symbols, pictures, geometric shapes and the like.



   MONUMENT SIGN. A type of freestanding sign placed upon, or supported
by, the ground, independent of the principal structure on the lot, presenting
a monolithic structure.







 



   NON-CONFORMING SIGN. See §§ 158.075 through 158.084 of this chapter.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL USE. Any commercial, office or religious  use lawfully
occurring on the applicable zoning lot as the primary use in a zoning
district authorizing such use. NON-RESIDENTIAL USES shall not include:



      (1)   Zoning lots containing agricultural uses within a
residential or agricultural zoning district; and



      (2)   Lots with no current use, including vacant or
undeveloped properties and structures, except as pertaining to temporary
construction and development signs authorized herein for a use pending
construction or development.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING LOT. A zoning lot containing a non-residential
use.



   POLE SIGN or ELEVATED SIGN. Any sign placed upon, or supported by, the
ground independent of the principal structure on the zoning lot where the
bottom edge of the sign is ten feet or more above the ground level.







 



   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure; any movable display structure capable of relocation,
whether under its own power or towed by a motor vehicle; signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels or skids; signs converted to A- or T-frames,
menu and sandwich board signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles
parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used
in the normal day-to-day operations of a business. The display message of the
sign may be painted or non-painted and capable of being readily altered and
may be with or without electrical illumination and power, and with or without
wheels.







 



   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign that is supported by any exterior wall of a
building or suspended beneath any awning, canopy or marquee with the exposed
face of said sign in a plane approximately perpendicular to the plane of the
wall and the like, and projecting more than 18 inches from the structure.







 



   RESIDENTIAL ZONING LOT. All zoning lots except those containing a
non-residential use.



   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. An A-frame sign that stands with self-supporting
elements and is not permanently affixed to the ground.



   SEARCHLIGHT. An apparatus containing a light source and a reflector for
projecting a high-intensity beam of approximately parallel rays of light.



   SIGN. Any object, device, display, structure or surface, or part
thereof, that is used to advertise, identify, display or attract attention to
any object, person, institution, organization, business, project, service or
event by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors or illumination for signage.



   SIGN AREA. The area of the one imaginary square or rectangle that would
completely enclose all parts of a sign, including the background.



   SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE. The total of the sign areas of all signs that a
particular establishment is permitted to display under the terms of this
subchapter.



   SIGN PERMIT. A permit issued by the Director to regulate the erection,
expansion, alteration, relocation or reconstruction of signs in all parts of
the city.



   STREET FRONTAGE. See FRONTAGE.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign not constructed or intended for long term or
permanent use.



   VACANT PROPERTY. A zoning lot with no current lawful building occupancy
and use.



   V-SHAPED SIGN. Freestanding signs erected upon common or separate
structures that present a V-shape appearance.



   WALL SIGN. Any sign attached to or erected against any wall, awning,
canopy or marquee with the exposed face of said sign in a place approximately
parallel to the plane of the wall and the like and not projecting out more
than 18 inches.







 



   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof, designed
to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event,
sale or service that is visible from the exterior of a building and is
painted on, affixed to or suspended immediately behind a window.







 



   ZONING LOT. The parcel or parcels of land associated with the use or
improvements on it. Common area for any multi-lot development shall not be
deemed a separate ZONING LOT authorizing any additional signs, except as may
be directly authorized by the city relating to such common ground use. Where
multiple establishments are contained within a single development, the entire
development parcel or subdivision shall constitute the ZONING LOT regardless
of the existence of subdivided parcels within such development.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3786, passed 12-17-2012)




ARTICLE 9:
LANDSCAPING AND RIPARIAN CORRIDORS




§ 158.180  STATEMENT OF INTENT.



   The intent of this subchapter is to require landscaping in development
sites, parking lots and transition areas to enhance the aesthetic qualities
of the city and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value
of its neighborhoods and businesses by:



   (A)   Providing for quality and consistency in the design of
landscaping and screening;



   (B)   Providing for the separation of incompatible types of land
use; and



   (C)   Providing for the conservation of existing trees and the
planting of new trees in pace with the land development process.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.181  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This subchapter sets out the minimum landscaping, buffering
and screening requirements within the city. An approved preliminary
landscaping plan shall be required as a condition of any preliminary plat
approval and preliminary site plan approval. A final landscaping plan shall
be required as a condition of and prior to issuance of a permit  for any
construction and grading activity as to the following:



      (1)   Final site plan;



      (2)   Final plat approval; or



      (3)   Any other building or grading permit for any land
disturbing construction activity other than permits for agricultural uses, or
relating to one single-family detached dwelling or two-family attached
dwelling, except where it is determined by the Director that the activity
creates no new landscaping needs as established by the purposes of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter and all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.



   (C)   The city may require an outside consultant to review any of
the submittal requirements in accordance with this subchapter. When deemed
necessary the city may require a landscape or forestry study performed by an
independent arborist, urban forester, landscape architect or other certified
professional approved by the Director. All costs associated with these
professional services shall be the responsibility of the developer.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.182  LANDSCAPE PLAN; SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscaping, screening and tree protection plans shall include
information and detail as required by the Director to determine compliance
with this section. Such plan shall be submitted to the Department and
approved prior to any grading, bulldozing or other removal of existing
vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage.



   (A)   Preliminary landscape plan requirements. All preliminary
landscape plans, unless otherwise waived by the Director, shall include, but
are not limited to, the following;



      (1)   Legible scale consistent with the submitted development
plan or plat;



      (2)   North reference;



      (3)   The extent of the development site, including the limits
of land disturbance, clearing, grading and trenching. Also include the
boundaries of existing stands of trees and any significant trees;



      (4)   The location and size of all utilities on the site;



      (5)   The location of all existing and proposed parking areas,
sidewalks and other paved surfaces;



      (6)   The location of any screening or enclosures to be used
on the property, including, but not limited to, trash storage locations and
loading areas;



      (7)   The general location and proposed type of landscaping
for all existing and proposed buildings, structures, trash/dumpster
enclosures, signage and all raised medians or islands. The landscaping plan
should provide dimensions of planting areas; approximate location and number
of plants/trees; and general location, dimension and material of any
structural buffer requirements; and



      (8)   The boundary of riparian corridors to meet the standards
in § 158.194 of this chapter.



   (B)   Final landscape plan requirements. All final landscape plans,
unless otherwise waived by the Director, shall include all preliminary
landscape plan requirements in addition, but not limited, to the following:



      (1)   The location of all landscape materials proposed to meet
the requirements of this code, drawn to scale; and a planting schedule
indicating plant names, quantities and installation size;



      (2)   Location of all stands of trees to remain on the
development site and measures taken to protect them during construction; and



      (3)   The construction details, including a profile section,
of each natural and structural buffer proposed.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.183  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All landscaping, screening and buffering shall meet the following
minimum requirements.



   (A)   Tracts of land in the downtown area are exempt from the
landscaped parkway requirements.



   (B)   Pedestrian access between developments and in parking lots is
encouraged to provide safe and uninterrupted pedestrian access to on-site
principal uses and adjacent uses, where appropriate.



   (C)   All portions of the site not covered with paving or buildings
shall be landscaped. Open areas not covered with other materials shall be
covered with turf or ground cover.



   (D)   All areas required to be landscaped shall be covered in plant
material or other pervious materials in accordance with this subchapter or as
approved by the Director. Plantings shall include trees, shrubs, ground
cover, perennials, grasses, decorative rock, mulch, sod or other natural
materials excluding gravel, aggregate, paving and other road surfacing
materials.



   (E)   Required landscape and buffer areas shall contain no
driveways, structures, parking areas, patios, storm water detention
facilities or any other structures or accessory uses except for the following:



      (1)   Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of
an overall landscape design;



      (2)   Pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks and bus
stops;



      (3)   Underground utilities;



      (4)   Required vehicular access/driveways through a required
buffer or landscape area may be allowed as a condition of site plan approval;



      (5)   Signs otherwise permitted by this chapter; and



      (6)   Buffer areas may contain fences, walls or earthen berms
constructed to provide the visual screening required to meet the standards of
§ 158.168 of this chapter.



   (F)   All required landscaping shall adhere to applicable
requirements of §§ 155.070 through 155.076 and App. A of Ch. 155 of this
code, including, but not limited to, spacing, diversity, installation,
minimum size and type. In addition, bushes shall be installed with minimum
size of 24-inch, balled and burlapped or five-gallon container size.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.184  SUBDIVISION LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.



   Subdivisions and developments shall adhere to the landscape standards
set forth in §§ 155.070 through 155.076 and App. A of Ch. 155 of this code.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.185  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.



   Parking lots shall adhere to the landscape standards set forth in §
158.144.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.186  BUFFERS, WHERE REQUIRED.



   A landscape buffer shall be provided within any development pursuant to
the applicable requirements in this table and the following situations: a
buffer shall be required along a side or rear lot line that abuts a different
zoning district, as identified in the table below.



 


Table: Situations Where Buffer is Required




Zoning of Adjacent Development

 

Zoning of Proposed Development




I

 

B-1 & B-2

 

O-1

 

MH & MR

 

A, RR, SR-1, SR-1B, SR-2 & SR-3





A, RR, SR1, SR1B, SR2 & SR3
 

D

 

A or B

 

A or B

 

A or B

 

-



MH & MR
 

D

 

A or B

 

A or B

 

-

 

A or B



B-1 & B-2
 

C

 

-

 

-

 

A or B

 

A or B



O-1
 

C

 

-

 

-

 

A or B

 

A or B



I
 

-

 

C

 

C

 

D

 

D




Required Buffer Design


(Letters in table correspond with the design standards below and in Figure
13.1)


A.Structural buffer -  6' fence or wall with landscaping

B.Structural buffer -  Combination of berm, fencing and landscaping

C.Natural buffer -  opaque natural screen or vegetation

D.Natural buffer with a fence




 



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 158.187  MINIMUM BUFFER STANDARDS.



   Required buffer yards shall comply with the minimum standards in this
section. The image at the end of this section provides illustrations of
acceptable buffering techniques.



   (A)   Natural buffers.



      (1)   At a minimum, natural buffers shall consist of existing
vegetation that provides an opaque natural visual screen to a height of at
least six feet, or any combination of existing and replanted vegetation that
can reasonably be expected to create an opaque visual screen at least six
feet high within five growing seasons.



      (2)   Natural buffers may contain deciduous or perennial
vegetation, but shall contain evergreen shrubs, bushes and trees suitable to
local growing conditions that will provide an opaque visual screen during all
seasons of the year, in accordance with the following.



      (1)   (a)   Natural buffers shall include at least one
evergreen shrub planted every four feet, at least one evergreen tree planted
every 25 feet, and at least one deciduous tree planted every 50 feet.



         (b)   The minimum width of all natural buffers shall be
20 feet.



      (2)   (a)   The retention of existing vegetation should be
preserved to the maximum extent practical.



         (b)   The addition of new vegetation may be required if
vegetation retained is not sufficient.



      (3)   (a)   Natural buffers shall be sufficient in opacity
to screen automobile headlights from areas zoned residential or agriculture.



         (b)   The city may require a landscaped berm or a
structure buffer, such as walls or fences, to achieve the desired level of
screening needed.



      (4)   (a)   Generally, all trees and bushes used within a
required buffer area shall be adequate in quantity and type to provide the
necessary screening or buffering as determined by the city.



         (b)   Buffer areas shall comply with the standards
herein.



   (B)   Structural buffers. Structural buffers shall meet the
following criteria.



      (1)   Structural buffers shall be vegetated throughout the
minimum area required for the buffer around any fences or walls and upon any
earthen berms, which may include grass, ground covers, shrubs and trees.



      (2)   (a)   Structural buffers shall include at least one
evergreen shrub planted every ten feet, at least one evergreen tree planted
every 25 feet, and at least one deciduous tree planted every 50 feet.



         (b)   The minimum width of all structural buffers shall
be ten feet.



      (3)   (a)   All earthen berms shall have a maximum side
slope of three horizontal to one vertical.



         (b)   Earthen berms shall not be constructed within the
drip line of any existing trees that will remain on the property.



      (4)   (a)   Fences and freestanding walls of brick, stone
or ornamental concrete shall meet the standards of § 158.056 of this
chapter, and shall be designed to present a finished and decorative
appearance on both sides.



         (b)   Unless otherwise waived by the Director, fences
and walls shall be placed on the property line, and the shrubs, ground covers
or other vegetation shall be provided on the interior side of the fence or
wall.







 



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.188  MODIFICATIONS AND ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Upon request by the applicant, the City Council may consider
and approve alternatives to full compliance with the landscaping, screening
and buffering standards contained in this subchapter if the associated visual
impact is mitigated to the maximum extent feasible by the alternative
landscaping and screening plans. Mitigation measures may include, but are not
limited to increased setbacks, increased landscaping, additional fencing and
architectural treatments or otherwise camouflaging equipment or, with prior
City Council approval, the planting and maintenance, or payment therefore, of
adjacent public way landscaping.



   (B)   The Director may waive a buffer requirement or reduce its
extent to a temporarily appropriate level of screening if the future land use
map designates adjoining property in a land use category such that a buffer
would not be required by this chapter once the adjoining property is rezoned
or developed.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.189  INSTALLATION.



   All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the American
Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association for
Nurserymen and is hereby incorporated by reference. All landscaping shall be
installed prior to issuance of any temporary or final occupancy permit,
unless a hardship is determined to exist by the Director. In such event, the
landscaping improvements shall be secured with a letter of credit or other
acceptable surety pursuant to § 158.058 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.190  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The applicant, developer, landowner and successors in interest
shall be jointly and severally responsible for the regular maintenance of all
landscaping elements, whether located on private common ground or private
property, in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. Trees and
vegetation, irrigation systems, fences, walls and other landscape elements
shall be considered required elements of a development in the same manner as
parking, building materials and other site requirements imposed by the final
development plan or otherwise. When a buffer is required, the owner shall
maintain the landscaping and screening to provide an opaque visual screen to
a height of six feet on a continuous, year-round basis. All landscaping shall
be maintained free of disease, pests, weeds and litter. All landscape
structures shall such as fences, walls and planters shall be repaired and
replaced periodically to maintain them in a structurally sound and
aesthetically pleasing condition.



   (B)   (1)   All property owners shall be responsible to maintain
and keep safe and free from debris and yard waste the landscaped parkway
adjacent to such property. Any landscape element located on the owner’s
property that dies, or is otherwise removed or seriously damaged, shall
within 30 days of the beginning of the growing season be replaced based on
the requirement of this subchapter.



      (2)   If the owner fails to fulfill his or her obligation in
this regard during an 18-month period after installation of the landscaping,
the city may complete the performance and seek reimbursement from the
owner’s surety.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.191  LANDSCAPE CREDIT.



   Any existing trees on a site that are in appropriate locations and of
acceptable quality may be credited towards fulfillment of any landscaping
provisions of this chapter on a caliper inch per inch basis, at the
discretion of the city.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.192  CONSTRUCTION PROTECTION.



   The following standards shall be followed prior to and during
construction to protect significant trees.



   (A)   Within the drip line of any protected tree, there shall be no
cut or fill unless the disturbance has been evaluated and approved by an
independent arborist, urban forester, landscape architect or other certified
professional as approved by the Director.



   (B)   Prior to and during construction, temporary barriers shall be
erected around all protected existing trees, or tree stands, with a four-foot
fence outside the drip line or five times the DBH, whichever is greater.
There shall be no storage or movement of equipment, material, debris or fill
within the fenced tree-protection zone. The temporary barriers shall be
inspected by a qualified professional identified in division (A) above prior
to disturbance.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.193  RIPARIAN CORRIDORS.



   (A)   Definition. Riparian corridors are those linear natural
landscape systems, which have economic, biological, ecological or visual
values for the community. Within the city, riparian corridors located along
naturally occurring drainage channels have been identified as critical
environmental resources within the community. These corridors form important
visual and recreational opportunities for the community, which in-turn create
economic value when correctly preserved as amenities within developed parcels.



   (B)   Intent. This section is provided to govern the preservation of
all existing landform/topographic conditions and vegetative cover within
identified environmental corridors. RIPARIAN CORRIDORS, identified in the
environmental/landscape framework plan, are defined as those natural drainage
channels having tree canopy or other vegetative cover, and/or soils generally
associated with continuous or intermittent drainage or flooding. For purposes
of the plan, riparian corridors have been identified by visual means, using
current aerial photographs that indicate tree canopy cover over or within
natural drainage channels.



   (C)   Applicability. This section shall apply to any land
disturbance or construction of any structure within any area designated as a
riparian corridor as set forth in the environmental/landscape framework plan,
the boundaries of which are more specifically set forth in the plan’s map
appendix. To the extent that a parcel is only partially subject to the
riparian corridor designation, only structures or land disturbance on that
portion of the site shall be subject to this section.



   (D)   Procedures. Land disturbance and construction of any structure
governed by this section is prohibited, except as may be specifically
permitted by special use permit issued pursuant to §§ 158.240 through
158.243, 158.255 through 158.257, 158.270 through 158.282 of this chapter and
this subchapter, and subject to the additional standards established in this
section. If construction is proposed as part of a planned use, no separate
special use permit is needed.



   (E)   Standards. No special use permit shall be granted pursuant to
this section, except in conformance with the standards established in the
environmental/landscape framework plan, and the standards established in §§
158.095 through 158.102 of this chapter, as applied to the riparian corridor.
The issuance of a special use permit shall require maximum preservation of
vegetation and tree canopy, and shall include mitigation conditions to ensure
that any disturbance within the riparian corridor is minimized and adequately
restored and mitigated where disturbance cannot be reasonably avoided.



   (F)   Requirements. If it is determined that a portion of a riparian
corridor is located on the site of a proposed subdivision or development
proposal, the petitioner shall comply with the following.



      (1)   Site plan. Each applicant must show any riparian areas
on the required site plan. The city may determine the applicability of
specific criteria where existing riparian corridor tree canopy and other
vegetative cover is less than 300 feet in width.



      (2)   Clearing restrictions. In no case may existing trees or
other vegetation be removed within riparian corridors identified as part of a
submitted site plan without prior written approval by the city. Such review
and approval by the city is required in order to maintain a city-wide
functional storm water management system and important environmental
functions of these areas.



   (G)   Riparian Corridor “x” Zone. The “x” zone of the
riparian corridor is a critical zone of vegetative cover and soil conditions
that provides for drainage channel bank stability and erosion control.
Current tree canopy along most of the identified riparian corridors occurs
within the width of the “x” zone, and in addition to the erosion control
created by the vegetation within the zone, the zone creates primary wildlife
habitat and movement corridors. The zone’s tree canopy, a remnant of the
forests which covered much of the city’s landscape prior to agricultural
use and development, creates important visual qualities for the city.
Development and preservation criteria for the “x” zone include:



      (1)   A minimum width of 300 feet, measured 150 feet
(horizontal or plan dimension) perpendicular from centerline of drainage
channel on both slopes;



      (2)   Development of parcels shall not directly or indirectly
impact the “x” zone area of the riparian corridors;



      (3)   All vegetative cover and landform/ topographic
conditions must be retained in a natural condition during development and
post-development activities;



      (4)   Storm water management basins, devices or strategies
shall not be deployed within the “x” zone of the riparian corridor unless
other storm water mitigation strategies are deemed impractical by the city;
and



      (5)   Use of the “x” zone shall be primarily resource
preservation. Limited use of the zone for hike and bike trails may be
approved by the city.



   (H)   Riparian Corridor “y” Zone. The “y” zone of the
riparian corridor is another critical zone of vegetative cover and soil
conditions that shall be preserved or re-established outside of the “x”
zone described above. The primary purpose of the “y” zone is to provide
additional biological filtration of sediment and contaminants carried by
storm water run-off into natural drainage channels, and to further buffer or
slow storm water time of concentration as storm flows enter natural drainage
channels. Development and preservation criteria for the “y” zone include:



      (1)   Minimum width of 50 feet, measured 50 feet (horizontal
or plan dimension) perpendicular from outside boundary of “x” zone as
described above;



      (2)   Development of parcels shall not directly or indirectly
impact the “y” zone area of the riparian corridors, except for uses noted
below. Otherwise, all vegetative cover and landform/ topographic conditions
must be retained in a natural condition during development and
post-development;



      (3)   Use of the “y” zone shall be limited to
non-structural or natural storm water management strategies, non-vehicular
circulation systems or dedicated parkland/ open space developed with native
plant species; and



      (4)   Storm water management basins, devices or strategies
deployed within the “y” zone shall be reviewed and approved by the city.







 



   (I)   Alternative compliance. Upon request by the applicant, the
Director may consider and approve alternatives to full compliance with the
development guidelines contained in this subchapter if the associated
environmental and functional impact of the environmental corridor is
mitigated to the maximum extent feasible by the alternative methods. Any
proposed alternatives must be shown on the site plan and certified by a
qualified professional knowledgeable in the area of natural drainage systems.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 158.194  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Commercial production from the land or on the land of
agricultural products, including horticultural, floricultural, dairy,
livestock, poultry and apiarian products, but not including forestry
products. (See TREE FARMING herein.)



      (2)   Clearing trees for the purpose of planting crops,
providing pasture for livestock, or constructing buildings accessory to
production of agricultural products.



   BERM. A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound.



   BUFFER. An area of natural vegetation or human-made construction that
is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar
land uses.



   BUFFER, NATURAL. A visual screen created by vegetation of such density
so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the
other throughout the year.



   BUFFER, STRUCTURAL. A visual screen created through construction of a
solid wooden or vinyl fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm or
combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented
with vegetation, to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one
side to the other throughout the year.



   BUILDING TREE LINE. The lines extending from the corners of a building
nearest a street to the side lines of the lot (not including a street
right-of-way), parallel to the right-of-way line or to the chord of that line.



   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a
point six inches above the ground or top of the root ball for up to and
including four-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground
or top of root ball for larger sizes.



   CANOPY. A roof-like structure supported by columns or projecting from a
building and open on at least three sides.



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. The land area circular in shape and centered on the
trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is determined by the farthest
extent of the drip line from the trunk.



   DEVELOPMENT SITE. That portion of a tract of land that will be
dedicated to a proposed development, including the land containing trees that
will be counted toward satisfying the requirements of these provisions. Where
the proposed DEVELOPMENT SITE is less than the entire tract, the Director
shall to determine the boundaries of the DEVELOPMENT SITE.



   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of a tree trunk (usually a
mature tree) measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground.
If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the trunk
is measured at the narrowest point beneath the split.



   DRIP LINE. A perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the
trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree
lands on the ground.



   GROUND COVER. A low growing plant other than turf grass that forms a
continuous cover over the ground surface.



   LANDSCAPE MATERIALS. Any combination of living plant materials and
non-living materials, such as rock, pebbles, sand, mulch, pavers, berms,
fencing, walls, fountains and other decorative materials.



   LANDSCAPED PARKWAY. The landscaped or green area between the curb and
sidewalk or other improvement.



   LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs, vines, turf, ground
cover and other landscape materials that are utilized to enhance the
aesthetic and functional qualities of a site.



   OPAQUE. Impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features,
buildings, structures and uses become visually indistinguishable.



   PLANT MATERIALS. Living plants that include trees, shrubs, ground
cover, grasses and perennial flowering plants, turf and vines, which are
suitable for ornamental and/or functional use.



   RIPARIAN CORRIDOR. A strip of land located along naturally occurring
drainage channels.



   SCREEN. Natural vegetation or a decorative structure that creates an
opaque visual block or obscures an unattractive view. For the purpose of this
subchapter, a SCREEN is opaque to a height of six feet above the ground
surface or, for a screen of plant materials, has the maximum opacity
obtainable with the approved arrangement and species of plant materials, to a
height of six feet. SCREENING may consist of any combination of the
following, as approved by the Director:



      (1)   Fencing constructed of cedar, redwood, treated wood or
other suitable all-weather material;



      (2)   Masonry walls;



      (3)   Plant materials or natural vegetation; and



      (4)   Earthen berms.



   SHADE TREE. A broadleaf tree having an average height at maturity of a
least 20 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding
trees with pyramidal, conical or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as
to provide shade in the summer months.



   SIGNIFICANT TREE. A tree in fair or better condition, which is 20
inches DBH or greater or  small ornamental hardwoods such as dogwoods,
redbuds or sourwoods whose diameters are eight inches DBH or more.



   SHRUB. A self-supporting woody plant that normally reaches a height of
less than 15 feet.



   TREE. A self-supporting woody plant which normally reaches a height of
at least 15 feet.



   TREE FARMING. The planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees in a
continuous cycle as a regular practice on a tract of land; not including the
removal of trees for purposes of development or the removal of trees without
replanting.



   TURF. Ground cover composed of one or more species of perennial grass
that is grown as a permanent lawn.



   VINE. A plant that is typically woody and climbs by supporting itself
on some other plant or structure.



(Ord. 3474, passed 9-5-2006; Ord. 3817, passed 2-18-2014)




ARTICLE 10:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS




§ 158.205  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The general purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the
placement, construction and modification of telecommunications towers,
support structures and antennas in order to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering
with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications
marketplace in the city.



   (B)   Specifically, this subchapter is intended to:



      (1)   Provide for the appropriate location and development of
telecommunications facilities and systems to serve the citizens and
businesses of the city;



      (2)   Minimize adverse visual impacts of communications
antennas and support structure through the careful design, siding, landscape
screening and innovative camouflaging techniques;



      (3)   Maximize the use of existing and new support structures
so as to minimize the need to construct new or additional facilities;



      (4)   Maximize the co-location of facilities on any new
support structures;



      (5)   Ensure that any new telecom-munications tower or
structure is located in an area compatible with the neighborhood or
surrounding community to the extent possible; and



      (6)   Ensuring that regulation of telecommunications towers
and structures does not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless services, and does not unreasonably discriminate among
functionally equivalent providers of such service.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.206  THE LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.



   The legislative findings supporting this legislation are contained in
the predecessor ordinance on file with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.207  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTENNA. Any device that transmits and/or receives radio waves for
voice, data or video communications purposes including, but not limited to,
television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone and similar forms of
communications. The term shall exclude satellite earth station antennas less
than two meters in diameter (mounted within 12 feet of the ground or
building-mounted) and any receive-only home television antennas.



   AGL. Above ground level. Ground level shall be determined by the
average elevation of the natural ground level within a radius of 50 feet from
the center location of measurement.



   CABINET. A structure for the protection and security of communications
equipment associated with one or more antennas where direct access to
equipment is provided from the exterior and that has horizontal dimensions
that do not exceed four feet by six feet, and vertical height that does not
exceed six feet.



   COMMUNICATION TOWER MULTI-USE INTEREST AREA. An area as designated by
the map of the same title indicating general locations in which more than one
wireless service provider may potentially seek to locate an antenna facility
and in which the construction of co-locatable towers will be required. The
map may be periodically revised in response to new information received
regarding tower sites sought by wireless providers. A MULTI-USE INTEREST AREA
shall be designated as appropriate for towers within one mile of each other,
unless the applicant demonstrates to the contrary. The MULTI-USE INTEREST
AREA MAP shall include the area within the city limits and within one and
one-half miles of its corporate boundaries.



   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the city or his or her
designee.



   DISGUISED SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any freestanding, human-made structure
designed for the support of antennas, the presence of which is camouflaged or
concealed as an appropriately-placed architectural or natural feature.
Depending on the location and type of disguise used, such concealment may
require placement underground of the utilities leading to the structure. Such
structures may include but are not limited to, clock towers, campaniles,
observation towers, light standards, flag poles and artificial trees.



   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



   HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average grade of the
base of the structure at ground level to its highest point and including the
main structure and all attachments thereto.



   INCIDENTAL USE. Any use authorized herein that exists in addition to
the principal use of the property.



   MODIFICATION. Any addition, deletion or change, including the addition
or replacement of antennas, or any change to a structure requiring a building
permit or other governmental approval.



   SHELTER. A building for the protection and security of communications
equipment associated with one or more antennas and where access to equipment
is gained from the interior of the building. Human occupancy for office or
other uses or the storage of other materials and equipment not in direct
support of the connected antennas is prohibited.



   SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A tower or disguised support structure.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. The part of the signal distribution system
used or operated by a telecommunications carrier under a license from the FCC
consisting of a combination of improvements and equipment including:



      (1)   One or more antennas;



      (2)   A supporting structure and the hardware by which
antennas are attached;



      (3)   Equipment housing; and



      (4)   Ancillary equipment such as signal transmission cables
and miscellaneous hardware.



   TOWER. A structure designed for the support of one or more antennas and
including guyed towers, self-supporting (lattice) towers or monopoles but not
disguised support structures or buildings. The term shall also not include
any support structure including attachments of 65 feet or less in height
owned and operated solely for use by an amateur radio operator licensed by
the Federal Communication Commission.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.208  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The requirements set forth in this section shall be applicable to all
towers, antennas and other support structures installed, built or modified
after the effective date of this subchapter to the full extent permitted by
law.



   (A)   Principal or incidental use. Antennas and support structures
may be either a principal use in all zoning districts or an incidental use to
institutional or non-residential uses, subject to any applicable district
requirement relating to yard or setback.



   (B)   Building codes, safety standards and zoning compliance. To
ensure the structural integrity of antenna support structures, the owner
shall see that it is constructed and maintained in compliance with all
standards contained in applicable state and local building codes and the
applicable standards published by the Electronics Industries Association, as
amended from time to time. In addition to any other approvals required by
this section, no antenna, tower or support structure shall be erected prior
to receipt of a certificate of zoning compliance and the issuance of a
building permit.



   (C)   Regulatory compliance. All antennas and support structures
shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and
any other state or federal agency with the authority to regulate
communications antennas and support structures. Should such standards or
regulations be amended, then the owner shall bring such devices and structure
into compliance with the revised standards or regulations within the time
period mandated by the controlling agency. No approval for any placement,
construction or modification of any antenna or structure permitted by this
section shall be granted for any applicant having an uncured violation of
this section or any other governmental regulatory requirement related to such
antenna or structures within the city.



   (D)   Security. All antennas and support structures shall be
protected from unauthorized access by appropriate security measures. A
description of proposed security measures shall be provided as part of any
application to install, build or modify antennas or support structures.
Additional measures may be required as a condition of the issuance of a
building permit or administrative permit as deemed necessary by the Director
or by the Planning Commission in the case of a special use permit.



   (E)   Lighting. Antennas and support structures shall not be lighted
unless required by the FAA or other state or federal agency with authority to
regulate, in which case a description of the required lighting scheme will be
made a part of the application to install, build or modify the antennas or
support structure. Equipment cabinets and shelters may have lighting only as
approved by the Director on the approved site development plan.



   (F)   Advertising. Except for a disguised antenna support structure
in the form of an otherwise lawfully permitted pylon sign, the placement of
advertising on structures regulated by this section is prohibited.



   (G)   Design.



      (1)   Subject to the requirements of the FAA or any applicable
state or federal agency, towers shall be painted a neutral color consistent
with the natural or built environment of the site.



      (2)   Equipment shelters or cabinets shall have an exterior
finish compatible with the natural or built environment of the site and shall
also comply with any design guidelines as may be applicable to the particular
zoning district in which the facility is located.



      (3)   Towers shall not exceed the height limitation of any
airport overlay zone as may be adopted by the city.



      (4)   Antennas attached to a building or disguised antenna
support structure shall be of a color identical to or closely compatible with
the surface to which they are mounted. All other antennas shall be designed
disguised, or if otherwise permitted, maximally concealed on or within the
support structure. Unless demonstrated to be technologically unfeasible,
exposed or separated antennas on “crows nest” platforms are prohibited.



      (5)   All towers shall be surrounded by a minimum six-foot
high decorative wall constructed of brick, stone or comparable masonry
materials and a landscape strip of not less than ten feet in width and
planted with materials, which will provide a visual barrier to a minimum
height of six feet. The landscape strip shall be exterior to any security
wall. In lieu of the required wall and landscape strip, an alternative means
of screening may be approved by the Director in the case of use permitted by
administrative permit, or by the Planning Commission in the case of a special
use permit, upon demonstration by the applicant that an equivalent degree of
visual screening will be achieved.



      (6)   All towers, disguised support structures, and related
structures, fences and walls shall be separated from the property line of any
adjacent property zoned for a residential use at least a distance equal to
the height of the tower, and shall be separated from all other adjacent
property lines at least a distance equal to one-half of the height of the
tower or structure.



      (7)   Vehicle or outdoor storage on any tower site is
prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by the zoning.



      (8)   On-site parking for periodic maintenance and service
shall be provided at all antenna or tower locations consistent with the
underlying zoning district.



   (H)   Shared use.



      (1)   Existing towers. Prior to the issuance of any permit to
alter or modify any tower existing on the effective date of this subchapter,
the owner shall provide to the city a written and notarized agreement
committing to make said tower available for use by others subject to
reasonable technical limitations and reasonable financial terms. The willful
and knowing failure of a tower owner to agree to shared use or to negotiate
in good faith with potential users shall be unlawful and shall, among other
remedies of the city, be cause for the withholding of future permits to the
same owner to install, build or modify antennas or towers within the city.



      (2)   Tower inventories. Prior to the issuance of any permit
to install, build or modify any tower, the tower owner shall furnish the
Director an inventory of all of that owner’s towers in or within one and
one-half miles of the city limits. The inventory shall include the tower’s
reference name or number, the street location, latitude and longitude,
structure type, height, type and mounting height of existing antennas and an
assessment of available ground space for the placement of additional
equipment shelters. Upon being modified, any such tower shall be placed on
the multi-use interest area map for required collocation.



      (3)   Shared use required; new towers. Any new tower approved
at a height of 60 feet AGL (above ground level) or higher shall be designed
and constructed to accommodate at least one additional user unless a larger
number is indicated by the response to the notification provisions herein. A
written agreement committing to shared use as required by division (H)(1)
above shall be submitted by the  tower applicant. The willful and knowing
failure of the owner of a tower built for shared use to negotiate in good
faith with potential users shall be unlawful and shall be a violation of this
subchapter and, among other remedies of the city, shall be cause for the
withholding of future permits to the same owner to install, build or modify
antennas or towers within the city.



      (4)   Communications tower multi-use area map. Any new tower
approved within a communication tower multi-use interest area as designated
by the map of the same title, shall be designed and constructed to
accommodate the number of users indicated by the plan to the extent feasible.
The willful and knowing failure of the owner of a tower build for shared use
to negotiate in good faith with potential users shall be a violation of this
subchapter and, among other remedies of the city, shall be cause for the
withholding of future permits to the same owner to install, build or modify
antennas or towers within the city.



      (5)   Notice of tower applications to potential tower users.
Prior to any application for the construction of a new tower or disguised
support structure, a copy of the application or a summary containing the
height, design, location and type and frequency of antennas shall be
delivered by certified mail to all known potential tower users as identified
by a schedule maintained by the Community Development Department. Proof of
such delivery shall be submitted with the application to the city. The
Director may establish a form required to be used for such notifications.
Upon request, the Director shall place on a list the name and address of any
user of towers or prospective user to receive notification of applications.
The Director shall, before deciding on the application or forwarding it to
the Planning Commission for consideration, allow all persons receiving notice
at least ten business days to respond to the city and the applicant that the
party receiving notice be permitted to share the proposed tower or locate
within one mile of such area. Where two or more parties seek to locate within
one mile of each other, or such other distance as is demonstrated to the
Director to be reasonable pursuant to the objectives of this subchapter, the
Director shall designate such area as a multi-use interest area on the map.
The failure of the receiving party to use this process or respond to any such
notice shall be considered cause for denying requests by such party for new
towers or structures.



      (6)   Appeal of shared use violations. Any party seeking
shared use of a tower subject to this provision shall after responding to
notice of an application, negotiate with the applicant for such use. The
applicant may on a legitimate and reasonable business basis choose between
multiple requests for shared use on the same tower or structure, and may
reject any request where legitimate technical obstacles cannot be reasonably
overcome or where the party requesting shared use will not agree to
reasonable financial terms. Any party believing that the applicant has
breached its duty to negotiate in good faith for shared use shall immediately
notify the applicant and the Director in writing. The Director may reject the
application upon a finding that shared use has been improperly denied. A
notice of breach of duty shall explain the precise basis for the claim and
shall be accompanied by payment of an administrative review fee of $500 to
the city to offset the cost of review. After the applicant’s receipt of the
notice, the applicant shall have ten calendar days to provide a written
submission to the Director responding to the alleged violation of the shared
use requirement. If deemed necessary by the Director, he or she may engage,
at the cost of the party alleging the violation, a neutral, qualified
technical consultant to provide an opinion on feasibility or costs of the
shared use request. If the Director receives a notice alleging a violation of
the shared use requirement, the time for a decision on an administrative
permit is automatically extended for up to 30 days until the Director has
determined that the applicant has complied. An application for special use
permit shall not be deemed complete for acceptance until a decision on
compliance is reached.



   (I)   Construction of telecommunication facilities within one and
one-half miles of the city. Except to the extent contrary to applicable law,
a telecommunications carrier or other entity shall prior to constructing a
telecommunications facility within one and one-half miles of the city shall
comply with the following requirements.



      (1)   Notice.



         (a)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-1, at
least 30 days prior to commencing construction of a new telecommunications
facility, the telecommunications carrier shall provide written notice of its
intent to construct the facility. The notice shall include, but not be
limited to the following information:



            1.   The name, address, and telephone number of
the company responsible for the construction of the facility; and



            2.   The address and telephone number of the
governmental entity that issued the building permit for the
telecommunications facility.



         (b)   The notice shall be provided in person, by
overnight private courier, or by certified mail to the city and all owners of
property within 250 feet of the parcel in which the telecommunications
carrier has a leasehold or ownership interest.



         (c)   For the purposes of this notice requirement,
OWNERS means those persons or entities identified from the authentic tax
records of the county in which the telecommunications facility is to be
located. If, after a bonafide effort by the telecommunications carrier to
determine the owner and his or her address, the owner of the property on whom
the notice must be served cannot be found at the owner’s last known
address, or if the mailed notice is returned because the owner cannot be
found at the last known address, the notice requirement of this division
(I)(1) is deemed satisfied.



      (2)   Subdivision and development regulations. No such
construction shall commence contrary to any provision of the Subdivision and
Development Control Ordinance and any required approval therein, including,
but not limited to, any grading or infrastructure permit approval.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.209  PERMITTED USES.



   The placement of antenna and towers are permitted in all zoning
districts only as follows:



   (A)   The attachment of additional or replacement  complying
antennas or shelters to any tower existing on the effective date of this
subchapter or subsequently approved in accordance with these regulations;
provided that, additional equipment shelters or cabinets are located within
the existing tower compound area;



   (B)   The mounting of antennas on any existing building or
structure, such as a water tower, provided that the presence of the antennas
is concealed by architectural elements or fully camouflaged by painting a
color identical surface to which they are attached;



   (C)   The mounting of antennas on or within any existing
high-voltage electric transmission tower, but not exceeding the height of
such tower by more than ten feet; and



   (D)   The installation of antennas or the construction of a tower or
support structure on buildings or land owned by the city following the
approval of a lease agreement by the City Council.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.210  AUTHORIZATION BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT.



   (A)   The placement of antenna and towers are permitted in all
zoning districts by administrative permit approved by the Director only as
follows:



      (1)   The attachment of additional or replacement antennas or
shelters to any tower existing on the effective date of this subchapter or
subsequently approved in accordance with these regulations and requiring the
enlargement of the existing tower compound area as long as all other
requirements of this section and the underlying zoning district are met;



      (2)   The one-time replacement of any tower existing on the
effective date of this subchapter or subsequently approved in accordance with
these regulations so long as the purpose of the replacement is to accommodate
shared use of the site or to eliminate a safety hazard. The new tower shall
be of the same type as the original except that a guyed or self-supporting
(lattice) tower may be replaced by a monopole. If the guyed or lattice tower
to be replaced is 180 feet or less in height, it shall only be replaced with
a monopole. The height of the new tower may exceed that of the original by
not more than 20 feet. Subsequent replacements shall require the approval of
a special use permit;



      (3)   The construction of a disguised support structure;
provided that, all related equipment shall be placed underground or concealed
within the structure when the structure is located in any district other than
a district authorizing industrial uses. Equipment may be placed in a cabinet
if the disguised support structure is incidental to an industrial,
commercial, institutional or other non-residential use;



      (4)   The placement of dual polar panel antennas on wooden or
steel functioning utility poles not to exceed 40 feet in height in any
residentially zoned district and on any such poles (or functional replacement
poles of no greater height) existing in any other district on the date of
adoption of this subchapter. All related equipment for antennas permitted by
this division (A)(4) shall be wholly contained in a cabinet; and



      (5)   Towers erected and maintained for a period not to exceed
45 days for the purpose of replacing an existing tower, testing an existing
or proposed network, or special events requiring mobile towers.



   (B)   Applications for administrative permits shall be made on the
appropriate forms to the Director and accompanied by payment of $500, or such
other fee as may be established by the Council.



   (C)   A detailed site plan, based on a closed boundary survey of the
host parcel, shall be submitted indicating all existing and proposed
improvements including buildings, drives, walkway, parking areas and other
structures, public right-of-way, the zoning categories of the subject and
adjoining properties, the location of and distance to off-site residential
structures, required setbacks, required buffer and landscape areas,
hydrologic features and the coordinates and height AGL of the existing or
proposed tower.



   (D)   The application shall be reviewed by the Director to determine
compliance with the above standards and transmit the application for review
and comment by other departments and public agencies as may be affected by
the proposed facility.



   (E)   The Director shall issue a decision on the permit within 45
days of the date of application or the application shall be deemed approved
unless the time period for review and action was extended. The Director may
deny the application or approve the application as submitted or with such
modifications as are, in his or her judgment, reasonably necessary to protect
the safety or general welfare of the citizens consistent with the purposes of
this section. The Director may consider the purposes of this section and the
factors established herein for granting a special use permit as well as any
other considerations consistent with this subchapter. A decision to deny an
application shall be made in writing and state the specific reasons for the
denial.



   (F)   Appeals from the decision of the Director shall be made in the
same manner as otherwise provided for the appeal of administrative decisions.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.211  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   All proposals to install, build or modify an antenna or support
structure not permitted by §§ 158.209 and 158.210 of this chapter shall
require the approval of special use permit following a duly advertised public
hearing by the Planning Commission, subject to the forthcoming limitations.



   (A)   Applications. Applications of special use permits shall be
filed and processed subject to the requirements of and in the manner and time
frame as established in §§ 158.240 through 158.242, 158.255 through 158.257
and 158.270 through 158.282 of this chapter. A decision by the Planning
Commission shall be accompanied by substantial evidence supporting the
decision, which shall be made a part of the written record of the meeting at
which a final decision on the application is rendered. Evidence shall be
under oath and may be submitted with the application or thereafter or
presented during the public hearing by the applicant or others.



   (B)   Additional minimum requirements. No special use permit shall
be issued unless the applicant has clearly demonstrated by substantial
evidence that placement of an antenna or support structure pursuant to §§
158.209 and 158.210 of this chapter is not technologically or economically
feasible. The Planning Commission may consider current or emerging industry
standards and practices, among other information, in determining feasibility.



   (C)   Findings required. In addition to the determinations or
limitations specified herein and by §§ 158.095 through 158.102 of this
chapter for the consideration of special use permits, the Planning Commission
shall also base its decision upon, and shall make findings as to, the
existence of the following conditions:



      (1)   The proposed tower is not and cannot be located within a
communications tower multi-use interest area as designated by such map, or if
so located, meets the co-location requirements of this section;



      (2)   No existing towers, structures or buildings within the
necessary geographic area for the applicant’s tower meet the applicant’s
necessary engineering requirements considering:



         (a)   Height;



         (b)   Structural strength;



         (c)   Resulting signal interference;



         (d)   Feasibility of retrofitting;



         (e)   Feasibility of redesigning the applicant’s tower
network; or



         (f)   Other limiting conditions that render towers,
structures or buildings within the applicant’s required geographic area
unsuitable.



      (3)   Applications for a new tower structure shall be
considered only after a letter, certified by a radio frequency engineer,
clearly demonstrates that the planned telecommunication equipment cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved transmission tower and clearly
demonstrates one or more of the following conditions:



         (a)   Planned telecommunications equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of an existing or approved transmission tower, and
the transmission tower cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned
telecommunication equipment at a reasonable cost;



         (b)   Planned telecommunications equipment will cause
radio frequency interference with other existing or planned
telecommunications equipment for that transmission tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;



         (c)   Existing or approved towers do not have space on
which the planned telecommunications equipment can be placed so it can
function effectively and at least in parity with other similar
telecommunications equipment in place or approved by the city and or the
county.



         (d)   Addition of planned equipment to an existing or
approved transmission tower would result in NIER levels in excess or those
permitted under division (C)(5) below; or



         (e)   Other reasons that make it impractical to place
the telecommunications equipment planned by the applicant on an existing and
approved transmission tower.



      (4)   No application for a new tower structure shall be
considered unless the applicant is unable to lease or otherwise secure space
on an existing or planned telecommunication tower.



         (a)   Shared use of an existing or approved tower shall
be conditioned upon the applicant’s agreement to pay reasonable fees and
costs associated with adapting existing facilities to the proposed use,
including, but not limited to, reasonable costs for reinforcing or modifying
a tower or structure, for preventing radio frequency interferences and other
changes reasonably required to accommodate shared use.



         (b)   The city may consider expert testimony to
determine whether the fees and costs are reasonable.



         (c)   Once the city finds that the telecommunications
equipment proposed by the applicant cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower, each tower so found is presumed unable to accommodate similar
equipment that may be proposed in the future, unless evidence is introduced
to demonstrate otherwise.



      (5)   The design of the tower or structure, including the
antennas, shelter and ground layout maximally reduces visual degradation and
otherwise complies with provisions and intent of this section. New towers
shall be of a monopole design, unless it is shown that an alternative design
would equally or better satisfy this division (C)(5);



      (6)   The proposal minimizes the number and/or size of towers
or structures that will be required in the area. Where alternate technology
or design exists or is reasonably available that would satisfy the general
need for the proposal, this factor is ordinarily not satisfied;



      (7)   The applicant has not previously failed to take
advantage of reasonably available shared use opportunities or procedures
provided by this subchapter or otherwise;



      (8)   No land owned by any agency of the federal or state
government, or by any political subdivision of the state, is available for
locating the structure or tower;



      (9)   The city may require, at the expense of the petitioner,
any additional studies or the hiring of an external consultant to review
exhibits and/or other requirements in accordance with this section; and



      (10)   If any one, but not more than one, of the first six
determinations is not satisfied, approval may be granted only on a finding of
unique circumstances otherwise necessitating approval to satisfy the purposes
of this section.



   (D)   Additional height limitations. No tower shall be approved at a
height exceeding 150 feet AGL unless the applicant clearly demonstrates that
such height is required for the proper function of the applicant’s system
or that of a public safety communications system of a governmental entity
sharing the tower. Such showing must also be supported by the opinion of a
telecommunications consultant hired by the city at the expense of the
applicant. The opinion of the consultant shall include a statement that no
available alternatives exist to exceeding the height limit or the reason why
such alternatives are not viable.



   (E)   Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation standards. All
transmission facilities shall conform to the relevant sections of the
American National Safety Levels with Respect to Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 300 kHz to 100 kHz. This standard as
identified by as ANSI- C95.1-1982 and is published by the American National
Standards Institute, a copy of which is incorporated herein by reference and
is maintained on file in the office of the Director of Community Development.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.212  OBSOLETE NON-COMPLYING TOWER STRUCTURES.



   Any upper portion of a tower which is not occupied by active antennas
for a period of 12 months, and any entire tower which is not so occupied for
a period of six months, shall be removed at the owner’s expense. Removal of
upper portions of a tower manufactured as a single unit shall not be
required. Failure to comply with this provision shall constitute a nuisance
that may be remedied by the city at the tower or property owner’s expense.
Any applicant for a new tower or disguised structure not built as disguised
part of another existing or permitted structure shall place a bond or other
security with the city prior to any final approval for the purpose of
removing any tower or disguised structure as required herein and to
compensate the city for performing proper maintenance of such towers or
disguised structures to ensure such structures do not become unsafe or
otherwise fail to be maintained in compliance with this subchapter. The bond
or security shall be in the form approved by the Director, and in the amount
of $15,000, or such other amount as is determined by the Director to satisfy
the requirements hereof with regard to the specific tower or structure to
which it would apply.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.213  COMMERCIAL OPERATION OF UNLAWFUL TOWER OR ANTENNAS.



   Notwithstanding any right that may exist for a governmental entity to
operate or construct a tower or structure, it shall be unlawful for any
person to erect or operate for any private commercial purpose of any antenna,
tower or disguised support structure in violation of any provision of this
subchapter, regardless of whether such antenna or structure is located on
land owned by a governmental entity.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)




ARTICLE 11:
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 158.225  DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   The Director of Community Development (Director) or duly
designated and acting Director shall be responsible for interpreting and
administering the provisions of this chapter and shall have primary
responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter by all necessary and
appropriate means of the duties as required herein.



   (B)   The Director may adopt such administrative policies as
necessary to the carrying out of such duties.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.226  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The Planning Commission of the city, which has been duly created by the
City Council, is the Planning Commission (Commission) referred to in this
chapter. The objective and purpose of the Commission are those set forth in
the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, subdivision regulations and amendments
and supplements thereto. The regulations, membership, terms of office, powers
and duties delegated to the Commission by the City Council are set forth in
Ord. 632 of 3-2-1970, and the Commission charter/by-laws as may be approved
by the City Council.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.227  BUILDING PERMITS, ZONING PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.



   (A)   Building permit. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, raised
or structurally altered without a building permit therefore issued by the
Community Development Department(Department). A building permit shall not be
issued by the Department, except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, unless said official receives a written order from the Hearing
Officer in the form of an interpretation involving a formal appeal proceeding
as provided by the applicable provisions of §§ 158.295 through 158.301 of
this chapter or in the form of a variation from those regulations that, as
applied, authorizes the proposed use, construction or consistent with the
provisions relating to variances in accordance with §§ 158.295 through
158.301 of this chapter, or in the form of a special (use) permit as provided
by the applicable provisions of §§ 158.095 through 158.102 of this chapter;
or upon receipt of a written order from a court with jurisdiction under an
administrative review proceeding.



   (B)   Zoning permit.



      (1)   A zoning permit shall be required whenever a building or
structure is erected, moved, added to, placed, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, raised or structurally altered, or as otherwise required by the
city. No building permit shall be issued until the Director has issued a
zoning permit confirming the proposed building, structure or alteration is
consistent with and authorized by the applicable zoning.



      (2)   Upon determination of compliance of the application with
all applicable requirements of this chapter and Ch. 154 of this code, if
applicable, the Director shall issue a zoning permit stating that the
proposed building or structure is authorized in compliance with this chapter.



      (3)   Nothing in the issuance of a zoning permit shall be
deemed to grant authority for uses or construction not authorized by the
applicable regulations.



   (C)   Occupancy permit.



      (1)   No building or structure hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be occupied and used until an occupancy permit
indicating compliance with the applicable sections of the Building Code,
Zoning Code and any other applicable section of the municipal code has been
issued by the Director.



      (2)   Occupancy permits shall be requested in the manner
required under the City Building Code and further satisfying the conditions
of this section.



      (3)   The Director shall cause the premises to be inspected to
determine that the proposed use and any buildings or structures involved
comply with all respects with the provisions of this chapter or with a
written order from the Hearing Officer in the form of an administrative
review decision on an appeal or variation as provided in §§ 158.240 through
158.243, 158.255 through 158.257 and 158.270 through 158.282 of this chapter.



      (4)   Upon determination of compliance, the Director shall
issue an occupancy permit stating that the building or structure is in
compliance with this chapter.



      (5)   The issuance of an occupancy permit is required in
addition to the zoning permit and building permit requirement for a
certificate of occupancy, not as a substitute for the same.



      (6)   A record of all zoning and occupancy permits shall be
kept in file in the office of the Community Development Department, and
copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building or structure affected.



   (D)   Cost and applications. For individual applications for
permits, a fee in amount as determined by separate ordinance authorized by
the city shall be charged the applicant, payable to the city, for the cost of
processing. There shall be submitted with all applications for a permit: two
copies of a site development plan drawn to accurate scale showing the actual
dimensions of the subject lot, the size and location of the lot, buildings,
structures and uses existing and/or proposed and such other information as
may be necessary to determine and provide for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.



   (E)   Authorizations. A building permit or zoning permit shall be a
permission to proceed with the proposed work and shall not be construed to be
an authorization to violate, cancel or set aside any of the standards and
requirements of this chapter, except as maybe specifically stipulated by
variation from said standards and requirements in accordance with the
procedures specified by the provisions herein.



   (F)   Compliance with approved applications. All work and use
activity regulated under this chapter shall conform to the approved
application, including the plans and other accompanying documents for which a
building permit or zoning permit has been issued, and any approved amendments
thereto. Whenever and wherever any work is being done or any premises is
being maintained and the performance or maintenance thereof is not in
conformity with the approved application and accompanying supporting
documents, then such work or maintenance shall be unlawful being in violation
of the terms and conditions under which approval was given and the zoning
permit issued.



   (G)   Expiration of zoning permit. A building permit or zoning
permit shall expire and become invalid if the authorized work is not
commenced within 12 calendar months after issuance of said permit or, if
after once commencing the authorized work, the work is suspended, abandoned
or otherwise not actively prosecuted to completion for a period of six
months, the permit or zoning permit shall expire and become invalid unless
otherwise determined.



   (H)   Revocation of permit. The Director may revoke a building
permit or zoning permit issued under this chapter in any instance of false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the approved
plans or other accompanying documents for which the permission to perform
work activity was based.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.228  ENTRY AND INSPECTIONS OF LAND AND BUILDINGS.



   (A)   To the extent otherwise permissible by law and consistent with
any required procedures as may be imposed by law, the personnel of the
Community Development Department or its authorized representatives are hereby
empowered in the performances of their functions, to enter upon any land in
the city for the purpose of making inspections, examinations and surveys
required to effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Director is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected
any building or other structure or any land on which work is planned pursuant
to a permit application or is in progress.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.229  VIOLATIONS OF PRIOR REGULATIONS.



   All violations under the previously existing regulations that exist
within the city as of the effective date of this chapter shall continue to be
violations and shall not be considered to be legal, non-conforming situations
under this chapter. The city shall have the authority to secure civil
remedies for violations of those regulations to the same extent that it may
secure similar remedies for violations of this chapter pursuant to § 158.999
of this chapter.



(Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)




ARTICLE 12:
ZONING AMENDMENTS




§ 158.240  WHO MAY APPLY.



   (A)   Text amendments. An application for a zoning text amendment
may only be filed by the governing body, the City Administrator or the
Director. A “zoning text amendment” is any amendment to the city’s
Zoning Code herein, but does not include the property rezoning.



   (B)   Property rezoning. An application for property rezoning may be
filed by either the City Administrator, at the direction of the governing
body, the landowner, or the landowner’s agent. A “property rezoning” is
a zoning district change or a planned use amendment applicable to one or more
specific properties reflected on the Official Zoning Map.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.241  CONSIDERATION OF ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   All zoning text amendments shall be approved by ordinance.
Consideration of zoning text amendments shall require a public hearing before
the Commission following publication notice in accordance with requirements
set forth in §§ 158.255 through 158.257 of this chapter. The recommendation
of the Commission is advisory.



   (B)   A vote either for or against a zoning text amendment by a
majority of all of the Commissioners present shall constitute a
recommendation of the Commission. If a motion for or against the zoning text
amendment fails to receive a majority vote, the Commission may entertain a
new motion. A tie vote, or the failure to obtain a majority vote on any
motion, shall constitute a “failure to recommend”. The Commission’s
recommendation, or failure to recommend, shall be submitted to the governing
body, accompanied by a written summary of the hearing.



   (C)   When the Commission submits a recommendation to the governing
body, the governing body may take such action as it deems appropriate,
including approval, approval with conditions, disapproval, amendment of the
application and adoption as amended, or rehearing of the petition by the
governing body.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.242  CONSIDERATION OF PROPERTY REZONING APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Public hearing required. Consideration of all applications for
property rezoning shall require a public hearing before the Commission and
governing body, with publication notice, notice to surrounding property
owners as required by §§ 158.255 through 158.257 of this chapter.



   (B)   Procedures. The procedures for Commission and governing body
consideration of property rezoning applications shall conform to the
procedures set forth for zoning text amendments. The governing body shall not
take action on the Commission’s original recommendation or a failure to
recommend unless seven days have elapsed after the date of the conclusion of
the Commission’s public hearing held pursuant to publication notice to
allow the filing of a protest petition as provided in this section. However,
where the right to file a protest petition has been waived in a verified
statement signed by all property owners holding the right, the governing body
may consider the Commission’s recommendation at any time.



   (C)   Protest petitions.



      (1)   A protest against any property rezoning application
shall be filed not later than the end of the business day (5:00 p.m.) on the
seventh day following the date of the conclusion of the Commission’s public
hearing held pursuant to the publication notice. To be considered a valid
protest, a protest petition must be timely filed and duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or
by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the
frontage proposed to be altered.



      (2)   If a protest is filed, a copy of the written protest
shall be served by the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the
proposed amendments and a copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if any, by
certified mail at the address of the applicant and attorney shown in the
application for the proposed amendment. Verification of the genuineness and
correctness of the signatures on the protest petition, either individually or
collectively, shall be made by a person who has signed the protest petition.



      (3)   Once a valid protest petition has been filed with the
city, it may not be withdrawn unless every person who originally signed the
protest signs a verified affidavit that states and fully explains the rights
being waived by the withdrawal of the protest petition. The affidavits of
withdrawal must be filed with the City Clerk on or before the last regular
business day preceding the governing body meeting for which the protest
applies. For purposes of withdrawal, signatures shall not be required of the
city, where city-owned property lies within the protest area, or of entities
controlling rights-of-way or utility easements.



   (D)   Adoption where protest filed. Where a valid protest petition
has been filed, an ordinance approving the property rezoning shall not become
effective, except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all members of the
governing body.



   (E)   Criteria for considering applications. In considering any
application for rezoning, the Commission and the governing body may give
consideration to the criteria stated below to the extent they are pertinent
to the



particular application. The Commission and governing body also may consider
other factors that may be relevant to a particular application.



      (1)   The existing uses and zoning of nearby property;



      (2)   The extent to which property values are diminished by
the particular zoning restrictions;



      (3)   The extent to which the destruction of property values
of plaintiff promote the health, safety, morals or welfare of the public;



      (4)   The relative gain to the public as compared to the
hardship imposed upon the individual property owner;



      (5)   The suitability of the subject property for the zoned
purposes;



      (6)   The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned
considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of
the subject property;



      (7)   The care that the community has taken to plan its land
use development; and



      (8)   The community need for the proposed use.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.243  LIMITATION ON SUCCESSIVE PROPERTY REZONING APPLICATIONS BY
LANDOWNER.



   (A)   No application for property rezoning shall be accepted if any
application for property rezoning for substantially the same property has
been filed and advertised for public hearing within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   For purposes of division (A) above, the preceding 12-month
period shall be determined as follows.



      (1)   If there was final action (either approval or denial) on
the prior application, the 12-month period shall run from the date of the
action.



      (2)   If the prior application was withdrawn after being
advertised for public hearing, the 12-month period shall run from the date
the application was withdrawn.



   (C)   (1)   The Director shall determine if an application
concerns “substantially the same property” as a prior application.



      (2)   The landowner may appeal the Director’s determination
to the governing body.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)




ARTICLE 13:
NOTICES AND HEARINGS




§ 158.255  PUBLICATION NOTICES.



   (A)   Newspaper public notice publication. Notice of all hearings
for  zoning text amendments, property rezoning or other approvals subject to
this requirement shall be published in one issue of a newspaper published in
the city or, if no newspaper is published in the city, a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. At least 15 days, but no more than 30 days, shall
elapse between the date of such publication and the date set for hearing. It
shall be the city’s responsibility to make sure said public notice is
published pursuant to this section. Notice for text amendments shall include
a brief statement describing the requested change.



   (B)   Inclusions. Notice for other amendments or approvals shall
include:



      (1)   Identification or description of the particular location
for which the amendment or other approval is sought; as well as



      (2)   A brief statement describing the proposed amendment or
other approval sought.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.256  NOTICES OF HEARING TO SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   Mailed notice. Notice for  hearings subject to this
subchapter, except hearings for text amendments, shall in addition to the
newspaper publication requirement above also require notice to surrounding
property owners as follows.



      (1)   The applicant shall certify and provide the addresses
and owners, as recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county
and as appears from the authentic tax records of the county, of all property
within 250 feet in each direction of the location for which the special use
is requested.



      (2)   Making notice of the hearing to the neighboring owners
of record is the city’s responsibility and shall be sent by regular mail
within 15 days of the scheduled hearing, but shall not be sent more than 30
days prior to the scheduled hearing.



   (B)   Notice of intent to surrounding property owners. It shall be
the applicant’s responsibility to submit a notice of intent to surrounding
property owners by certified mail. The notice shall contain the time and
place of the public hearing and a statement regarding the purpose of the
hearing, including, but not limited to, the following.



      (1)   The notice shall contain a statement regarding the
proposed changes in the chapter or in the boundaries of the zone or district.



      (2)   Where the hearing is for an application that relates to
specific property, the property shall be designated by its legal description
and general street location.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.257  PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   When the consideration of an application requires a public hearing, the
following shall apply.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a public hearing is to provide the
applicant and all other interested parties a reasonable and fair opportunity
to be heard, to present evidence relevant to the application and to rebut
evidence presented by others.



   (B)   Minutes. A journal of minutes of the proceedings shall be made
for all public hearings.



   (C)   Rules of procedure. All testimony by witnesses in any hearing
shall be given under oath. The governing body, Commission and Board may adopt
additional rules of procedure for public hearings by resolution or by- laws.



   (D)   Continuance. Any applicant or authorized agent shall have the
right to one continuance of a public hearing before the Commission, governing
body or Zoning Hearing Officer. No additional notices shall be required,
except if a hearing is continued to an unspecified date, notice pursuant
hereto shall be required to officially schedule the subsequent date and place
of the continued hearing. If a second continuance is required it shall be
treated as a new public hearing. Notice for the new hearing shall be
accordance with §§ 158.255 and 158.256 of this chapter.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)




ARTICLE 14:
GENERAL APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES




§ 158.270  GENERAL.



   The following requirements apply to all applications for zoning text
amendments, property rezonings, special use permits and other applications
subject to this chapter, unless otherwise specified.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.271  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   All applications shall be made on forms provided by the city.



   (B)   If an application is filed by, or on behalf of, a landowner,
an affidavit of ownership shall be submitted to the city with the application.



   (C)   If an application is filed by an agent of a landowner, an
affidavit of the landowner establishing the agent’s authorization to act on
behalf of the landowner shall also be submitted with the application.



   (D)   All applications shall be accompanied with the appropriate
fees made payable to the city.



   (E)   The affidavits required by this section shall be on forms
provided by the city or in such form as is acceptable to the Director and
shall be submitted at the time of filing the application.



   (F)   All applications shall include proof of service to the County
Soil and Water Conservation District for comment pursuant to ILCS Ch. 70, Act
405, § 22.02a, of a copy of any application for text amendment, property
rezoning variance or application for relief from existing zoning regulation
shall be sent.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.272  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.



   (A)   A pre-application conference with the Director or his or her
designee shall be required prior to submission of any application for a
variance, rezoning, special use permit, sketch plan, preliminary development
plan or preliminary plat.



   (B)   The purpose of this conference is to:



      (1)   Acquaint the applicant with the procedural requirements
of this chapter;



      (2)   Provide for an exchange of information regarding
applicant’s proposed development and the regulations, restrictions and
requirements of this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan and other development
requirements;



      (3)   Advise the applicant of any technical studies or public
sources of information that may aid the application;



      (4)   Identify policies and regulations that create
opportunities or pose significant restraints for the proposed development;



      (5)   Review any proposed concept plans and consider
opportunities to increase development benefits and mitigate undesirable
project consequences;



      (6)   Review whether the application is compatible with
adjacent proposed or existing development; and



      (7)   Permit assistance by city staff with the development’s
general design.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.273  GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application requirements. Unless otherwise indicated in this
chapter or by the Director, all applications shall contain or be accompanied
by the following items and materials;



      (1)   Date prepared;



      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
the name, address and telephone number of the landowner if different than the
applicant;



      (3)   Affidavit of ownership pursuant to § 158.271 of this
chapter;



      (4)   Such information and certifications required by §
158.256 of this chapter;



      (5)   Name, address and telephone number of all persons
preparing any technical studies, maps, drawings and documents submitted with
the application;



      (6)   Form provided by Director, signed by both the landowner
and the Director, that shows a pre-application conference has occurred as
required herein;



      (7)   Accurate legal description of the property for which the
application is submitted;



      (8)   Any technical studies that may be required by the
Director;



      (9)   Statement regarding adequate public facilities and
services for the proposed development;



      (10)   Small key map with north arrow indicating the location
of the property within the city;



      (11)   A statement of the reasons for the request; and



      (12)   A statement of when development of the land area
covered by the application is contemplated to commence after the application
is approved.



   (B)   Map submission requirements. Unless otherwise indicated in
this chapter or by the Director, each map required by this chapter shall be
on paper that is 24 inches by 36 inches. An 11-inch by 17-inch version of
and/or a digital copy of all applications may also be required, as needed, by
the Director. The maps in the number of copies as required by the Director
shall contain the following:



      (1)   Date prepared;



      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of the person who
prepared, or person responsible for preparing, the map;



      (3)   Graphic, engineering scale;



      (4)   North arrow;



      (5)   Location of property lines of the subject property;



      (6)   Approximate existing and proposed grades based on
U.S.G.S. datum at ten-foot contour intervals or spot grades for preliminary
submissions (including sketch plans), and five- or two-foot contour intervals
for final submissions (including final development plans); and



      (7)   Existing conditions showing the following:



         (a)   All existing streets and rights-of-way on the land
area covered by the application and on all property within 250 feet of the
boundaries of the property, including street name and widths of pavement and
rights-of-way;



         (b)   Names of any abutting subdivisions, and the names
of owners of abutting property on unsubdivided parcels;



         (c)   Land use and zoning classification with district
boundary lines of all property abutting and all property within 250 feet of
the boundaries of the property covered by the application;



         (d)   All existing drainage channels on the land area
covered by the application;



         (e)   The location and size of all existing utilities
and easements on the land area covered by the application; and



         (f)   The location and elevation of all areas designated
as 100-year floodplain areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on
the land area covered by the application.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.274  SUBMISSION OF TECHNICAL STUDIES.



   (A)   Technical studies required by the Director.



      (1)   The Director may require applicants to submit any
technical studies that the Director deems necessary to enable the appropriate
person or entity to fully evaluate the application.



      (2)   Examples of technical studies that may be required shall
include, but not be limited to, traffic studies, engineering studies,
geologic or hydrogeologic studies, flood studies, environmental impact
assessments, noise studies or surface water management/drainage studies. The
persons or firms preparing the studies shall be approved by the Director.



      (3)   The costs of all studies shall be borne by the applicant.



   (B)   Technical studies required by Commission or governing body.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Director did not require submission of a
technical study in support of an application, either the Commission or the
governing body may require the submission of a technical study prior to
taking action on an application. In this case, the persons or firms selected
to perform the study shall be approved by the entity requesting that the
study be performed. Any decision of the Commission or the governing body to
require that a study be performed or to disapprove the person or firm
selected by the applicant to perform the study shall be final. The persons or
firms preparing the studies shall be approved by the Director. The costs of
all studies shall be borne by the applicant.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.275  WHEN APPLICATIONS DEEMED COMPLETE.



   No application shall be deemed complete until all items required to be
submitted by this chapter have been submitted. Upon receipt of a complete
application the Department shall note the filing date on the application and
shall make a permanent record thereof. If the applicant fails to submit
required elements, the application will not be considered complete, the
application shall not be processed, and the filing, notification and
advertising process established by this chapter will not begin until all
required elements have been submitted in the form required by this chapter.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.276  APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION DEADLINES.



   (A)   The Director or the Commission may administratively provide
for submission deadlines for materials required in support of any application
provided for in this chapter. These deadlines shall be provided to the
applicant at the pre-application conference.



   (B)   Compliance with these deadlines is required before the
application will be placed on an agenda to be heard by the appropriate entity.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.277  DUAL APPLICATIONS.



   In an instance where an applicant seeks approval of two requests
simultaneously, such as a property rezoning and a special use permit, the
applicant shall submit all necessary documents, plans, maps and other
required information in accordance with the provisions relating to both of
the submitted applications and pay all appropriate fees for both applications.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.278  CITY STAFF REVIEW.



   The city staff shall review all applications, plans, information and
data submitted in support of an application by the applicant. After reviewing
such information, the city staff shall prepare a staff report discussing the
submitted data. This report shall be provided to the applicant, all
appropriate city officials and be available for public review. The staff
report may contain a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions or
denial.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.279  CONDITIONAL APPROVALS.



   In the consideration of any application authorized by this chapter, the
recommending and the approving authority may stipulate that the
recommendation or approval, as the case may be, is subject to compliance with
certain specified conditions, including, but not limited to, limitations on
permitted uses; time of performance requirements; limitation on hours of
operation; and provision of services and/or facilities to ensure that
adequate public services and facilities are available to serve the
development proposed by the application.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.280  WRITTEN FINDINGS NOT REQUIRED; WHEN.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or by other
applicable law, written findings are not required for a final decision on any
application. However, any decision may be expressly made subject to the
subsequent adoption of written findings and, if expressly made subject to
written findings, the decision shall not be final until the findings are
adopted.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.281  FINAL DECISION WHERE ORDINANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   In the case of a decision to approve an application where
adoption of an ordinance is required, the decision shall be final on the date
that the governing body adopts the ordinance approving the application.



   (B)   A decision to deny an application is final when:



      (1)   The governing body votes to deny the application; or



      (2)   An ordinance with respect to such application fails to
receive number of votes required by law.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)



§ 158.282  APPEALS OF FINAL DECISIONS.



   Except where this chapter provides for an appeal to another body, any
person, official or agency who is aggrieved by a final decision on an
application provided for in this chapter, and who desires to appeal the
decision, shall file the appeal in the appropriate court of jurisdiction, as
the case may be, within 30 days after the decision is made.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970)




ARTICLE 15:
VARIANCES AND APPEALS




§ 158.295  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF HEARING OFFICER.



   The position of City Hearing Officer is hereby created in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-14.1, and other applicable authority. The
Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. Alternate Hearing Officers may serve when the Hearing Officer is not
available and may be appointed in the same manner as the Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.296  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Hearing Officer shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by
law and by this chapter, including the following.



   (A)   Appeals. Upon an appeal from a decision by any administrative
official, to decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision or term of this chapter, including the determination of the exact
location of any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect
thereto, or other claimed error in the, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter; provided that,
such decision shall be bound by and  consistent with the language of the
ordinance or regulation at issue.



   (B)   Variances. The Hearing Officer may vary the application of the
requirements of this chapter, except for use variances, as provided in this
subchapter. The corporate authorities may reserve, by ordinance, any class of
variance for approval only by the corporate authorities. In such cases where
the City Council has reserved



decision making authority, the Hearing Officer shall still conduct a hearing
and provide notice in compliance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-6. Any
variance granted by the Hearing Officer, not exercised within 12 months from
the date of approval, shall be deemed expired and may be revoked by the
Hearing Officer.



   (C)   Use variances.



      (1)   To hold public hearing for applications for use
variances and to forward a written report containing findings of fact and a
separate conclusion recommendation thereon to the City Council, consistent
with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-14.1.C(1), which Council may by ordinance
without further public hearing adopt any proposed use variance, or the
Council may refer it back to the Hearing Officer for further consideration or
deny the use variance request as a final action. For purposes of this
section, USE VARIANCES shall be any variation that authorizes any use or
classification of use to continue or commence in a zoning district in which
that use is not a permitted use by right. Any proposed use variance which
fails to receive the approval of the Hearing Officer shall not be approved,
except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all Council members. No
variance shall be granted that shall authorize a use that may be granted by
special use or planned use procedures.



      (2)   Use variances are not favored and shall be granted only
when failure to authorize the use denies all economically viable use of the
property or similar extreme hardship is demonstrated by the evidence
presented.



   (D)   Airport zoning. To hear and decide any appeal, exception or
variance as allowed under ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25, § 27.



   (E)   Other authority. To hear and decide all other matters referred
to it by the City Council or upon which it is required to pass under
applicable ordinance.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.297  APPEALS.



   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Hearing Officer by any person,
firm or corporation aggrieved by a determination or decision of any
administrative official charged with the enforcement of any provision of or
regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the city relating to such decision. The appeal shall be
taken within 45 days of the action complained of by filing, with the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and with the Hearing Officer a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The official appealed from shall
thereupon transmit to the Hearing Officer all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.



   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the official appealed from certifies to the
Hearing Officer after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, the stay would, in his or
her opinion, cause eminent peril to life or property, in which case the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Hearing Officer or by a Court of Record on application,
or notice to the  official appealed from and on due cause shown.



   (C)   The Hearing Officer may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or
may modify or amend the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from to the extent and in the manner that the Hearing Officer may
decide to be fitting and proper to the premises. No challenge to any decision
subject to this section shall filed in any court until or unless a timely
appeal has been filed and prosecuted to completion by the applicant as
provided for in this subchapter so as to establish a final appealable
decision.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.298  VARIANCES.



   (A)   A variance may be sought by filing a written application and
payment of applicable fee to the Hearing Officer specifying the specific
provision to be varied, the extent of the variation, and the basis therefore
and including such requirements as are set forth in this subchapter or as
otherwise established Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer may grant a
variance only if it is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter and in accordance with general or specific rules adopted hereto and
only in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship
in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any regulation of this
chapter relating to the use, construction, alteration of buildings, or
structures or the use of land, but in no other case.



   (B)   No variance may be granted to any condition or term of a
special use permit or planned zoning procedure. The Hearing Officer may
impose such conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the premises,
benefitted by the variance as may be necessary to reduce or minimize any
potentially injurious effect of such variance upon other property in the
neighborhood, and to carry out the general purpose and intent of these
regulations.



   (C)   A request for a variance, other than a use variance, may be
granted, upon a finding and determination on the record of the Hearing
Officer that the requirements of this section are met and that all three of
the following conditions are satisfied or upon such conditions as may the
Hearing Officer establishes as will meet such conditions:



      (1)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable
return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the
applicable zoning regulations;



      (2)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
and



      (3)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.299  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   General. The Hearing Officer shall act in accordance with the
procedure specified by law and by this chapter. All appeals and applications
to the Hearing Officer shall be in writing. Every appeal or application shall
refer to the specific provision of the ordinance involved, and shall exactly
set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the use for which the variance
or special permit is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied
for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be
granted, as the case may be. The city may appear by any designated official
of the City Council and be heard as a party in interest in any hearing before
the Hearing Officer, and the city may appeal any decision of the Hearing
Officer to a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   Notice of hearing. No action of the Hearing Officer shall be
taken on any petition for variance until after notice has been given therefor
in accordance with applicable state law and including newspaper notice as
required for zoning text amendments as provided for in § 158.255 of this
chapter and any specific statutory requirements.



The Hearing Officer shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal
or application and shall give due notice thereof to the parties and decide
the matter within a reasonable time.



   (C)   Hearings procedure. All hearings conducted by the Hearing
Officer shall be open to the public, held at the call of the Hearing Officer
and at such times as he or she may determine. At hearings conducted by the
Hearing Officer, any interested person may appear in person or by duly
authorized agent or attorney. All testimony before the Hearing Officer shall
be given under oath. The Hearing Officer shall administer oaths and may
compel attendance of witnesses. The Hearing Officer shall keep minutes of his
or her proceedings and other official actions. The Hearing Officer shall
adopt his or her own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this chapter
or applicable state statutes.



   (D)   Decision and findings of fact. Every variation decision shall
be accompanied by findings of facts and shall refer to any exhibits
containing plans and specifications for the proposed use or variation, which
shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Hearing Officer. The
findings of facts shall specify the reason or reasons for making the
variation. The terms of the relief granted shall be specifically set forth in
a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact. Property for
which relief has been granted shall not be used in violation of the specific
terms of the findings of fact, as the case may be, unless its authorized use
is changed by subsequent variance or ordinance. Every rule, regulation,
decision or determination of the Hearing Officer shall immediately be filed
with the Zoning Official and shall be public record.



   (E)   Expiration of variance approval. Any construction or use
authorized by a variance approval shall substantially commence not later than
six months after the date of the decision granting the variance, or such
other time as may be specified in the variance approval.



   (F)   Cost. For any application to the Hearing Officer, a fee shall
be charged by the city for processing, plus the cost of advertising of public
notice in an amount as established by the Council.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 158.300  CITY COUNCIL POWER OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Immediately following the filing of the written decision of
the Zoning Hearing Officer on any appeal or variance request under this
section, staff shall file a report with the City Council concerning such
action. Within 21 days after the Zoning Hearing Officer’s decision, the
City Council, upon majority vote, may exercise the power of administrative
review of any Zoning Hearing Officer decision on an application for an appeal
or variance.



   (B)   Upon adoption of the motion to exercise the power of review,
the City Council may act on the matter directly or first refer the matter to
committee. Before acting on the variance or appeal, the City Council may set
the matter for hearing before the committee or the City Council. The City
Council will give written notice of any such hearing to the applicant and all
other persons who appeared and spoke at the public hearing before the Zoning
Hearing Officer. In addition, the City Council may, in its discretion, notify
and allow to be heard at the hearing any other person who the Council
believes may be aggrieved by any decision or action concerning the
application.



   (C)   Following its review, the City Council may affirm, reverse or
modify, in whole or in part, any determination of the Zoning Hearing Officer.
An affirmative majority vote of the City Council shall be required to
overturn or modify a decision by the Zoning Hearing Officer. The decision of
the City Council shall be made within 45 days of the Zoning Hearing Officer
vote, unless extended for specified cause by a majority vote of the Council,
or the Zoning Hearing Officer decision shall become final. In making any
decision, the Council may adopt and rely on the record of the Hearing Officer
or may hold a new hearing to establish a record for final decision.



   (D)   Unless the City Council exercises its power of review of
administrative review, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Officer shall
become effective after 21 days following its decision.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 3561, passed 2-4-2008)



§ 158.301  JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FINAL DECISION.



   Any officer, department, board or bureau of the city or any person
whose legal rights, duties or privileges have been affected by any final
decision of the Hearing Officer, or any party affected by the decision of the
Council where such decision has been reserved or appealed to the Council, may
present to the Circuit Court having jurisdiction in the county, a complaint,
duly verified, stating that such decision is illegal in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of the illegality and otherwise proceeding pursuant to
the Administrative Review Law, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq. which
shall govern such appeals including as authorized in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-13-14.1. Such complaint shall be presented to the court within 35 days
after the filing of the final decision. The costs of preparing and certifying
the record of proceedings for filing with the Circuit Court in an
administrative review proceeding shall be paid to the city by the appellant
prior to the filing of such records with the Court. To the full extent
permitted by law, unless review is sought of an administrative decision
within the time and in the manner herein provided, the parties to the
proceeding before the administrative agency shall be barred from obtaining
judicial review of such administrative decision.



(Ord. 3382, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 3561, passed 2-4-2008)




ARTICLE 16:
AIRPORT OVERLAY GENERALLY




§ 158.315  AIRPORT OVERLAY (AO) DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a zoning district entitled Airport Overlay
(AO) District, including subarea districts, with the expressed intent to
provide for uses and unique design requirements for lands adjacent to and
within runway protection zones, accident potential zones, airspace zones and
noise zones for the environs of Scott Air Force Base and the MidAmerica St.
Louis Airport.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.316  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Airport Overlay (AO) District is to establish land
use controls that promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort and
general welfare, and including:



   (A)   To provide for and protect the long term mission, operation
and viability of Scott Air Force Base (AFB) and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport
from hazardous, injurious and/or other conditions that could adversely affect
airport operations and safety and/or that would be incompatible with airport
operations and functions;



   (B)   To protect the use, enjoyment and values of land and
development in the airport environs from injurious and hazardous conditions
and incompatibility of uses;



   (C)   To promote proper land use arrangement and development, public
and private services and facilities, and a desirable environment to achieve
and sustain physical, social and economic activities, which are compatible
with Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport;



   (D)   To provide standards for new or redeveloped buildings within
the noise attenuation zone to be constructed with materials and in such
manner that aircraft noise be reduced by the structure to an interior level
that has no adverse impact on the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents;



   (E)   To maintain an open process of regional coordination,
negotiation and interpretation of airport influence districts and cooperation
with other affected local governments to achieve these goals;



   (F)   To inform citizens in the vicinity of Scott AFB and MidAmerica
St. Louis Airport of the potential impacts of airport influence districts on
the use of their properties; and



   (G)   To preserve the economic development potential that Scott AFB
and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport brings to the area.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.317  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common
and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall
be construed and understood according to such meaning. Except as otherwise
specifically defined below for purposes of this chapter, definitions
generally applicable within this chapter shall apply herein.



   (B)   Nothing contained within this chapter shall be construed as or
applied to be substantially inconsistent with an airport approach plan
adopted by IDOT Division of Aeronautics, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25, §
12.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.318  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONES (APZ). As applied to military airfields, those
areas which are identified as being significantly impacted by accident
potential from aircraft. APZ-1 is an area normally beyond the Clear Zone that
possesses a significant potential for accidents. APZ-2 is an area normally
beyond APZ-1 that has a measurable potential for accidents. Both the APZ-1
and APZ-2 are the same width as the Clear Zone. APZ-1 extends from the Clear
Zone an additional 5,000 feet. APZ-2 extends from APZ-1 an additional 7,000
feet.



   AIR INSTALLATION COMPATIBLE USE ZONE (AICUZ). A study conducted by the
Air Force to evaluate the effect on noise and accident potential on
surrounding property and to promote compatible land use that reduces the
risks to public health and safety.



   AIR FORCE. The United States Air Force as represented by the Base
Community Planner for Scott Air Force Base or such other designee.



   AIRPORT. Any area of land or water that is designed and set aside for
the landing and taking off of aircraft and related use associated with Scott
Air Force Base or MidAmerica St. Louis Airport and utilized or to be utilized
in the interest of the public for such purposes.



   AIRPORT ENVIRONS. The geographic area that is affected by the airport
air traffic operations and defined on the basis of those areas immediately
affected by noise exposure, Clear Zones, Civilian Clear Zones, Runway
Protection Zones, APZ-1 and APZ-2 areas, CPZ-1 and CPZ-2 areas, height hazard
zones, and areas of airport influence property. These areas constitute the
Airport Overlay (AO) District established in this chapter.



   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or object of natural growth or use of
land within the airport environs that obstructs the air space required for
the flight of taking off, maneuvering or landing at an airport or which is
otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.



   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water, or both, upon which an
airport hazard might be established if not prevented by this chapter.



   CIVILIAN PROTECTION ZONES (CPZ). As applied to civilian airfields,
those areas which are identified as being significantly impacted by accident
potential from aircraft. CPZ-1 is an area normally beyond the Civilian Clear
Zone that possesses a significant potential for accidents. CPZ-2 is an area
normally beyond CPZ-1 that has a measurable potential for accidents. Both the
CPZ-1 and CPZ-2 are the same width as the Civilian Clear Zone. CPZ-1 extends
from the Civilian Clear Zone an additional 5,000 feet. CPZ-2 extends from
CPZ-1 an additional 7,000 feet.



   CIVILIAN CLEAR ZONE (CCZ). A defined area extending outward from the
end of each runway of MidAmerica St. Louis Airport. The CIVILIAN CLEAR ZONES
are considered an area of high accident potential. The Clear Zone starts at
the end of the runway and extends outward 3,000 feet at a width of 3,000 feet.



   CLEAR ZONE (CZ). A defined area extending outward from the end of each
runway of Scott Air Force Base. The CLEAR ZONES are considered an area of
high accident potential. The CLEAR ZONE starts at the end of the runway and
extends outward 3,000 feet at a width of 3,000 feet.



   DECIBEL (DB). A unit for measuring the relative loudness of sound or
sound pressure equal approximately to the smallest degree of difference of
loudness or sound pressure ordinarily detectable by the human ear, the range
of which includes about 130 decibels on a scale beginning with one for the
faintest audible sound.



   DECIBEL A-WEIGHTED SCALE (DBA). The unit of noise level measured in
accordance with the “A- weighted scale” which replicates the response
characteristics of the ear. This scale is a quantity, in decibels, read from
a standard sound-level meter with A weighting circuitry. The A-space
weighting discriminates against lower frequencies according to a relationship
approximating, and more accurately reflecting the auditory sensitivity and
response of the human ear. The A-scale sound level measures approximately the
relative “noisiness” or “annoyance” of common sounds.



   DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION. Any request to the local governing body for
rezoning, subdivision (major or minor), zoning variance, permit for a
non-conformity, final site plan approval, special use permits, sign permits
for freestanding or illuminated signs, mobile home permits, or in the case of
building permits, permits to increase the existing square footage by 50% or
more or over 35 feet in height, or permits otherwise determined by the
Director to have any potential impact within the District intended to be
addressed by this chapter. A request to approve a change to the future land
use map of the approved Comprehensive Plan shall also be considered a
development application within this section.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community Development, or other designee, as
the staff person assigned to administer, interpret and implement the
standards, criteria, and procedures of this Zoning Code for their respective
elected bodies.



   DNL. Day Night Level. See LEVEL, DAY NIGHT SOUND LEVEL (LDN).
Acoustical industry standards often use the abbreviations DNL and Ldn
interchangeably.



   ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SIGNS. Signs that show changeable copy, graphic
displays or video displays.



   FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA). The federal agency responsible
for the safety of civil aviation and the regulation of U.S. commercial space
transportation.



   HEIGHT, AIRPORT. In the Airport Environs, for purpose of determining
the height of any structure, tree, or other object, including communication
towers, the height is the elevation above mean sea level (MSL). For
calculation purposes, this is the sum of the elevation of the site and the
height of the structure, including any appurtenances.



   LEVEL, DAY NIGHT SOUND LEVEL (LDN). A basic measure for quantifying
noise exposure. The day/night average level, or the 24-hour equivalent
continuous sound level (time averaged A-weighted sound level) from midnight
to midnight, obtained after the addition of ten dBA to sound levels measured
from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



   NOISE CONTOUR. A line on the AO-4 Map linking together a series of
points of equal cumulative noise exposure based on the day/night average
level (Ldn) measurement. Such contours are developed based on aircraft flight
patterns, number of daily aircraft operations by type of aircraft, and time
of day noise characteristics of each aircraft and typical runway usage
patterns.



   NIT. A unit of visible-light intensity, commonly used to specify the
brightness of a cathode ray tube or liquid crystal display computer display.
One NIT is equivalent to one candela per square meter.



   NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION (NLR). Amount of noise reduction required through
construction and incorporation of sound attenuation material to reduce
interior noise level. The difference between the exterior and interior sound
level, expressed in decibels.



   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, commanding officer of any local military base or any other
legal entity having legal or equitable title to or sufficient proprietary
interest in or to any property subject to this Zoning Code.



   PARTICIPATING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. The coordinating local governments in
the county participating in the RAB and adopting an Airport Overlay Code
substantially in the form of or consistent with this chapter.



   PRIMARY SURFACE. A ground surface longitudinally centered on the
runway. The dimensions and limits of the primary surface shall be those
prescribed in Department of Defense (DoD) height and obstruction criteria for
Scott AFB and in Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) part 77 for MidAmerica St.
Louis Airport.



   RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport or airfield prepared for landing
and takeoff of aircraft along its length. For purposes of this chapter and
compliance with other applicable laws, the RUNWAYS of Scott Air Force Base or
MidAmerica St. Louis Airport shall be considered PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAYS
unless otherwise hereinafter designated.



   RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE (RPZ). An area off the runway end of a civilian
airport designated by the FAA to enhance the protection of people and
property on the ground.



   SLCUM. The Standard Land Use Coding Manual, which provides a general
numeric coding scheme that uses two, three, four or more digits to identify
land use activities and allow for the flexible categorization of new land
uses.



   SOUND ATTENUATION. The reduction in sound level which occurs between
the source and the receiver.



   SOUND LEVEL.



      (1)   The level of sound pressure measured with a sound level
meter and one of its weighing (frequency) networks.



      (2)   When A-weighing is used, the SOUND LEVEL is expressed as
dBA.



   SOUND TRANSMISSION CLASS (STC).



      (1)   An integer rating of how well a building partition
attenuates airborne sound.



      (2)   In the United States, it is widely used to rate interior
partitions, ceilings/floors, doors, windows and exterior wall configurations



   STRUCTURE. Any object whether permanent or temporary, including, but
not limited to, a building, tower, crane, smokestack, earth formation,
overhead transmission line or flagpole; to also include mobile and tethered
objects.



   ZONING CODE. The Zoning Ordinance of the city, as amended, set out in
Ch. 158 of this code, including this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.319  ACRONYMS.



   AFB. Air Force Base.



   AICUZ. Air Installation Compatible Use Zone.



   APZ. Accident Potential Zone.



   CZ. Clear Zone.



   CCZ. Civilian Clear Zone.



   CPZ. Civilian Protection Zone.



   dB. Decibels.



   dBA. Weighted decibels.



   DoD. Department of Defense.



   FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.



   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.



   Ldn. Day-night sound level.



   NLR. Noise level reduction.



   RAB. Regional Advisory Board.



   RPZ. Runway Protection Zone.



   SLUCM. Standard Land Use Coding Manual.



   STC. Sound transmission class.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.320  GENERAL USE RESTRICTIONS.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use whether
permitted in the underlying zoning district, or by planned use, special use
permit, or otherwise, may be made of land or water within the Airport Overlay
(AO) District so as to:



   (A)   Create electrical interference with navigational signals,
radar or radio communications between Scott Air Force Base and MidAmerica St.
Louis Airport and the aircraft;



   (B)   Cause confusion or otherwise make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and other lights;



   (C)   Result in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport;



   (D)   Impair visibility of the airport;



   (E)   Emit or discharge smoke (e.g., exhaust from a smoke stack),
that interferes with the health and safety of pilots and the public in the
use of the airport, or that is otherwise detrimental or injurious to the
health, safety and general welfare of the public in the use of the airport;



   (F)   Emit thermal discharge (e.g., steam from a power plant) that
interferes with the pilot’s vision in the use of the airport;



   (G)   Cause significant air turbulence (e.g., exhaust from a peaker
plant) where aircraft limit loads may be exceeded;



   (H)   Cause any other kind of emission that may cause a safety of
flight issue;



   (I)   Create a bird or wildlife strike hazard that in any way
endangers or interferes with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft
using or intending to use the airport;



   (J)   Create a vertical obstruction that physically intrudes on
protected airspaces around the airport; and



   (K)   Concentrate people within zones to unduly expose them to noise
or aircraft accident risk.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.321  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   General. The Director is hereby granted the authority to issue
clarification and interpretation of this chapter and the items and uses set
forth in the attached land use compatibility tables consistent with the
intent and language of this chapter.



   (B)   Notification. The Director shall make reasonable efforts to
provide notice to all persons filing a development application for in the AO
District that the respective property is located either partially or wholly
within the AO District, and may be subject to aircraft over-flight and the
standards and requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Field testing. When field inspection indicates that the
construction is not in accordance with the approved plans, the Director may
order such corrective action as may be necessary to meet the height and noise
attenuation requirements, including but not limited to stop-work orders until
such corrections are made.



   (D)   Inspections. Inspections of height and of noise attenuation
work shall be performed during the required building construction inspection
process.



   (E)   Penalties. Any person who violates this act or any orders,
regulations or rulings promulgated or made pursuant to this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties and enforcement procedures established in this
chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.322  STATE AIRPORT HAZARD ZONING REGULATIONS.



   In the event of conflict between any Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations
promulgated by IDOT Division of Aeronautics, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 620, Act
25, § 17, and contained at 92 Ill. Admin. Code  part 16, and any airport
zoning regulation set forth in this chapter or any other applicable
regulations provided in this chapter, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25, §
18, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.323  DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION CONSULTATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Director shall submit to the Air Force a copy of
development applications for properties within the AO District as graphically
shown on § 158.416 (“Process Chart”) of this chapter and implemented as
follows.



      (1)   AO-2 District. If the application or impact is on
property within the AO-2 District, all development applications relating
thereto, shall be sent to Scott AFB for review.



      (2)   AO-1, AO-3 and AO-4 Districts. If the application or
impact is in an AO District subarea other than the AO-2 District, development
applications that meet one of the following criteria shall be sent to Scott
AFB for review:



         (a)   Increase of an existing structure or construction
of a new structure whose height is 100 feet or higher above the ground level
of the runway. Towers, antennas, lighting, silos or any similar structures
that are 100 feet above the ground level of the runway or higher shall be
subject to review;



         (b)   Request for any outdoor lighting applications,
temporary lighting, obstruction marking or lighting, and illuminated signs
that do not meet the lighting standards established within the AO-1 District
Lighting, § 158.353 of this chapter;



         (c)   Application for a human-made use that could
attract high levels of birds or wildlife, such as retention ponds, roosting
habitats on buildings, landscaping, putrescible-waste disposal operations,
wastewater treatment plants and surface mining;



         (d)   Application for a use or permit that could create
electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications
between Scott AFB and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport and aircraft, including
emergency and public safety communications systems, power lines,
transformers, television broadcast and radio transmitters and
telecommunication towers; and



         (e)   Applications for a use or permit that could create
air-borne emissions or materials limiting visibility such as smoke, steam,
dust, gases or projectiles of any type.



   (B)   The Director shall send all appropriate development
applications, as determined in the above section, to the Air Force for
review. Applications can be mailed to:



   Base Community Planner



   375 CES/CEAO



   702 Hangar Road, Bldg 56



   Scott AFB IL 62225-5035



   618-256-4270



   (C)   Optional Consultation with MidAmerica St. Louis Airport: for
any development application within the Height Restriction Zone, Airport
Overlay (AO-3) District or the Noise Zones, Airport Overlay (AO-4) District,
the Director may choose to mail and/or email notice to the MidAmerica St.
Louis Airport at:



   Director, Engineering & Planning



   MidAmerica St. Louis Airport



   9768 Airport Boulevard, Box 3



   Mascoutah, IL 62258



   618-566-5325



   tom.goode@flymidamerica.com



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.324  REGIONAL ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   General. The state allows for the use of eminent domain
authority to resolve incompatible land uses in the environs of Scott Air
Force Base and MidAmerica St. Louis Airport pursuant to ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25,
§ 33. To reduce the need for the use of eminent domain and to better
coordinate airport zoning and planning, a Regional Advisory Board (RAB) is
established. The purpose of the RAB is to review potentially incompatible
development applications within a specific geography around Scott AFB and
MidAmerica St. Louis Airport and provide comment to the applicable local
government receiving the application.



   (B)   Established. The Regional Advisory Board (RAB) is hereby
authorized and established as an advisory intergovernmental body to
coordinate and review land use decisions in the AO-2 District. The RAB shall
be deemed to exist immediately and shall include all qualified members
similarly authorizing such establishment.



   (C)   Membership.



      (1)   The RAB shall consist of one representative from each of
the following five entities, appointed by local governing authorities
(“participating local governments”):



         (a)   St. Clair County;



         (b)   The City of Lebanon;



         (c)   The City of Mascoutah;



         (d)   The City of O’Fallon; and



         (e)   The Village of Shiloh.



      (2)   In addition, one Air Force representative and one
representative of MidAmerica St. Louis Airport shall serve on the RAB as
non-voting, ex-officio members.



      (3)   The RAB shall designate a Chairperson among the five
participating local government representatives to conduct meetings and
coordinate with the Air Force on administrative support and the distribution
of background materials. The RAB Chair shall rotate among the participating
local government representatives every two years. In the event that any
member fails to adopt authority for the RAB or subsequently withdraws from
participation, the membership shall continue with the remaining authorized
members.



      (4)   The representative on the RAB for the city shall be the
Mayor, who may from time-to-time designate another person to attend meetings
of the RAB and act on the RAB on behalf of the city.



   (D)   Meetings.



      (1)   The RAB shall meet if the Air Force renders an opinion
that a development application subject to review under § 158.323 of this
chapter is incompatible.



      (2)   The RAB may also establish and publish a regular meeting
schedule. Meetings shall be public. Special meetings may be called by the
Chairperson.



   (E)   Rules.



      (1)   The RAB shall adopt operating procedures for the conduct
of meetings and business of the RAB.



      (2)   The RAB shall adhere to the provisions of this chapter
with regard to the review and approval of site development plans.



      (3)   The RAB shall keep a record of its transactions,
findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record.



   (F)   Duties.



      (1)   The RAB shall review development applications and
present an advisory finding to the local jurisdiction responsible for
approval of applications in the geographic areas designated as AO-2 District.



      (2)   Any time the FAA, DoD or IDOT Division of Aeronautics,
amends, deletes or creates regulations affecting the standards set forth in
this chapter, the RAB shall review such amended, deleted or new regulations
and advise the participating local governments as to necessary or appropriate
changes to this chapter.



      (3)   The RAB shall act only as an advisory body.



   (G)   Procedures and responsibilities.



      (1)   Within the Airport Overlay (AO) District, the members
shall consult with the Air Force on those development applications that have
potential impacts on Scott AFB based on criteria established in § 158.323 of
this chapter.



      (2)   The Air Force shall review these actions within a
30-calendar-day period and render an advisory opinion of
compatible/incompatible for those actions inside the AO-2 District. The Air
Force may recommend conditions of approval to mitigate any negative impacts
of those actions within the AO-1 District.



      (3)   The Air Force shall evaluate the compatibility of the
development application based on consistency with land use guidance
established in the Joint Land Use Study and Air Installation Compatible Use
Zone program.



      (4)   If no response is rendered from the Air Force within 30
days, the local government may consider the Air Force recommendation as being
compatible.



      (5)   If the Air Force finds an application within the AO-2
District to be incompatible, the RAB shall meet within a 30-calendar-day
period following an incompatible finding. The Air Force shall provide



administrative support for the scheduling of the RAB meeting and the
distribution of necessary background materials.



      (6)   The RAB shall render a recommendation, which the city
shall consider.



      (7)   The city shall not make a final decision without a
recommendation from the RAB; provided that, if the RAB does not provide its
recommendation within 30 days of receipt of the application, a final decision
may proceed without such recommendation.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)




ARTICLE 17:
AIRPORT OVERLAY BOUNDARIES AND MAPS




§ 158.335  AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   Certain airport environs are identified and established by this chapter
for property within and around Scott Air Force Base (AFB) and MidAmerica St.
Louis Airport (MidAmerica) within the county. These environs have been
identified through Federal Aviation Regulations part 77 and data provided to
St. Clair County by the United States Air Force as part of the 2008 Joint
Land Use Study and the 2009 Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ)
report. Areas within the airport environs are subject to regulation beyond
the other requirements of this chapter. These additional restrictions,
designated as the Airport Overlay (AO) District, provide an enhanced level of
protection in support of the continued operations of Scott AFB and MidAmerica
St. Louis Airport.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.336  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Establishment and interpretation of district boundaries. The
boundaries of the Airport Overlay (AO) District and Subarea Districts are
hereby enacted and established as set forth on the series of four maps
incorporated in § 158.338 of this chapter (District Maps), with precise
boundaries being determined by scaling distances and features shown on these
maps. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the airport districts, as shown on the Airport Overlay (AO)
District maps, the Director shall make the necessary determination of the
boundary based on the purposes of this chapter and underlying mapping data.
Any property owner contesting the location of a district boundary affecting
his or her property shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their
case in accordance with the appeal procedures established in this chapter.
The adopted District Maps may include areas outside the territorial
boundaries of the city in order to promote coordination with other
participating local governments. The regulations of this Airport Overlay
District shall not be deemed to extend to any property outside such
territorial boundaries to which the city lacks jurisdiction to impose such
regulation.



   (B)   Split parcels. For purposes of regulation of parcels that
appear split by the district boundary lines, only that portion of a parcel
that falls within the district shall be subject to the provisions and
standards of this chapter.



   (C)   Boundary changes. The boundaries of the Airport Overlay (AO)
District may be subject to change reflecting new military mission activity
and/or aviation operations at Scott AFB and MidAmerica Airport. Scott AFB and
MidAmerica Airport shall communicate the results of updated analyses of noise
and air safety zones, including AICUZ reports and FAA studies, to affected
local governments. The Director shall notify the Air Force, MidAmerica
Airport and other local governments that have adopted airport zoning
regulations in the environs of Scott Air Force Base and MidAmerica Airport of
changes to the district boundary lines as shown in the maps in § 158.338 of
this chapter to promote the coordinated and consistent application of Airport
Overlay regulations. Other coordinating local governments may adopt more
stringent regulations than the minimum requirements in this chapter. Boundary
changes to the AO district or subarea districts shall be adopted pursuant to
the procedures applicable to amendments to this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.337  SUBAREAS; OVERLAP.



   (A)   To carry out the purpose of this district, the Airport Overlay
(AO) District is composed of four overlapping subarea districts that
establish different levels of restrictions based on airport boundary areas of
influence, safety areas based on hazard zones and structure height
regulations, and noise contours as follows. Properties or portions of
properties located within multiple subareas shall comply with the standards
established for each of those subareas in which the property is located.



   (B)   The areas are:



      (1)   AO-1  Primary Planning Influence Area. The Primary
Planning Influence Area designates the subarea that primarily includes
standards for avigation easements and lighting as described in §§ 158.350
through 158.353 of this chapter.



      (2)   AO-2  Safety Zones Area. The Safety Zones Area
designates the subarea that primarily includes standards for land use,
density, and design as designated in §§ 158.365 through 158.367 of this
chapter. The boundary of this area is determined by FAA and DoD Imaginary
Surfaces definitions for military and civilian airfields (Clear Zone, Runway
Protection Zone, Accident Potential Zone 1 and Accident Potential Zone 2) in
effect on the effective date of this chapter in conjunction with any other
relevant safety area data obtained by the Director.



      (3)   AO-3  Height Restriction Area. The Height Restriction
Area designates the subarea that primarily includes standards for controlling
height as described in §§ 158.380 through 158.383 of this chapter. The
boundary of this area is determined by a combination of measurements
including a 1,500-foot buffer around Scott Air Force Base and imaginary
surfaces definitions for military and civilian airfields in effect on the
effective date of this chapter, in conjunction with any other relevant height
restriction data obtained by the Director.



      (4)   AO-4 Noise Zones Area. The Noise Zones Area designates
the subarea that primarily includes standards for the attenuation of noise
and residential land use controls as specified in §§ 158.395 through
158.398 of this chapter. This boundary is determined by applying the noise
contours published by the DoD for Scott Air Force Base in conjunction with
any other relevant noise data obtained by the Director.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.338  MAPS.



   (A)   The following four maps are incorporated as an integral part
of this chapter.



   (B)   These maps are hereby adopted and incorporated as an amendment
to the official zoning map whether maintained separately or integrated within
a single document:



      (1)   AO-1  Primary Planning Influence Area;



      (2)   AO-2  Safety Zones Area;



      (3)   AO-3  Height Restriction Area; and



      (4)   AO-4  Noise Zones Area.



Editor's Note: These Figures are available in a printer-friendly, PDF format:
Click HERE




Figure 1

















Figure 2

















Figure 3
















Height Hazard Area




Figure 4
















(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



ARTICLE 18:
AO-1 PRIMARY PLANNING INFLUENCE AREA



§ 158.350  PURPOSE AND GENERALLY.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to require that new or
redeveloped facilities within the Primary Planning Influence Area, Airport
Overlay (AO-1) District, be constructed in such a manner to mitigate impacts
on aircraft operators and therefore protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents.



   (B)   The AO-1 District designates the area that primarily includes
standards for consultation with the Air Force, avigation easements and
lighting.



   (C)   Establishment of Primary Planning Influence Area: buildings,
structures or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of
the regulations set forth herein for the district or districts in which they
are located. The boundaries of the AO-1 District are shown on the map in §
158.338 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.351  CONSULTATION.



   Development applications on properties within the AO-1 District shall
require consultation with the Air Force to the extent required per § 158.323
of this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.352  AVIGATION EASEMENTS.



   (A)   All applications for subdivision approval for any structure
requiring plan approval in the AO-1 District, to the extent consistent with
applicable requirements of law, shall include the dedication of an avigation
easement to the city. The dedicated avigation easement shall allow property
owners to develop land in accordance with the applicable zoning district and
regulations, and shall also convey a clear right to maintain flight
operations in navigable airspace over the property, consistent with federal
statutes and regulations, and shall submit the property to compliance with
the regulations set forth in this chapter. The easement shall be recorded
with the deed to a property and shall run in perpetuity with the land.



   (B)   The applicant for all final subdivision plats within an AO
District shall place a reference to the applicability of AO District
regulations to the subdivision on the recorded plat.



   (C)   The city shall maintain publicly available maps of the Airport
Overlay District to facilitate the disclosure of potential airport environs
impacts as part of real estate transactions.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.353  LIGHTING.



   The following standards shall apply to all lands within the AO-1
District, unless otherwise stated.



   (A)   Non-residential uses and multi-family residential.



      (1)   The light source of outdoor lighting fixtures shall be
fully shielded and downward facing so as not to allow any light above the
horizontal, as measured at the luminaire.



      (2)   Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be placed so as to not
cause excessive glare or light trespass.



      (3)   On-site parking areas shall be constructed of asphalt,
dyed concrete or other non-reflective paving surfaces.



      (4)   All light fixtures that are required to be shielded
shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is
effective.



      (5)   Canopy lighting shall be designed to conceal the
illumination source and the lighting fixture shall not extend below the
canopy skirt.



      (6)   Exterior sign lights shall be shielded and oriented
downward with respect to the sign.



   (B)   Single-family and agricultural uses. Single-family residential
and agricultural uses are exempt from the standards contained in this
section; provided that, such uses do not affect the safety of the public or
persons utilizing Scott Air Force Base or MidAmerica St. Louis Airport.



   (C)   Electronic display signs. Electronic display signs shall be
permitted within the AO-1 District under the following conditions.



      (1)   The maximum brightness of electronic signs shall not
exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours, or of
500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn.



      (2)   Any image or message or portion thereof displayed on the
sign shall have a minimum duration of 15 seconds and shall be of static
display.



      (3)   Electronic signs are prohibited in the AO-2 District.



      (4)   Electronic display signs shall comply with all other
applicable regulations set forth in this chapter.



   (D)   Temporary lights. Special use permits shall be required for
temporary lights such as spot lights. A permit may be granted if, upon
review, the Director finds that the proposed lighting will not create
excessive glare, sky glow or light trespass.



   (E)   Lighting plan. Within the AO-1 District, a lighting plan shall
be included as part of the required site plan submittal or subdivision
construction drawings which shall contain, but not be limited to, the
following:



      (1)   The location of the site where the outdoor light
fixtures will be installed;



      (2)   Plans indicating the location on the premises of each
outdoor light fixture, both proposed and any already existing on the site; and



      (3)   A description of the outdoor light fixtures including,
but not limited to, manufacturer's catalog cuts and drawings.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



ARTICLE 19:
AO-2: SAFETY ZONES AREA



§ 158.365  PURPOSE AND GENERALLY.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to require that land and
structures located within safety zones around the Scott AFB and MidAmerica
St. Louis airfields are developed to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the public and to mitigate hazards of potential aircraft mishaps.



   (B)   The Safety Zones Area, Airport Overlay (AO-2) District,
designates the area that primarily includes standards for land use, density
and design, in addition to those requirements established for all properties
within the AO-1 District.



   (C)   Establishment of safety zones:



      (1)   Buildings, structures or land shall be occupied or used
only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the
district in which they are located.



      (2)   The boundaries of the military safety zones as
determined by the Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) program are
shown on the map in § 158.338 of this chapter. There are three military
safety zones:



         (a)   CZ: Clear Zone;



         (b)   APZ-1: Accident Potential Zone 1; and



         (c)   APZ -2: Accident Potential Zone 2.



      (3)   The Federal Aviation Administration designates a Runway
Protection Zone (RPZ) for civilian airports as shown on the map in § 158.338
of this chapter. There are four civilian safety zones:



         (a)   RPZ: Runway Protection Zone;



         (b)   CCZ: Civilian Clear Zone;



         (c)   CPZ-1: Civilian Protection Zone 1; and



         (d)   CPZ -2: Civilian Protection Zone 2.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.366  PROCEDURES AND DESIGN REGULATIONS IN SAFETY ZONES.



   (A)   Consultation. All development applications on properties
within the AO-2 District shall require consultation with the Air Force as per
§ 158.323 of this chapter.



   (B)   Design regulations. Properties within the AO-2 District shall
also comply with all the standards established per §§ 158.350 through
158.353 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.367  USE REGULATIONS IN SAFETY ZONES.



   (A)   Use regulations in AO-2: CZ, CCZ and RPZ. No uses or
structures shall be permitted in the CZ, CCZ and RPZ, except roadways,
underground utilities, agriculture and permanent passive open space. Bridges
above the ground level of the runway, timber activities and silvaculture
shall not be permitted.



   (B)   Use and design regulations in AO-2: APZ-1 and CPZ-1.



      (1)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are listed herein;
provided that, no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying
zoning district.



      (2)   Prohibited uses.



         (a)   Manufacturing or above-ground bulk storage of
flammable liquids, gases or other explosive materials is prohibited.



         (b)   No use shall be permitted that emits smoke, steam,
dust, gases or projectiles of any type that may interfere with safe aircraft
operation.



         (c)   No residential development of any type is
permitted. This includes short- and long-term hotels, lodgings, campsites, RV
parks, mobile home parks, group homes, dormitories or any accommodations
where over-night residency is expected.



         (d)   Active parks with facilities intended to support
organized activity or concentrations of users, such as athletic fields,
buildings or structures for recreational activities, concessions, courts or
playgrounds are prohibited.



         (e)   Places of large assemblies shall be prohibited to
protect the general public against the grave consequences of an aircraft
mishap. Places where the mobility-challenged and youth regularly assemble are
also prohibited. These include hospitals, in-patient clinics, nursing homes,
child care centers, schools, movie theaters and auditoriums, churches and
places of worship or meditation, sports arenas, restaurants and other places
of assembly.



         (f)   Public transportation passenger terminals shall
not be permitted in the APZ-1 or CPZ-1.



         (g)   Regionally-significant above-ground utility lines
or sub-stations, such as high-tension power lines or public transportation
transmission wires, shall not be permitted in the APZ-1 or CPZ-1.



      (3)   Maximum assembly. Maximum assembly shall be limited to
25 people per acre per hour over a 24- hour period, and shall not be more
than 50 people per acre at any one time.



      (4)   Lot coverage.



         (a)   The maximum gross acreage for all buildings on any
single lot is 10%. Use restrictions shall comply with Table 1 of this
chapter. Height restrictions shall comply with §§ 158.380 through 158.383
of this chapter.



         (b)   For industrial uses, in addition to all other
limitations on concentrations of people, a sliding scale of employment
density per shift and maximum acreage coverage shall be utilized as shown in
Figure 6 of this chapter.



         (c)   A planned development approach is encouraged to
maximize flexibility in layout and guide buildings away from the centerline
of the runway.



   (C)   Use and design regulations in AO-2: APZ-2 and CPZ-2.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Permitted uses are listed on Table 1; provided
that, no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the underlying zoning
district.



         (b)   Single-family residential density shall be limited
to one dwelling unit per acre within the APZ-2 and CPZ-2.



      (2)   Prohibited uses.



         (a)   Manufacturing or above-ground bulk storage of
flammable liquids, gases or other explosive materials is prohibited.



         (b)   No use shall be permitted that emits smoke, steam,
dust, gases or projectiles of any type that may interfere with safe aircraft
operation.



         (c)   1.   Higher density housing is prohibited.



            2.   This includes multi-family housing, attached
single-family housing, short- and long-term hotels, lodgings, campsites, RV
parks, mobile home parks, group homes or dormitories.



         (d)   1.   Places of large assemblies shall be
prohibited to protect the general public against the grave consequences of an
aircraft mishap.



            2.   Places where the mobility-challenged and
youth regularly assemble are also prohibited.



            3.   These include hospitals, in-patient clinics,
nursing homes, child care centers, schools, movie theaters and auditoriums,
churches and places of worship or meditation, sports arenas, restaurants and
other places of assembly.



      (3)   Lot coverage.



         (a)   1.   The maximum gross acreage for all
non-residential buildings on any single lot is 20%.



            2.   Use restrictions shall comply with Table 1 of
this chapter.



            3.   Height restrictions shall comply with §§
158.380 through 158.383 of this chapter.



         (b)   For industrial uses, in addition to all other
limitations on concentrations of people, a sliding scale of employment
density per shift and maximum acreage coverage shall be utilized as shown in
Figure 6 of this chapter.



         (c)   A planned development approach is encouraged to
maximize flexibility in layout and guide buildings away from the centerline
of the runway.




Figure 5: APZ-1 & CPZ-2 Industrial Uses

















Figure 6: APZ-2 & CPZ-2 Industrial Uses
















   (D)   Permitted land uses in AO-2: Safety Zones.



      (1)   Table 1 below describes those uses that are permissible
within the areas designated as safety zones. Within Table 1, the designation
with the letter "Y" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to
compliance with the standards of this chapter.



      (2)   The designation with the letters "PS" indicates that the
land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of this
chapter, and the supplemental standards specified for the use. Supplemental
standards are contained in divisions (A), (B), (C) above.



      (3)   The designation with the letter "N" indicates the land
use is prohibited.



      (4)   Any land use that is not identified in Table 1 is
prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar by the Director. A
requested use shall be considered substantially similar when the
characteristics of the requested use are equivalent in type, intensity,
degree, or impact when compared to a permissible use named in Table 1. Such
characteristics include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Typical numbers of employees and public located on
the property at any given time;



         (b)   Typical hours of operation;



         (c)   Generation of noise, light pollution, odor, smoke,
dust, electromagnetic interference or vibration;



         (d)   Bulk of structures and large equipment storage;



         (e)   Use of outdoor storage;



         (f)   Typical airspace intrusion;



         (g)   Attractiveness to birds and wildlife; and



         (h)   Customary functions of the use.



      (5)   Accessory uses and structures incidental to a permitted
principal structure or use are permitted so long as they are within the
intent, purpose or objectives of these regulations.



      (6)   Temporary uses and structures are permitted so long as
they are within the intent, purpose or objectives of these regulations.




Table 1




 


Land Use

 

AO-2 District Safety Zones




SLCUM

 
Name
 

CZ/CCZ/R PZ

 

APZ/CPZ 1

 

APZ/CPZ 2






10

 
Residential
 






11

 
Household units
 






11.11

 
Single units; detached
 

N

 

N

 

PS




11.12

 
Single units; semi-detached
 

N

 

N

 

N




11.13

 
Single units; attached row
 

N

 

N

 

N




11.21

 
Two units; side-by-side
 

N

 

N

 

N




11.22

 
Two units; stacked
 

N

 

N

 

N




11.31

 
Apartments; walk up
 

N

 

N

 

N




11.32

 
Apartments; elevator
 

N

 

N

 

N




12

 
Group quarters
 

N

 

N

 

N




13

 
Residential hotels
 

N

 

N

 

N




14

 
Mobile home parks or courts
 

N

 

N

 

N




15

 
Transient lodgings
 

N

 

N

 

N




16

 
Other residential
 

N

 

N

 

N




20

 
Manufacturing



21

 

   of food and kindred products

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




22

 

   of textile mill products

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




23

 

   of apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather and
similar materials

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




24

 

   of lumber and wood products (except furniture)

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




25

 

   of furniture and fixtures

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




26

 

   of paper and allied products

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




27

 

   of printing, publishing and allied industries

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




28

 

   of chemicals and allied products

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




29

 

   of petroleum refining and related industries

 

N

 

PS

 

PS




30

 
Manufacturing



31

 
Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




32

 
Stone, clay and glass products
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




33

 
Primary metal industries
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




34

 
Fabricated metal products
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




35

 
Professional and scientific instruments
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




39

 
Miscellaneous manufacturing
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




40

 
Transportation, communications and utilities



41

 
Railroad, rapid rail transit and street railroad transportation
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




42

 
Motor vehicle transportation
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




43

 
Aircraft transportation
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




44

 
Marine craft transportation
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




45

 
Highway and street right-way
 

PS

 

Y

 

Y




46

 
Automobile parking
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




47

 
Communications
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




48

 
Utilities
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




48.23

 
Natural or manufactured gas storage and distribution points
 

N

 

N

 

N




49

 
Other transportation communications and utilities
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




50

 
Trade



51

 
Wholesale trade
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




52

 
Retail trade -building materials, hardware and farm equipment
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




53

 
Retail trade - general merchandise
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




54

 
Retail trade - food
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




55

 
Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




55.3

 
Gasoline service stations
 

N

 

N

 

N




56

 
Retail trade - apparel and accessories
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




57

 
Retail trade - furniture, home furnishings and equipment
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




58

 
Retail trade - eating and drinking establishments
 

N

 

N

 

PS




59

 
Other retail trade
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




60

 
Services



61

 
Finance, insurance and real estate services
 

N

 

N

 

PS




62

 
Personal services
 

N

 

N

 

PS




62.4

 
Cemeteries
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




63

 
Business services
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




63.7

 
Warehousing and storage services
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




64

 
Repair services
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




65

 
Professional services
 

N

 

N

 

PS




65.1

 
Hospitals, nursing homes
 

N

 

N

 

N




65.1

 
Other medical facilities
 

N

 

N

 

N




65.11

 
Physician services
 

N

 

N

 

N




65.12

 
Dental services
 

N

 

N

 

N




66

 
Contract construction services
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




67

 
Governmental services
 

N

 

N

 

PS




68

 
Educational services
 

N

 

N

 

N




69

 
Miscellaneous services
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




70

 
Cultural, entertainment and recreational



71

 
Cultural activities (including churches)
 

N

 

N

 

PS




71.2

 
Nature exhibits
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




72

 
Public assembly
 

N

 

N

 

N




72.1

 
Auditoriums, concert halls
 

N

 

N

 

N




72.11

 
Outdoor music shell, amphitheaters
 

N

 

N

 

N




72.2

 
Outdoor sport arenas, spectator sports
 

N

 

N

 

N




73

 
Amusements
 

N

 

N

 

N




74

 
Recreational activities (including golf course and riding stables)
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




75

 
Resorts and group camps
 

N

 

N

 

N




76

 
Parks
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




76.1

 
Parks - general recreational (active)
 

N

 

N

 

PS




76.2

 
Parks - leisure and ornamental (passive)
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




79

 
Other cultural, entertainment and recreation
 

N

 

PS

 

PS




80

 
Resources production and extraction



81

 
Agriculture (except livestock)
 

PS

 

Y

 

Y




81

 
Livestock farming and animal breeding
 

N

 

Y

 

Y




82

 
Agricultural related activities
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




83

 
Forestry activities and related services
 

N

 

Y

 

Y




84

 
Fishing activities and related services
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




85

 
Mining activities and related services
 

N

 

PS

 

Y




89

 
Other resources production and extraction
 

N

 

PS

 

Y





 



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



ARTICLE 20:
AO-3: HEIGHT RESTRICTION AREA



§ 158.380  PURPOSE AND GENERALLY.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to require that new or
redeveloped buildings within the Height Restriction Area, Airport Overlay
(AO-3) District, be constructed to prevent interference with safe aircraft
operation and to maintain a visually permeable and physically secure buffer
that lowers the vulnerability of personnel on the base to outside attacks.



   (B)   The AO-3 District designates the areas that primarily include
standards for controlling height. Except as otherwise provided herein for
this District, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained in the
AO-3 District to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations
established in this subchapter or those established and enforced by the FAA,
DoD or IDOT Division of Aeronautics.



   (C)   Establishment of height restriction areas: buildings,
structures or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of
the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located.
The boundaries of the AO-3 Installation Buffer and Height Hazard restriction
areas are shown on the map in § 158.338 of this chapter. There are two
height restriction areas within the AO-3 District.



      (1)   Height hazard area. A height hazard area, as shown on
the map depicted in § 158.338, Figure 3, of this chapter, encompassing all
of the AO-3 District and defined by the Airport Imaginary Surfaces described
in §§ 16.50 through 16.110 of the State Airport Hazard Zoning regulations,
92 Ill. Admin. Code part 16.



      (2)   Installation buffer. A subarea of the AO-3 District
being a buffer extending 1,500 feet from the boundaries of Scott Air Force
Base, as shown on map depicted in § 158.338, Figure 3, of this chapter and
establishing supplemental height restrictions in the AO-3 District.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.381  PROCEDURES AND DESIGN REGULATIONS IN THE HEIGHT RESTRICTION AREA.



   (A)   Consultation. Development applications on properties within
the AO-3 District established by reference to Scott Air Force Base shall
require consultation with the Air Force to the extent required by § 158.323
of this chapter.



   (B)   Design regulations. Properties within the AO-3 District shall
also comply with all the standards established per §§ 158.350 through
158.353 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.382  AREA REGULATIONS.



   (A)   AO-3: Installation Buffer Area.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   All uses are permitted as defined by the
underlying zoning district, except for those listed as a prohibited use below.



         (b)   Single-family residential density shall be limited
to two dwelling units per acre within installation buffer.



      (2)   Prohibited uses.



         (a)   Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within
the installation buffer.



         (b)   Multi-family housing shall not be permitted within
the installation buffer.



         (c)   Group homes, dormitories or hotels and overnight
lodging sites shall not be permitted within the installation buffer.



      (3)   Maximum height. The maximum height of any structure
within the installation buffer for shall be 35 feet.



   (B)   AO-3: Height Hazard Area.



      (1)   Maximum height.



         (a)   The maximum height of any structure or object of
natural growth in the AO-3 subarea shall be determined by the limits of the
airport imaginary surfaces described in §§ 16.50 through 16.110 of the
State Airport Hazard Zoning regulations, 92 Ill. Admin. Code part 16.



         (b)   The Airport Imaginary Surfaces are based on the
imaginary surfaces in 14 C.F.R. part 77 and are visually represented on the
Airport Airspace sheet of the Airport Layout Plan for MidAmerica St. Louis
Airport, dated 1-7-2009, and adopted by the State Department of
Transportation, Division of Aeronautics. Sample graphic depictions of the
Airport Imaginary Surfaces are contained in § 158.417 to this chapter. The
drawings in § 158.417 are for illustrative purposes only.



         (c)   No structures are permitted within the Clear
Zone/Runway Protection Zone as set forth by § 158.367(A) of this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.383  HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The building height limitations stipulated in the AO-3
District shall apply to all structures within this district, including, but
not limited to:



      (1)   Air conditioning units;



      (2)   Antennas;



      (3)   Chimneys;



      (4)   Church steeples;



      (5)   Communication towers;



      (6)   Elevator towers;



      (7)   Flag poles;



      (8)   Parapet walls;



      (9)   Silos;



      (10)   Utility transmission towers;



      (11)   Windmills;



      (12)   Similar structures; and



      (13)   Landscaping.



   (B)   No structure shall be erected to a height that would encroach
into or through any established public or private airport approach plan,
prepared in accordance with the criteria established by the Department of
Defense and/or the Federal Aviation Administration.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



ARTICLE 21:
AO-4: NOISE ZONES AREA



§ 158.395  PURPOSE AND GENERALLY.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to require that new or
redeveloped buildings within the Noise Zones Area, Airport Overlay (AO-4)
District, be constructed with materials and in such manner that aircraft
noise is reduced by the structure to an interior level which has no adverse
impact on the health, safety and general welfare of the residents.



   (B)   The AO-4 District designates the area that primarily includes
standards for the attenuation of noise.



   (C)   Establishment of noise zones:



      (1)   Buildings, structures or land shall be occupied or used
only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the
district in which they are located. The boundaries of the noise contour zones
are shown on the map in § 158.338 of this chapter. There are four applicable
noise zones:



         (a)   NZ 1: area within the noise zone where the DNL is
between 65 and 69 dB;



         (b)   NZ 2: area within the noise zone where the DNL is
between 70 and 74 dB;



         (c)   NZ 3: area within the noise zone where the DNL is
between 75 and 79 dB; and



         (d)   NZ 4: area within the noise zone where the DNL is
greater than 80 dB.



      (2)   Other industry-standard noise zones exist around the
airfields. However, all land uses are considered compatible with noise levels
below 65 dB. Noise Zone 4 is only located on federally controlled land.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.396  PROCEDURES AND DESIGN REGULATIONS IN NOISE ZONES.



   (A)   Consultation. Development applications on properties within
the AO-4 District shall require consultation with the Air Force to the extent
required by § 158.323 of this chapter.



   (B)   Design regulations. Properties within the AO-4 District shall
also comply with all the standards established per §§ 158.350 through
158.353 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.397  USE REGULATIONS IN NOISE ZONES.



   (A)   Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 1.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Permitted uses are listed on Table 2 of this
chapter; provided that, no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the
underlying zoning district. When regulations within the Airport Overlay
District overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply.



         (b)   Single-family residential density shall be limited
to one dwelling unit per acre within the NZ-1.



      (2)   Prohibited uses.



         (a)   Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within
the NZ-1.



         (b)   Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted
within the NZ-1.



      (3)   Sound attenuation.



         (a)   To the extent permitted by law, sound attenuation
standards to achieve an NRL of at least 25 dB is required for all new or
expanded hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care centers, schools,
movie theaters, auditoriums, churches and places of worship and meditation.
The requirements of this section shall apply only to the area of expansion.
Expansion shall include any such work that results in an increase of the
cubic content of the building or the floor or ground area devoted to the
noise sensitive use or in any way increases or creates a site-related
non-conformity.



         (b)   Sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of
at least 25 dB are required for all new residential construction within the
NZ-1.



   (B)   Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 2.



      (1)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are listed on Table 2 of
this chapter; provided that, no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in
the underlying zoning district. When regulations within the Airport Overlay
District overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply.



      (2)   Prohibited uses.



         (a)   Manufactured housing shall not be permitted
within  the NZ-2.



         (b)   Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted
within the NZ-2.



         (c)   All residential uses, including hotels and
overnight lodging sites, shall be prohibited within the NZ-2.



      (3)   Sound attenuation.



         (a)   To the extent permitted by law, sound attenuation
standards to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB is required for all new or
expanded hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care centers, schools,
movie theaters, auditoriums, churches and places of worship and meditation.



         (b)   Sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of
at least 25 dB is required for all new or expanded structures containing
office, business, retail and wholesale trade uses. Within new or expanded
industrial structures, those portions of the building where the public is
received, offices are located, and other places where low noise levels are
normally expected shall utilize sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL
of at least 25 dB.



   (C)   Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 3.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Permitted uses are listed on Table 2 of this
chapter; provided that, no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the
underlying zoning district.



         (b)   When regulations within the Airport Overlay
District overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply.



      (2)   Prohibited uses.



         (a)   Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within
the NZ-3.



         (b)   Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted
within the NZ-3.



         (c)   All residential uses, including hotels and
overnight lodging sites, shall be prohibited within the NZ-3.



         (d)   All hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care
centers, schools, movie theaters, auditoriums, churches and places of worship
and meditation are prohibited.



      (3)   Sound attenuation. Sound attenuation standards to
achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB is required for all new or expanded
structures containing office, business, retail and wholesale trade uses.
Within new or expanded industrial structures, those portions of the building
where the public is received, offices are located, and other places where low
noise levels are normally expected shall utilize sound attenuation standards
to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB.



   (D)   Use and design regulations in AO-4: NZ 4.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Permitted uses are listed on Table 2 of this
chapter; provided that, no uses shall be allowed where not permitted in the
underlying zoning district.



         (b)   When regulations within the Airport Overlay
District overlap, the more stringent standard shall apply.



      (2)   Prohibited uses.



         (a)   Manufactured housing shall not be permitted within
the NZ-4.



         (b)   Outdoor amphitheaters shall not be permitted
within the NZ-4.



         (c)   All residential uses, including hotels and
overnight lodging sites, shall be prohibited within the NZ-4.



         (d)   All hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, child care
centers, schools, movie theaters, auditoriums, churches and places of worship
and meditation are prohibited within the NZ-4.



      (3)   Sound attenuation.



         (a)   Sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of
at least 30 dB is required for all new or expanded structures containing
office, business, retail and wholesale trade uses.



         (b)   Within new or expanded industrial structures,
those portions of the building where the public is received, offices are
located, and other places where low noise levels are normally expected shall
utilize sound attenuation standards to achieve an NRL of at least 30 dB.



   (E)   Permitted land uses in AO-4: Noise Zones.



      (1)   (a)   Table 2 of this chapter describes those uses
that are permissible within the areas designated as noise zones.



         (b)   Within Table 2 of this chapter, the designation
with the letter "Y" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to
compliance with the standards of this chapter.



      (2)   The designation "PS 25" indicates that the land use is
permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of this chapter and
demonstrating noise reduction materials have been incorporated into the
design and construction of proposed development in a manner that achieves a
noise level reduction of 25 dB.



      (3)   The designation "PS 30" indicates that the land use is
permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of this chapter and
demonstrating noise reduction materials have been incorporated into the
design and construction of proposed development in a manner that achieves a
noise level reduction of 30 dB.



      (4)   The designation with the letter "N" indicates the land
use is prohibited.



      (5)   The recommendations for permitted and prohibited types
of facilities or land uses by noise level reduction are based on the U.S.
Department of Transportation and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) charts
for aircraft noise avoidance.



Table 2



 


Land Use

 

Airport Overlay AO-4 Noise Zones (dB)




SLCUM

 
Name
 

NZ 1 65-69

 

NZ 2 70-74

 

NZ 3 75-79

 

NZ 4 80+






10

 
Residential



11

 
Household units



11.11

 
Single units; detached
 

PS 25

 

N

 

N

 

N




11.12

 
Single units; semi detached
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




11.13

 
Single units; attached row
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




11.21

 
Two units; side-by-side
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




11.22

 
Two units; stacked
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




11.31

 
Apartments; walk up
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




11.32

 
Apartments; elevator
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




12

 
Group quarters
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




13

 
Residential hotels
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




14

 
Mobile home parks or courts
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




15

 
Transient lodgings
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




16

 
Other residential
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




20

 
Manufacturing



21

 

   of food and kindred products

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




22

 

   of textile mill products

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




23

 

   of apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather and
similar materials

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




24

 

   of lumber and wood products (except furniture)

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




25

 

   of furniture and fixtures

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




26

 

   of paper and allied products

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




27

 

   of printing, publishing and allied industries

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




28

 

   of chemicals and allied products

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




29

 

   of petroleum refining and related industries

 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




30

 
Manufacturing



31

 
Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




32

 
Stone, clay and glass products
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




33

 
Primary metal industries
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




34

 
Fabricated metal products
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




35

 
Professional and scientific instruments
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




39

 
Miscellaneous manufacturing
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




40

 
Transportation, communications and utilities



41

 
Railroad, rapid rail transit and street railroad transportation
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 25

 

PS 25




42

 
Motor vehicle transportation
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 25

 

PS 25




43

 
Aircraft transportation
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 25

 

PS 25




44

 
Marine craft transportation
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 25

 

PS 25




45

 
Highway and street right-way
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 25

 

PS 25




46

 
Automobile parking
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y




47

 
Communications
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 25

 

N




48

 
Utilities
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y




49

 
Other transportation communications and utilities
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 25

 

N




50

 
Trade



51

 
Wholesale trade
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




52

 
Retail trade - building materials, hardware and farm equipment
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




53

 
Retail trade - general merchandise
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




54

 
Retail trade - food
 

Y N

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




55

 
Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




56

 
Retail trade - apparel and accessories
 

Y N

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




57

 
Retail trade - furniture, home furnishings and equipment
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




58

 
Retail trade - eating and drinking establishments
 

Y N

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




59

 
Other retail trade
 

Y N

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




60

 
Services



61

 
Finance, insurance and real estate services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




62

 
Personal services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




62.4

 
Cemeteries
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




63

 
Business services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




64

 
Repair services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




65

 
Professional services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30




65.1

 
Hospitals, nursing homes
 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N

 

N




65.1

 
Other medical facilities
 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

PS 30

 

N




66

 
Contract construction services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




67

 
Governmental services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




68

 
Educational services
 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N

 

N




69

 
Miscellaneous services
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




70

 
Cultural, entertainment and recreational



71

 
Cultural activities (including churches)
 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N

 

N




71.2

 
Nature exhibits
 

Y

 

N

 

N

 

N




72

 
Public assembly
 

Y

 

N

 

N

 

N




72.1

 
Auditoriums, concert halls
 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N

 

N




72.11

 
Outdoor music shell, amphitheaters
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




72.2

 
Outdoor sport arenas, spectator sports
 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

N




73

 
Amusements
 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

N




74

 
Recreational activities (including golf courses, riding stables, water
recreation)
 

Y

 

PS 25

 

PS 30

 

N




75

 
Resorts and group camps
 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

N




76

 
Parks
 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

N




79

 
Other cultural, entertainment and recreation
 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

N




80

 
Resources production and extraction



81

 
Agriculture (except livestock)
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N




81.5-81.7

 
Livestock farming and animal breeding
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N




82

 
Agricultural related activities
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N




83

 
Forestry activities and related services
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N




84

 
Fishing activities and related services
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y




85

 
Mining activities and related services
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y




89

 
Other resources production and extraction
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y





 



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.398  ATTENUATION.



   (A)   Minimum noise attenuation requirements and standards. Where a
particular structure contains different occupancy uses, the more stringent
requirements shall apply, except where it is architecturally possible to
achieve the appropriate noise level reduction for each different use and the
uses are acoustically separated by a wall or partition with a minimum STC of
25.



   (B)   Compliance use above minimum. In any instance where noise
level reduction is required by this chapter, all plans and specifications are
to be certified by a recognized acoustical specialist for compliance.



   (C)   Noise reduction.



      (1)   Buildings, structures and active outdoor recreation
space shall be located at the greatest distance from the noise source, taking
maximum advantage of existing topographical features to minimize noise
impacts, and within zoning district requirements such as required setbacks.



      (2)   Buildings and structures shall be oriented to minimize
exposure to the noise source and building openings, such as windows, shall be
located away from the noise source. The amount of passive outdoor
recreational space where individuals would be subject to noticeable or severe
levels of noise should be minimized. Landscaping materials should be used to
deflect noise. Noise attenuation shall be accomplished as follows.



         (a)   All mechanical ventilation systems shall provide
the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements as provided in
the Building Code for the proposed occupancy without the need to open any
exterior doors or windows.



         (b)   The perimeter of all exterior windows and door
frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction.



         (c)   Fireplaces shall be equipped with well-fitted
chimney cap devices.



         (d)   All ventilation ducts, except range hoods,
connecting interior space to outdoors shall be provided with a bend such that
no direct line of sight exists from exterior to interior through the vent
duct.



         (e)   Doors and windows shall be constructed so they are
close-fitting. Weather-stripping seals shall be incorporated to eliminate all
edge gaps.



         (f)   All penetration through exterior walls by pipes,
ducts, conduits and the like shall be caulked airtight to the exterior
construction.



   (D)   Existing residences. Any existing residence may be added to,
structurally altered or repaired without conforming to the referenced
specifications provided the property owner signs a waiver indicating
notification of said specifications and provided that all
generally-applicable requirements of the Building Code are complied with.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



ARTICLE 22:
AIRPORT OVERLAY SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEDURES



§ 158.410  GENERALLY.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide mechanisms for
obtaining relief from the provisions of this chapter. There are several ways
that potential relief from hardship is addressed, including through
non-conforming development, the grant of a variance, the grant of a special
use permit or through appeal.



   (B)   All cases shall be administered in accordance with the appeal,
variance, non-conforming use and special use permit procedures established in
this chapter, provided that all such procedures shall comply with applicable
procedures set forth in the Airport Zoning Act, ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25, §§
24, 27, 28 and 29.



   (C)   This chapter provides supplemental requirements beyond those
required by applicable state or federal law. The failure of the city to
specifically or precisely conform to any notice, review or other procedural
requirement herein shall not invalidate any action or approval of the city
unless such invalidation is required by law.



   (D)   Avigation easement: as a condition of approval of a
development application in an Airport Overlay (AO) District subarea,
including the application for a variance, rezoning or special use permit
prior to receiving final approval of the application, the applicant may be
required to convey to the appropriate authority an avigation easement
consistent with the avigation easement described in § 158.352 of this
chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.411  HEARING OFFICER.



   (A)   The Hearing Officer established and existing under this
chapter is hereby established as and shall serve as the Hearing Officer under
this chapter. The Hearing Officer shall exercise the following powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Director in the enforcement of the
airport zoning regulations of this chapter; and



      (2)   To hear and decide specific variances under this chapter.



   (B)   All appeals and variances shall be administered in accordance
with the appeal and variance procedures established in §§ 158.295 through
158.301 of this chapter.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.412  APPEALS.



   (A)   Except as provided below, appeals shall be made in a manner
consistent with procedures for appeals established within §§ 158.295
through 158.301 of this chapter.



   (B)   All appeals must be taken within a reasonable time, as
provided in this chapter, by filing with the Director and with the Hearing
Officer, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Director
shall forthwith transmit to the Hearing Officer all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.



   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Director certifies to the Hearing Officer,
after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the Director's opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by order of the Hearing Officer on notice to the
Director and on due cause shown.



   (D)   The Hearing Officer shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time, consistent with the
times and procedures for notice, hearing and decision of appeals provided in
this chapter. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or
by attorney.



   (E)   The Hearing Officer may, in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter and the Airport Zoning Act, ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25, §§ 1 et
seq., reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the Director from which the appeal is taken.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.413  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Except as provided herein, variance applications shall be made
in a manner consistent with the procedures for variances established within
§§ 158.295 through 158.301 of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person seeking a variance from the height limitations of
this chapter shall include as part of their variance application a
determination from the FAA as to whether the proposed construction or
alteration for which the variance is being sought would be a hazard to air
navigation, pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in 14 C.F.R.
part 77.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.414  NON-CONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Structures and uses existing on the effective date of this
chapter shall not be required to change in order to comply with these
regulations, except where otherwise required by law or where a threat to
public safety warrants a determination that the ongoing use is a public
nuisance. The non-conforming use requirements of this section shall otherwise
apply to the future applicability of the standards and requirements contained
herein, provided that the requirements of this section shall be supplemented
by provisions of this chapter governing non-conformities which do not
conflict with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Before any non-conforming structure or object of natural
growth may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed
to grow higher or replanted, a permit must be secured from the Director,
authorizing such replacement, change or repair. No permit shall be granted
that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit
a non-conforming structure or tree or non- conforming use to be made or
become higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the
effective date of this chapter or than it is when the application for a
permit is made.



   (C)   Whenever the Director determines that a non-conforming use or
non-conforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80% torn
down, destroyed, deteriorated or decayed:



      (1)   No permit shall be granted that would allow such
structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate
from the zoning regulations; and



      (2)   Whether application is made for a permit under this
section or not, the Director may by appropriate action compel the owner of
the non-conforming structure or tree, at his or her own expense, to lower,
remove, reconstruct or equip such object as may be necessary to conform to
the regulations.



   (D)   If the owner of the non-conforming structure or tree shall
neglect or refuse to comply with such order for ten days after notice
thereof, the Director may proceed to have the object so lowered, removed,
reconstructed or equipped and shall have a lien, upon behalf of the city,
upon the land whereon it is or was located, in the amount of the cost and
expense thereof. Such lien may be enforced by the city by an action for the
enforcement thereof, as in the case of other liens.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.415  AIRPORT HAZARD MARKING.



   In granting any development application, the Director or Hearing
Officer may, if it deems such action advisable to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and the Airport Zoning Act, ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25, §§ 1 et
seq., and reasonable in the circumstances, so condition such grant,
consistent with ILCS Ch. 620, Act 25, § 25, as to require the owner of the
structure or tree in question to permit the state or the city, as the case
may be, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such
markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of
an airport hazard.



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.416  PROCESS CHART.







 



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.417  AIRPORT IMAGINARY SURFACES.







 







 







 



(Ord. 3718, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 158.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Notice of violation or correction order. If the
Zoning Official determines that a violation of this chapter or regulations
made under its authority has occurred, he or she may issue the violator a
civil citation which shall be proceeded upon in accordance with the
provisions herein. The notice or order shall be issued to the violator by the
Zoning Official, which shall include a notice or summons to answer the
charges against him or her within the time specified on the form for hearing
before the Circuit Court. Upon issuance of a notice or order, the Zoning
Official shall provide a copy of the notice or summons to the Clerk of the
Circuit Court bearing jurisdiction.



      (2)   Fines for violations.



         (a)   If the notice of violation or correction order is
not complied with promptly, in addition to other remedies available, the
Zoning Official may request the legal counsel of the city to institute the
appropriate proceedings at law or in equity:



            1.   To prevent the unlawful construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;



            2.   To prevent the occupancy of the building,
structure or land;



            3.   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business
or use in or about the premises; or



            4.   To restrain, correct or abate the violation.



         (b)   The owner or general agent of a building or
premises where a violation of any provision of the regulations has been
committed or exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire
premises where a violation has been committed or exists, or the owner,
general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in
which a violation has been committed or exists, or the general agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or
assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in which
any violation exists shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in
an amount as set by separate ordinance of the city or other such penalty as
determined by the City Attorney or discretion of the court.



      (3)   Civil lawsuits. The city shall have the authority to
maintain civil suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and to abate
nuisances maintained in violation thereof. In the event that any building or
structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or
maintained in violation of this chapter, or any building, structure or land
is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter, the City Attorney or
other appropriate authority of the city may, in addition to any other
remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or any other appropriate actions or
proceeding to  prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or to correct or abate the
violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land, or
to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the
premises. Attorneys’ fees for the prosecution of any civil lawsuit pursuant
to this section shall be assessed against the person committing the violation
where not prohibited by law.



      (4)   Stop-work order.



         (a)   Issuance.



            1.   In addition to other measures available to
cause corrective action or to restrain the furtherance of work upon or
occupancy of any premises contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or in a
manner contrary to the terms and conditions under which a zoning permit was
issued under this chapter, without need of issuance of a notice of violation
or correction order, the Zoning Official shall have the power and authority
to order all work stopped upon the subject building or structure, or in or
about the premises whereon the violation or other objectionable condition
shall occur. Upon the issuance of an order to stop-work, the work shall be
immediately stopped by all persons involved therewith.



            2.   This stop-work order shall be issued in
writing and shall be presented:



               a.   To the owner of the property involved;
or



               b.   To the person doing the work or
performing the occupancy. In the event the stop-work order is rejected or if
no responsible person is present, the order shall be posted on the premises
in a conspicuous place.



            3.   The stop-work order shall state:



               a.   The nature of the violation or
objectionable condition;



               b.   No work shall precede unless authorized
by the Zoning Official; and



               c.   Shall identify the premises.



         (b)   Observance of stop-work order. Each person who
shall continue, or who shall cause to be continued, any work in or about the
building, structure or premises having been subject to a stop-work order,
except to perform as he or she is directed to perform to correct or abate a
violation or objectionable condition, shall be liable a fine in an amount as
set by separate ordinance of the city.



   (B)   Any person violating §§ 158.205 through 158.213 of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or 90 days in jail
or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 623, passed 9-8-1970; Ord. 3399, passed 12-5-2005)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Illinois Compiled Statutes





References to 1999 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Section
 
Code Section




Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 120
 
151.46


Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
 
30.05, 30.20, 30.22


Ch. 5, Act 140
 
31.168


Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
 
31.166


Ch. 5, Act 140, § 3
 
31.168


Ch. 5, Act 140, § 3.5
 
31.167, 31.168


Ch. 5, Act 140, § 4
 
31.168


Ch. 5, Act 140, § 6
 
31.168


Ch. 5, Act 140, § 7
 
31.168


Ch. 5, Act 140, § 11
 
31.168


Ch. 5, Act 140, § 11.5
 
31.168


Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 270, § 1
 
31.002


Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
36.04


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15
 
36.04


Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40
 
36.04


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5
 
36.04


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5
 
36.04


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a)
 
36.04


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)
 
36.04


Ch. 10, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
38.01


Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 20, Act 1605, § 7.12
 
135.02


Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.
 
137.02


Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
 
37.15, 70.001


Ch. 25, Act 5
 
117.02


Ch. 30, Act 235, §§ 1 et seq.
 
31.069


Ch. 30, Act 235, § 2.5(a)(7)
 
31.069


Ch. 30, Act 350, § 10
 
34.05


Ch. 35, Act 105
 
110.06


Ch. 35, Act 105, §§ 1 et seq.
 
35.003


Ch. 35, Act 115
 
110.06


Ch. 35, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.
 
35.085


Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9
 
35.002


Ch. 35, Act 120
 
110.06, 158.038


Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
 
35.085


Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3
 
35.001, 35.020, 35.088


Ch. 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.
 
35.036


Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.
 
Ch. 115, 115.01, 115.04


Ch. 35, Act 635, § 10
 
53.03, 115.01


Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.
 
53.01, 53.23, 115.03


Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-7
 
53.03


Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-25 and 5-30
 
115.20


Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-45(a)
 
53.01


Ch. 35, Act 638, §§ 1 et seq.
 
115.01


Ch. 35, Act 645, §§ 5-1 et seq.
 
53.04


Ch. 40, Act 5, § 3-135
 
32.40


Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 4-101 et. al.
 
32.61


Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
 
114.02


Ch. 50, Act 840, §§ 1 et seq.
 
53.04


Ch. 50, Act 840, § 10
 
53.01, 53.23


Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005
 
137.02


Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1127
 
70.001


Ch. 65
 
158.301


Ch. 65, Act 5
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
 
10.99, 152.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1
 
10.99


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 2-1-1 et seq.
 
32.05


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-25
 
31.001


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-30
 
31.001, 31.002


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50
 
31.016


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-10
 
31.015


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-20-10 et seq.
 
11.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5
 
31.020


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-5 through 3.1-35-30
 
31.019


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-5 et seq.
 
30.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10
 
31.020


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-15
 
31.022


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-20
 
31.025


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35
 
31.018


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-50
 
31.069


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-55
 
31.067


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-60
 
31.068


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90
 
31.045, 31.046


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-95
 
31.044


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-5
 
30.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-15
 
30.07


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-20
 
30.06


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-25
 
30.05


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-30
 
31.026


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-5
 
31.003, 31.017


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10
 
34.36


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-3-1
 
35.005


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1
 
35.001, 35.101


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2
 
35.100


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2(3)
 
35.100


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5
 
35.002


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6
 
35.003


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-7
 
35.020


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8
 
35.021


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17
 
115.01, 115.04


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1
 
32.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-5
 
32.04


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5
 
132.15


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-1.5
 
134.04


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-8-4
 
137.41


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-4 et seq.
 
33.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12
 
152.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-1
 
158.208


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 et seq.
 
158.002


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-1.1
 
158.095


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-6
 
158.296


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-14.1
 
158.295


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-14.1.C(1)
 
158.296


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-19-1 et seq.
 
50.03


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-3
 
Ch. 112


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-6
 
94.03


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7
 
94.03


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-13
 
50.42


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2
 
152.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8
 
152.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2
 
152.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1
 
71.001, 75.15


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3
 
Ch. 91


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-5
 
Ch. 112


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-48.2
 
151.01


Ch. 70, Act 405, § 22.02a
 
158.271


Ch. 70, Act 1205, § 3-9
 
70.001


Ch. 105, Act 5, § 2-3.51.5
 
71.999


Ch. 205, Act 5, § 5
 
135.01


Ch. 205, Act 205, § 7008
 
135.01


Ch. 205, Act 305, § 42.7
 
135.01


Ch. 210, Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
132.01


Ch. 210, Act 115
 
156.06


Ch. 220, Act 5
 
155.036


Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
35.121, 53.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105
 
35.121


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-202
 
115.01, 115.04


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-221
 
115.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222
 
115.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1
 
115.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104
 
35.100


Ch. 220, Act 5, Art. 21
 
114.03


Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 21-100 et seq.
 
53.05


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v)
 
53.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
 
114.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
 
53.02, 114.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)
 
114.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501
 
114.04


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(r)(1)
 
114.04


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(s)
 
114.04


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-601
 
114.05


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-701
 
114.03


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801
 
114.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
 
114.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(l)(vi)
 
114.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d)
 
114.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-1001
 
114.03


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-1301(a)
 
114.03


Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.
 
53.16


Ch. 220, Act 65, §§ 0.01 et. seq.
 
53.03


Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4
 
53.05


Ch. 225, Act 57, § 15
 
117.03


Ch. 225, Act 320, §§ 0.01 through 43
 
52.023, 52.111


Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3
 
52.063


Ch. 225, Act 325
 
154.008


Ch. 225, Act 330
 
154.008


Ch. 225, Act 425
 
132.01


Ch. 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq.
 
137.02


Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 0.01 et seq.
 
111.04, 111.05, 111.14


Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02, 135.03


Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.
 
121.04, 121.06, 135.02, 135.03


Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5
 
121.02, 158.016


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-3 et seq.
 
116.25


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.24
 
116.29


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 4-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 116


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 4-2 et seq.
 
31.024


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2
 
116.21


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-11
 
116.21


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-12
 
116.21


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-13
 
116.21


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16
 
116.51


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-20
 
116.51


Ch. 235. Act 5, § 6-21
 
116.19


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-25
 
116.21


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-5
 
116.25


Ch. 405, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.
 
120.01


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215
 
71.103


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.220
 
71.103


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360
 
71.103, 136.01, 136.02


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3
 
71.103, 136.01


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 4
 
136.02


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 5
 
136.03


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 6
 
136.04


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8(a), (b)
 
136.99


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8(a), (b), (d), (e)
 
136.99


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8(c)
 
136.07


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 9
 
136.05


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 10
 
136.99


Ch. 425, Act 35
 
137.42


Ch. 430, Act 30, § 3
 
71.081


Ch. 430, Act 65, §§ 0.01 through 16-3
 
Ch. 137


Ch. 430, Act 66
 
137.01


Ch. 515, Act 5
 
137.03


Ch. 520, Act 5
 
137.03


Ch. 525, Act 30, §§ 3.11 and 3.14
 
131.02


Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
53.02


Ch. 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
 
70.035


Ch. 605, Act 120, § 50
 
136.99


Ch. 620, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.
 
158.412, 158.415


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 12
 
158.317


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 17
 
158.322


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 18
 
158.322


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 24
 
158.410


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 25
 
158.415


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 27
 
158.296, 158.410


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 28
 
158.410


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 29
 
158.410


Ch. 620, Act 25, § 33
 
158.410


Ch. 625, Act 5
 
70.001, 72.17


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.
 
136.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-117.7
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120.7
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-123.7
 
98.13


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.10
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.15
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146
 
35.022, 70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-151
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157.5
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.3
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169.5
 
98.13


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188
 
10.02, 70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d)
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609
 
72.17, Ch. 78, Schd. II


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616
 
72.17, Ch. 78, Schd. II


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815(a)
 
75.37


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-201 et seq.
 
Ch. 91


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203
 
76.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213
 
76.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 5-101 et seq.
 
91.08


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-205
 
76.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303
 
70.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-111
 
75.31


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203
 
70.015, 70.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-204
 
70.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205
 
70.016


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206
 
70.017, 70.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301
 
70.001, 72.17


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302
 
70.041


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305
 
70.030


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306
 
70.031


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307
 
70.031, 70.032


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308
 
70.033


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309
 
70.034


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310
 
70.035


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311
 
70.036, 70.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312
 
70.037, 70.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313
 
70.038


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401
 
76.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402
 
76.05, 76.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403
 
76.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404
 
76.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(a)
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(b)
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409
 
76.08


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410
 
76.09


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-415
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501
 
70.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503
 
70.081, 76.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a)
 
76.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506
 
76.02, 76.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601
 
71.001, 71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601.5
 
70.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604
 
71.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605
 
71.001, 74.02, 74.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(a)
 
71.002


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(c)
 
71.002


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(e)
 
71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(e-5)
 
71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(f)
 
71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1
 
71.002, 71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a)
 
71.004


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611
 
71.003


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701
 
71.040


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702
 
71.041


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703
 
71.042, 71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704
 
71.043


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705
 
71.043


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706
 
71.044


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707
 
71.047


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708
 
71.046


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709
 
71.048


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710
 
71.096


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711
 
71.106


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-714
 
71.044


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801
 
71.020


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802
 
71.021


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803
 
71.022


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804
 
71.023


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805
 
71.024


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806
 
71.025


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901
 
71.060


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902
 
71.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903
 
71.062


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904
 
71.063


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905
 
71.064


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906
 
71.065


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a)(1)
 
71.040, 71.066


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(b)
 
71.066


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-908
 
71.040


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001
 
74.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002
 
74.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002.5
 
74.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003
 
74.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1
 
74.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004
 
74.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1
 
74.13


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005
 
74.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005.1
 
74.14


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006
 
74.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007
 
74.08


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008
 
74.09


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009
 
74.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010
 
74.11


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011
 
74.12, 74.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201
 
71.080, 71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202
 
71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204
 
70.031, 70.041


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205
 
71.082


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301
 
72.16


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.1
 
72.17, Ch. 78, Schd. II


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2
 
72.17, Ch. 78, Schd. II


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3
 
72.17


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.3(c)
 
72.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.3(c-1)
 
72.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.3(f)
 
72.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302
 
72.55


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303
 
72.15, 72.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304
 
72.01, 72.16


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305
 
72.56


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401
 
72.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402
 
71.095


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403
 
73.20


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1
 
73.25


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2
 
73.23


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404
 
73.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405
 
73.22


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406
 
71.097


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407
 
71.098


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410
 
71.099


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411
 
71.100


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412
 
71.100


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1
 
71.101


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.2
 
71.101


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413
 
71.103


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414
 
71.045, 71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416
 
71.104


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418
 
71.105


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420
 
71.067


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425
 
71.083, 71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502
 
73.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503
 
73.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504
 
73.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505
 
73.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1
 
73.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506
 
73.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507
 
73.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1
 
73.24


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101
 
75.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.
 
75.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208
 
71.023, 71.024


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215
 
70.016


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215(b)(12)
 
72.16


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-217
 
74.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602
 
75.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602.1
 
75.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-606
 
122.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-606(d)
 
122.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-801
 
70.001, 71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-802
 
70.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803
 
70.001, 71.045, 71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805
 
70.001, 71.045, 71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101
 
75.15


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq.
 
75.15


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102
 
75.31, Ch. 77, Schd. VI


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103
 
75.31


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105
 
75.16


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106
 
75.17


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107
 
75.31, Ch. 77, Schd. VI


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109
 
75.18


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109.1
 
75.19


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111
 
70.001, 75.21, Ch. 77, Schd. VI


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-113
 
75.37, 75.38


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114
 
75.19


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-301
 
75.38


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 16-101 et seq.
 
70.999, 71.999


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 20-204
 
70.002


Ch. 705, Act 405, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
132.17, 132.99


Ch. 720, Title III, Article 11 (Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.)
 
134.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
130.20


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2
 
130.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3
 
130.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4
 
130.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12
 
130.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4
 
130.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5
 
130.03


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6
 
130.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7
 
130.05


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4
 
130.06, 130.99


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-6
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20
 
134.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20.1
 
134.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21
 
134.03


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-2
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-3.05
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 18-1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 18-2
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 19-1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 19-3
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-1.1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-2
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1
 
70.081, 130.99, 131.03


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1.4
 
131.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3
 
131.02, 132.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(1)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(2)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(3)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(4)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(5)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(6)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7)
 
137.01, 137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(8)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(10)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(11)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(13)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(e)
 
137.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a-5)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(b)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(d)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(e)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(f)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g-6)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(h)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(i)
 
137.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1
 
70.081, 137.03


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.3
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6
 
137.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-0.1
 
137.20


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-0.1 to 24.8-6
 
130.20


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-1
 
137.21


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-2
 
137.22


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-3
 
137.23, 137.24


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-4
 
137.24


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24.8-5
 
137.25, 137.99


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 25-1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1
 
132.01, 132.99


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1
 
135.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-1 et seq.
 
113.20


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(4)
 
135.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2
 
135.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2(a)(1) through (a)(4)
 
135.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2(b)
 
113.20


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3
 
135.03


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a), (b)
 
135.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1
 
133.01, 133.99


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8
 
133.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9
 
133.03


Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 through 19
 
130.21


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5.1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5.2
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 8
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 570, § 401
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 570, § 401.1
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402
 
70.081


Ch. 720, Act 690, §§ 1 et seq.
 
130.20


Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-3(7)
 
131.02


Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-14(b)
 
131.02


Ch. 725, Act 5, Title VIII, Art. 124B
 
134.02


Ch. 725, Act 210, §§ 1 et seq.
 
137.02


Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
 
111.13, 158.301


Ch. 750, Act 5, § 17-0.5
 
135.01


Ch. 760, Act 100, § 1 et seq.
 
92.18


Ch. 805
 
158.038


Ch. 805, Act 105, §§ 101.01 et seq.
 
116.01


Ch. 820, Act 130
 
34.02


Ch. 820, Act 305
 
53.08


Ch. 820, Act 320, §§ 1 et seq.
 
32.70


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1999 CODE



 

1999 Code Section
 
2013 Code Section




10.02
 
10.18


10.09
 
10.19


10.20
 
10.20


11.01
 
11.01


30.01
 
30.01


30.02
 
30.02


30.03
 
30.03


30.04
 
30.04


30.05
 
30.05


30.06
 
30.06


30.07
 
30.07


30.08
 
30.08


30.20
 
30.20


30.21
 
30.21


30.22
 
30.22


30.23
 
30.23


30.24
 
30.24


30.25
 
30.25


30.26
 
30.26


30.27
 
30.27


31.001
 
31.001


31.002
 
31.002


31.003
 
31.003


31.004
 
31.004


31.015
 
31.015


31.016
 
31.016


31.017
 
31.017


31.018
 
31.018


31.019
 
31.019


31.020
 
31.020


31.021
 
31.021


31.022
 
31.022


31.023
 
31.023


31.024
 
31.024


31.025
 
31.025


31.026
 
31.026


31.040
 
31.040


31.041
 
31.041


31.042
 
31.042


31.043
 
31.043


31.044
 
31.044


31.045
 
31.045


31.046
 
31.046


31.047
 
31.047


31.048
 
31.048


31.051
 
31.049


31.052
 
31.050


31.053
 
31.051


31.065
 
31.065


31.066
 
31.066


31.070
 
31.067


31.072
 
31.068


31.073
 
31.069


31.080
 
31.080


31.081
 
31.081


31.082
 
31.082


31.083
 
31.083


31.084
 
31.084


31.085
 
31.085


31.086
 
31.086


31.095
 
31.100


31.097
 
31.101


31.110
 
31.115


31.111
 
31.116


31.112
 
31.117


31.113
 
31.118


31.114
 
31.119


31.115
 
31.120


31.116
 
31.121


31.117
 
31.122


31.125
 
31.135


31.126
 
31.136


31.127
 
31.137


31.140
 
31.150


31.143
 
31.151


31.150
 
31.165


31.151
 
31.166


31.152
 
31.167


31.153
 
31.168


32.01
 
32.01


32.02
 
32.02


32.03
 
32.03


32.04
 
32.04


32.05
 
32.05


32.15
 
32.20


32.16
 
32.21


32.30
 
32.35


32.31
 
32.36


32.32
 
32.37


32.33
 
32.38


32.34
 
32.39


32.35
 
32.40


32.50
 
32.55


32.51
 
32.56


32.52
 
32.57


32.53
 
32.58


32.54
 
32.59


32.50
 
32.60


33.01
 
33.01


33.02
 
33.02


33.03
 
33.03


33.04
 
33.04


33.05
 
33.05


33.06
 
33.06


33.07
 
33.07


33.08
 
33.08


33.09
 
33.09


33.20
 
33.20


33.21
 
33.21


33.22
 
33.22


34.01
 
34.01


34.02
 
34.02


34.03
 
34.03


34.04
 
34.04


34.05
 
34.05


34.06
 
34.06


34.15
 
34.20


34.30
 
34.35


34.33
 
34.36


35.01
 
35.001


35.02
 
35.002


35.03
 
35.003


35.04
 
35.004


35.05
 
35.005


35.06
 
35.006


35.07
 
35.007


35.20
 
35.020


35.21
 
35.021


35.22
 
35.022


35.35
 
35.035


35.36
 
35.036


35.38
 
35.038


35.40
 
35.039


35.41
 
35.040


35.55
 
35.055


35.56
 
35.056


35.57
 
35.057


35.58
 
35.058


35.59
 
35.059


35.60
 
35.060


35.61
 
35.061


35.62
 
35.062


35.63
 
35.063


35.64
 
35.064


35.65
 
35.065


35.65
 
35.066


35.67
 
35.067


35.68
 
35.068


35.69
 
35.069


35.70
 
35.070


35.71
 
35.071


35.72
 
35.072


35.85
 
35.100


35.86
 
35.101


35.87
 
35.102


35.88
 
35.103


35.89
 
35.104


35.90
 
35.105


35.91
 
35.106


35.99
 
35.999


36.01
 
36.01


36.02
 
36.02


36.03
 
36.03


36.04
 
36.04


37.01
 
37.01


37.02
 
37.02


37.03
 
37.03


37.04
 
37.04


37.05
 
37.99


37.15
 
37.15


38.01
 
38.01


38.02
 
38.02


38.03
 
38.03


38.04
 
38.04


38.05
 
38.05


39.01
 
39.01


39.10
 
39.15


39.99
 
39.99


50.01
 
50.01


70.01
 
70.001


70.02
 
70.002


70.10
 
70.015


70.11
 
70.016


70.12
 
70.017


70.13
 
70.018


70.30
 
70.030


70.31
 
70.031


70.32
 
70.032


70.33
 
70.033


70.34
 
70.034


70.35
 
70.035


70.36
 
70.036


70.37
 
70.037


70.38
 
70.038


70.39
 
70.039


70.40
 
70.040


70.41
 
70.041


70.55
 
70.055


70.56
 
70.056


70.57
 
70.057


70.58
 
70.057


70.59
 
70.059


70.60
 
70.060


70.61
 
70.061


70.62
 
70.062


70.63
 
70.063


70.64
 
70.064


70.65
 
70.065


70.75
 
70.080


70.76
 
70.081


70.77
 
70.082


70.78
 
70.083


70.79
 
70.084


70.80
 
70.085


70.81
 
70.086


70.82
 
70.087


70.98
 
70.999


70.99
 
70.999


71.001
 
71.001


71.002
 
71.002


71.003
 
71.003


71.004
 
71.004


71.020
 
71.020


71.021
 
71.020


71.022
 
71.022


71.023
 
71.023


71.024
 
71.024


71.025
 
71.024


71.040
 
71.040


71.041
 
71.041


71.042
 
71.042


71.043
 
71.043


71.044
 
71.043


71.045
 
71.045


71.046
 
71.046


71.047
 
71.047


71.048
 
71.048


71.060
 
71.060


71.061
 
71.060


71.062
 
71.062


71.063
 
71.063


71.064
 
71.064


71.065
 
71.065


71.066
 
71.066


71.067
 
71.067


71.080
 
71.080


71.081
 
71.081


71.082
 
71.082


71.083
 
71.083


71.095
 
71.095


71.096
 
71.096


71.097
 
71.097


71.098
 
71.098


71.099
 
71.099


71.100
 
71.100


71.101
 
71.101


71.102
 
71.102


71.103
 
71.103


71.104
 
71.104


71.105
 
71.105


71.106
 
71.106


71.107
 
71.107


71.108
 
71.108


71.109
 
71.109


71.110
 
71.110


71.111
 
71.111


71.112
 
71.112


71.120
 
71.125


71.121
 
71.126


71.122
 
71.127


71.123
 
71.128


71.124
 
71.129


71.125
 
71.130


71.126
 
71.131


71.127
 
71.132


71.128
 
71.133


71.129
 
71.134


71.130
 
71.135


71.132
 
71.136


71.145
 
71.150


71.146
 
71.151


71.147
 
71.152


71.148
 
71.153


71.001
 
71.999


71.002
 
71.999


71.042
 
71.999


71.045
 
71.999


71.080
 
71.999


71.083
 
71.999


71.999
 
71.999


72.01
 
72.01


72.02
 
72.02


72.10
 
72.15


72.11
 
72.16


72.12
 
72.17


72.13
 
72.18


72.14
 
72.19


72.15
 
72.20


72.16
 
72.21


72.17
 
72.22


72.18
 
72.23


72.19
 
72.24


72.20
 
72.25


72.35
 
72.40


72.36
 
72.41


72.37
 
72.42


72.60
 
72.55


72.61
 
72.56


72.99
 
72.99


73.01
 
73.01


73.02
 
73.02


73.03
 
73.03


73.04
 
73.04


73.05
 
73.05


73.06
 
73.06


73.20
 
73.20


73.21
 
73.21


73.22
 
73.22


73.23
 
73.23


73.07
 
73.24


73.08
 
73.25


73.24
 
73.26


74.01
 
74.01


74.02
 
74.02


74.03
 
74.03


74.04
 
74.04


74.05
 
74.05


74.06
 
74.06


74.07
 
74.07


74.08
 
74.08


74.09
 
74.09


74.10
 
74.10


74.11
 
74.11


74.12
 
74.12


74.13
 
74.13


74.14
 
74.15


74.99
 
74.99


75.01
 
75.01


75.02
 
75.02


75.03
 
75.03


75.10
 
75.15


75.11
 
75.16


75.12
 
75.17


75.13
 
75.18


75.14
 
75.20


75.15
 
75.21


76.01
 
76.01


76.02
 
76.02


76.03
 
76.03


76.04
 
76.04


76.05
 
76.05, 76.99


76.06
 
76.06


76.07
 
76.07


76.08
 
76.08


76.09
 
76.09


76.99
 
76.99


Ch. 77, Schd. I
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


Ch. 77, Schd. II
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


Ch. 77, Schd. III
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


Ch. 77, Schd. IV
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


Ch. 77, Schd. V
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


Ch. 77, Sch. VI
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VI


Ch. 77, Schd. VII
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VII


Ch. 77, Schd. VIII
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VIII


Ch. 78, Schd. I
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


Ch. 78, Schd. II
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


Ch. 78, Schd. III
 
Ch. 78, Schd. III


Ch. 78, Schd. IV
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


90.01
 
90.01


90.02
 
90.02


90.03
 
90.03


90.04
 
90.04


90.05
 
90.05


90.06
 
90.06


90.07
 
90.07


90.08
 
90.08


90.09
 
90.09


90.10
 
90.10


90.11
 
90.11


90.20
 
90.25


90.21
 
90.26


90.22
 
90.27


90.23
 
90.28


90.35
 
90.40


90.36
 
90.41


90.37
 
90.42


90.38
 
90.43


90.50
 
90.55


90.03
 
90.99


91.01
 
91.01


91.02
 
91.02


91.03
 
91.03


91.04
 
91.04


91.05
 
91.05


91.06
 
91.06


91.07
 
91.07


91.08
 
91.08


91.09
 
91.09


91.10
 
91.10


91.11
 
91.11


91.12
 
91.12


92.01
 
92.01


92.02
 
92.02


92.03
 
92.03


92.04
 
92.04


92.15
 
92.15


92.18
 
92.16


92.19
 
92.17


92.20
 
92.18


93.01
 
93.01


93.10
 
93.01


93.11
 
93.16


93.12
 
93.17


93.13
 
93.18


94.01
 
94.01


94.02
 
94.02


94.03
 
94.03


94.99
 
94.99


95.01
 
95.01


95.02
 
95.02


95.15
 
95.15


95.16
 
95.16


95.17
 
95.17


95.18
 
95.18


95.19
 
95.19


95.20
 
95.20


95.30
 
95.35


96.01
 
96.01


96.02
 
96.02


96.03
 
96.03


96.99
 
96.99


97.01
 
97.01


97.02
 
97.02


97.10
 
97.15


97.11
 
97.16


97.25
 
97.30


97.26
 
97.31


97.27
 
97.32


97.28
 
97.33


97.29
 
97.34


97.30
 
97.35


97.99
 
97.99


98.01
 
98.01


98.02
 
98.02


98.03
 
98.03


98.04
 
98.04


98.05
 
98.05


98.06
 
98.06


98.07
 
98.07


98.09
 
98.08


98.10
 
98.09


98.11
 
98.10


98.12
 
98.11


98.13
 
98.12


98.14
 
98.13


98.15
 
98.14


98.25
 
98.25


98.26
 
98.26


98.27
 
98.27


98.28
 
98.28


99.01
 
99.01


99.02
 
99.01


99.03
 
99.03


99.04
 
99.04


99.05
 
99.05


99.15
 
99.20


99.16
 
99.21


99.17
 
99.22


99.18
 
99.23


99.19
 
99.24


99.20
 
99.25


100.01
 
100.01


100.02
 
100.02


110.01
 
110.01


110.02
 
110.02


110.03
 
110.03


110.04
 
110.04


110.05
 
110.05


110.06
 
110.06


110.07
 
110.07


110.99
 
110.99


112.01
 
112.01


112.02
 
112.02


112.03
 
112.03


112.04
 
112.04


112.05
 
112.05


112.06
 
112.05


112.07
 
112.07


112.20
 
112.21


112.21
 
112.24


112.24
 
112.25


113.01
 
113.01


113.02
 
113.02


113.03
 
113.03


113.04
 
113.04


113.05
 
113.05


113.06
 
113.06


113.07
 
113.07


113.08
 
113.08


113.09
 
113.09


113.20
 
113.20


113.21
 
113.21


113.22
 
113.22


113.23
 
113.23


113.24
 
113.24


113.25
 
113.24


113.26
 
113.26


113.27
 
113.27


113.28
 
113.28


114.01
 
114.01


114.02
 
114.02


114.03
 
114.03


114.04
 
114.04


114.05
 
114.05


115.01
 
115.01


115.02
 
115.02


115.03
 
115.03


115.04
 
115.04


115.05
 
115.05


115.06
 
115.06


115.07
 
115.06


115.20
 
115.20


116.01
 
116.01


116.10
 
116.15


116.11
 
116.15


116.12
 
116.17


116.13
 
116.18


116.14
 
116.19


116.15
 
116.20


116.16
 
116.21


116.17
 
116.22


116.18
 
116.23


116.19
 
116.24


116.20
 
116.25


116.21
 
116.26


116.22
 
116.27


116.23
 
116.28


116.24
 
116.29


116.25
 
116.30


116.35
 
116.45


116.36
 
116.46


116.37
 
116.47


116.38
 
116.48


116.39
 
116.49


116.40
 
116.50


116.41
 
116.51


116.42
 
116.51


116.43
 
116.53


117.01
 
117.01


117.02
 
117.02


117.03
 
117.03


117.04
 
117.04


117.05
 
117.05


117.06
 
117.06


117.99
 
117.99


118.01
 
118.01


118.02
 
118.02


118.03
 
118.03


119.01
 
119.02


119.02
 
119.03


119.03
 
119.04


119.99
 
119.99


120.01
 
120.01


120.02
 
120.02


120.03
 
120.03


120.04
 
120.04


120.05
 
120.05


120.06
 
120.06


120.07
 
120.07


120.08
 
120.08


120.09
 
120.09


120.10
 
120.10


120.11
 
120.11


120.12
 
120.12


120.99
 
120.99


130.01
 
130.01


130.02
 
130.02


130.03
 
130.03


130.04
 
130.04


130.05
 
130.05


130.06
 
130.06


130.15
 
130.20


130.16
 
130.21


130.99
 
130.99


130.06
 
130.99


130.15
 
130.99


131.01
 
131.01


131.02
 
131.02


131.03
 
131.03


131.04
 
131.05


131.05
 
131.06


131.06
 
131.07


131.07
 
131.08


131.08
 
131.09


132.01
 
132.01


132.15
 
132.15


132.16
 
132.16


132.17
 
132.17


132.15
 
132.99


132.16
 
132.99


132.17
 
132.99


133.01
 
133.01


133.02
 
133.02


133.03
 
133.03


133.04
 
133.04


133.05
 
133.05


134.01
 
134.01


134.02
 
134.02


134.03
 
134.03


134.04
 
134.04


134.04
 
134.99


135.01
 
135.01


135.02
 
135.02


135.03
 
135.03


135.04
 
135.04


136.01
 
136.01


136.02
 
136.02


136.03
 
136.03


136.04
 
136.04


136.06
 
136.06


136.20
 
136.20


136.02
 
136.99


136.03
 
136.99


136.04
 
136.99


136.06
 
136.99


137.01
 
137.01


137.02
 
137.02


137.03
 
137.03


137.04
 
137.04


137.05
 
137.05


137.10
 
137.20


137.11
 
137.21


137.12
 
137.22


137.13
 
137.23


137.14
 
137.24


137.15
 
137.25


137.25
 
137.40


137.26
 
137.41


137.27
 
137.42


137.12
 
137.99


138.01
 
138.01


138.02
 
138.02


138.03
 
138.03


138.04
 
138.04


138.05
 
138.99


150.01
 
150.01


150.02
 
150.02


150.03
 
150.03


150.04
 
150.04


150.05
 
150.05


150.06
 
150.06


150.07
 
150.07


150.08
 
150.08


150.09
 
150.09


150.10
 
150.10


151.01
 
151.01


151.02
 
151.02


151.03
 
151.03


151.15
 
151.15


151.30
 
151.30


151.31
 
151.31


151.45
 
151.45


151.46
 
151.46


151.47
 
151.47


151.49
 
151.48


151.60
 
151.60


151.61
 
151.99


153.01
 
153.01


153.02
 
153.02


153.03
 
153.03


153.04
 
153.04


153.05
 
153.05


153.06
 
153.06


153.07
 
153.07


153.08
 
153.08


153.09
 
153.09


153.10
 
153.10


153.11
 
153.11


156.01
 
156.01


156.02
 
156.02


156.03
 
156.03


156.04
 
156.04


156.05
 
156.05


156.06
 
156.06


156.07
 
156.07


156.08
 
156.08


156.09
 
156.09


156.99
 
156.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


97-13
 
6-16-1997
 
36.03


01-34
 
8-6-2001
 
36.03


 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


-
 
- -
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


153
 
4-10-1930
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


207
 
11-19-1937
 
112.01, 112.05


216
 
12-5-1938
 
112.24


258
 
5-1-1944
 
98.12


287
 
10-6-1947
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV


298
 
3-14-1949
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


306
 
2-6-1950
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


378
 
9-19-1955
 
136.20


398
 
8-22-1957
 
51.083, 51.084, 52.086, 52.087


402
 
3-3-1958
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III; Ch. 78, Schd. II


440
 
7-3-1961
 
113.08


448
 
10-16-1961
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


488
 
10-16-1961
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


474
 
7-15-1963
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


480
 
1-6-1964
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


492
 
7-20-1964
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


513
 
6-7-1965
 
31.002


538
 
1-3-1967
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


541
 
4-17-1967
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


552
 
8-7-1967
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


560
 
8-21-1967
 
51.086, 51.087, 52.085


556
 
9-5-1967
 
52.041, 52.084


566
 
9-5-1967
 
51.081


573
 
1-15-1968
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


588
 
7-1-1968
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


604
 
4-21-1969
 
30.02


617
 
9-2-1969
 
35.002


618
 
9-2-1969
 
35.001


621
 
9-15-1969
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


632
 
3-2-1970
 
33.08


640
 
5-4-1970
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


644
 
5-18-1970
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


654
 
7-20-1970
 
91.12


655
 
7-20-1970
 
90.41


623
 
9-8-1970
 
158.030—158.039, 158.135—158.146, 158.160—158.168, 158.255—158.257,
158.270—158.282, 158.999


659
 
9-8-1970
 
158.030, 158.036—158.038


664
 
10-5-1970
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


672
 
2-1-1971
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


680
 
4-19-1971
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


697
 
5-17-1971
 
95.19


684
 
7-6-1971
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


691
 
11-4-1971
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


700
 
3-20-1972
 
133.04, 137.41


692
 
5-15-1972
 
52.112


709
 
7-3-1972
 
95.18


701
 
8-7-1972
 
50.07


715
 
9-17-1972
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


716
 
9-18-1972
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


728
 
2-5-1973
 
31.017


734
 
4-19-1973
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


730
 
5-7-1973
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


736
 
6-18-1973
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II, Schd. III, Schd. IV


738
 
8-20-1973
 
51.085


741
 
11-5-1973
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


747
 
5-20-1974
 
91.07


752
 
7-15-1974
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


757
 
11-4-1974
 
35.003


758
 
1-20-1975
 
50.25, 50.27, 50.29, 50.41—50.44


766
 
6-2-1975
 
131.05, 133.05


759
 
8-4-1975
 
158.038


770
 
9-15-1975
 
90.01, 90.11, 90.25, 90.26, 90.40, 90.42, 90.43


775
 
10-20-1975
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


777
 
12-1-1975
 
95.17


776
 
3-1-1976
 
112.01—112.07


789
 
3-15-1976
 
33.02


798
 
9-20-1976
 
94.03


813
 
4-18-1977
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II, Schd. III


821
 
7-18-1977
 
30.05


822
 
8-1-1977
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


816
 
8-15-1977
 
51.088


818
 
9-1-1977
 
51.001—51.005, 51.020—51.023, 51.035—51.043, 51.055—51.065,
51.081—51.088, 51.120—51.124


831
 
11-7-1977
 
72.19, Ch. 78, Schd. IV


834
 
12-5-1977
 
35.004


835
 
12-5-1977
 
133.05


836
 
12-5-1977
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


839
 
12-5-1977
 
93.18


846
 
2-15-1978
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


851
 
3-6-1978
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


857
 
3-6-1978
 
30.05


867
 
4-17-1978
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


871
 
6-5-1978
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


875
 
8-7-1978
 
90.07


879
 
8-7-1978
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


882
 
9-5-1978
 
51.039


887
 
10-16-1978
 
70.999


890
 
11-6-1978
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


892
 
11-20-1978
 
131.07


888
 
12-18-1978
 
52.022, 52.038, 52.080, 52.081, 52.088, 52.089


896
 
2-5-1979
 
51.100—51.106


905
 
3-19-1979
 
132.17, 132.99


906
 
4-2-1979
 
92.01, 92.02


909
 
4-2-1979
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


908
 
4-16-1979
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


932
 
9-17-1979
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


934
 
10-15-1979
 
95.16


949
 
12-17-1979
 
158.030, 158.031, 158.038, 158.039


1416
 
1-29-1980
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


954
 
3-17-1980
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II, Schd. III


960
 
6-16-1980
 
36.02


962
 
7-21-1980
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


964
 
7-21-1980
 
35.005


968
 
1-5-1981
 
31.017


969
 
1-5-1981
 
31.043


973
 
2-2-1981
 
35.006, 35.999


976
 
3-16-1981
 
113.20—113.28


977
 
3-16-1981
 
38.01—38.05


980
 
5-4-1981
 
52.037


988
 
9-9-1981
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I, Schd. II


990
 
9-21-1981
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


992
 
10-1-1981
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


994
 
10-5-1981
 
52.081, 52.083


995
 
11-16-1981
 
52.087


996
 
11-16-1981
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


1001
 
1-4-1982
 
51.038


1002
 
1-18-1982
 
35.020


1003
 
1-18-1982
 
35.021


1006
 
3-1-1982
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1012
 
6-21-1982
 
158.037


1017
 
7-6-1982
 
32.04


1020
 
7-19-1982
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV


1022
 
7-19-1982
 
32.21


1023
 
7-19-1982
 
31.135—31.137


1024
 
8-2-1982
 
31.100, 31.101


1032
 
10-18-1982
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1036
 
12-6-1982
 
36.01


1037
 
12-6-1982
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1041
 
1-17-1983
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1045
 
2-7-1983
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1048
 
2-23-1983
 
72.19


1050
 
3-21-1983
 
51.038


1057
 
5-16-1983
 
31.137


1060
 
7-5-1983
 
132.16, 132.99


1063
 
7-18-1983
 
30.05


1071
 
8-15-1983
 
153.01—153.08


1072
 
8-15-1983
 
72.18


1078
 
9-19-1983
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1088
 
1-3-1984
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1091
 
2-6-1984
 
52.112


1094
 
3-19-1984
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1101
 
4-30-1984
 
35.022


1109
 
7-2-1984
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1118
 
9-17-1984
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1119
 
9-17-1984
 
94.02


1120
 
9-17-1984
 
95.15


1125
 
11-5-1984
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1128
 
1-7-1985
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1139
 
3-4-1985
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1140
 
3-18-1985
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1154
 
7-1-1985
 
32.20


1155
 
7-1-1985
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1162
 
9-30-1985
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1167
 
9-31-1985
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1177
 
12-2-1985
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV


1190
 
3-31-1986
 
32.21


1191
 
3-31-1986
 
31.135


1192
 
3-31-1986
 
30.04


1201
 
6-30-1986
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV


1216
 
9-29-1986
 
51.087


1213
 
10-6-1986
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV


1214
 
10-6-1986
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1217
 
10-23-1986
 
158.037


1222
 
12-1-1986
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1242
 
2-16-1987
 
95.19


1261
 
4-6-1987
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1255
 
5-18-1987
 
30.04


1256
 
5-18-1987
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1257
 
5-18-1987
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1269
 
8-31-1987
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1275
 
10-5-1987
 
52.022


1277
 
11-2-1987
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1287
 
11-30-1987
 
51.036


1340
 
1-7-1988
 
31.017


1352
 
1-21-1988
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1294
 
2-1-1988
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


1299
 
2-29-1988
 
95.18, 95.20


1300
 
2-29-1988
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1301
 
3-7-1988
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1318
 
6-20-1988
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1321
 
7-5-1988
 
90.03, 90.99


1324
 
8-1-1988
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1330
 
9-19-1988
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1339
 
11-7-1988
 
92.03


1340
 
11-7-1988
 
30.02, 31.043, 31.066


1344
 
11-21-1988
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1352
 
11-21-1988
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1357
 
1-30-1989
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1364
 
3-6-1989
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1366
 
4-3-1989
 
52.037


1370
 
5-1-1989
 
95.15


1384
 
7-31-1989
 
52.088—52.090


1386
 
7-31-1989
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1392
 
8-21-1989
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1395
 
10-2-1989
 
32.02


1404
 
11-6-1989
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1408
 
11-20-1989
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1410
 
12-4-1989
 
98.25


1422
 
3-19-1990
 
96.01—96.03


1423
 
3-19-1990
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1429
 
4-16-1990
 
50.06


1431
 
5-17-1990
 
158.037


1434
 
5-21-1990
 
34.02


1441
 
7-2-1990
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1448
 
8-20-1990
 
32.20


1450
 
10-29-1990
 
52.021, 52.036, 52.089


1459
 
12-17-1990
 
52.088, 52.089


1464
 
1-22-1991
 
98.09


1466
 
2-4-1991
 
131.06


1468
 
2-19-1991
 
96.03


1474
 
4-1-1991
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1475
 
4-1-1991
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1476
 
4-1-1991
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1481
 
4-15-1991
 
92.04


1488
 
5-3-1991
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1485
 
5-20-1991
 
96.02


1487
 
5-20-1991
 
30.02


1493
 
7-29-1991
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1501
 
8-19-1991
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1507
 
9-16-1991
 
52.006, 52.999


1508
 
9-16-1991
 
31.002


1512
 
9-30-1991
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1514
 
10-21-1991
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1531
 
3-19-1992
 
90.09


1534
 
3-30-1992
 
116.01, 116.15—116.30, 116.45—116.53


1535
 
3-30-1992
 
130.21


1606
 
4-19-1992
 
32.20


1536
 
4-20-1992
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1554
 
7-6-1992
 
90.10


1557
 
7-20-1992
 
137.42


1564
 
8-17-1992
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1571
 
9-21-1992
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1573
 
9-21-1992
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1576
 
10-19-1992
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I, Schd. II


1583
 
12-7-1992
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV


1584
 
12-21-1992
 
158.030, 158.036, 158.037


1587
 
1-9-1993
 
30.02, 31.017, 31.043, 31.066


1590
 
1-19-1993
 
52.036


1591
 
1-19-1993
 
131.09


1595
 
3-8-1993
 
131.08


1600
 
4-5-1993
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


1583
 
4-19-1993
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1614
 
6-1-1993
 
52.080, 52.081


1635
 
8-16-1993
 
31.068


1639
 
8-30-1993
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1657
 
12-6-1993
 
114.01


1665
 
1-3-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VI


1670
 
1-31-1994
 
52.080, 52.081


1671
 
1-31-1994
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1675
 
2-7-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VI


1676
 
2-7-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1682
 
3-7-1994
 
90.41


1683
 
3-21-1994
 
50.05


1686
 
4-4-1994
 
71.107


1687
 
4-4-1994
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1693
 
5-2-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1963
 
5-2-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1640
 
9-7-1994
 
52.022


1720
 
10-17-1994
 
96.03


1722
 
10-17-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1648
 
10-18-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1732
 
12-19-1994
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1668
 
12-20-1994
 
52.022


1741
 
1-30-1995
 
52.008


1745
 
2-7-1995
 
52.039


1751
 
4-17-1995
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1755
 
5-1-1995
 
52.039


1762
 
5-15-1995
 
158.036


1758
 
5-30-1995
 
52.023


1759
 
5-30-1995
 
52.111


1772
 
7-19-1995
 
96.03


1774
 
7-31-1995
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV, Ch. 78, Schd. I


1777
 
7-31-1995
 
52.055—52.069


1781
 
9-5-1995
 
51.036


1786
 
9-5-1995
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1792
 
10-16-1995
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1794
 
10-30-1995
 
158.038


1796
 
10-30-1995
 
158.036


1799
 
11-20-1995
 
72.19


1800
 
11-20-1995
 
51.087


1806
 
12-18-1995
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1809
 
12-18-1995
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1818
 
1-29-1996
 
118.01—118.03


1824
 
4-3-1996
 
35.035, 35.036, 35.038, 35.039, 35.040, 35.999


1833
 
4-15-1996
 
151.01, 151.02, 151.15, 151.30, 151.31, 151.45—151.48, 151.60, 151.99


1845
 
5-20-1996
 
52.083


1848
 
5-20-1996
 
36.01


1852
 
7-1-1996
 
92.04


1859
 
7-15-1996
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. IV, Ch. 78, Schd. I


1866
 
9-16-1996
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1868
 
9-16-1996
 
34.02


1872
 
9-30-1996
 
52.999


1878
 
11-18-1996
 
158.030, 158.036, 158.037


1880
 
11-18-1996
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1881
 
11-18-1996
 
158.036


1886
 
12-2-1996
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


1889
 
12-16-1996
 
99.01—99.05, 99.20—99.25


1894
 
12-30-1996
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Schd. V


1895
 
1-6-1997
 
158.037


1897
 
1-6-1997
 
158.037


1898
 
1-6-1997
 
158.038


1910
 
4-7-1997
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Ch. 78, Schd. II


1916
 
5-19-1997
 
51.082


1917
 
6-2-1997
 
118.01—118.03


1927
 
6-30-1997
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III, Ch. 78, Schd. I


1928
 
7-7-1997
 
50.06


1937
 
9-2-1997
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1944
 
9-15-1997
 
36.01


1945
 
9-15-1997
 
34.35, 34.36


1946
 
9-15-1997
 
31.150, 31.151


1948
 
9-29-1997
 
52.087


1949
 
9-29-1997
 
36.01


1952
 
9-29-1997
 
31.080—31.086


1968
 
12-22-1997
 
115.01—115.06


1971
 
1-20-1998
 
97.30—97.35, 97.99


1972
 
2-2-1998
 
94.03, 94.99


1973
 
2-17-1998
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


1974
 
2-17-1998
 
32.20


1975
 
3-2-1998
 
52.080, 52.081


1980
 
4-6-1998
 
52.022


1981
 
4-6-1998
 
95.35


1979
 
4-7-1998
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


1992
 
6-1-1998
 
158.037


1995
 
6-15-1998
 
158.037, 158.038


1998
 
6-29-1998
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2003
 
7-20-1998
 
92.04


2006
 
8-17-1998
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2012
 
11-30-1998
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2018
 
12-21-1998
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


2016
 
12-22-1998
 
11.01


2017
 
12-22-1998
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2022
 
1-19-1999
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2024
 
2-16-1999
 
31.115—31.122


2030
 
3-1-1999
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2031
 
3-15-1999
 
110.01—110.07, 110.99


2036
 
4-19-1999
 
33.20—33.22


2037
 
4-19-1999
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


2038
 
4-19-1999
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2041
 
5-17-1999
 
52.081


2047
 
8-2-1999
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2048
 
8-16-1999
 
31.115—31.122


2053
 
9-20-1999
 
158.037


2055
 
10-18-1999
 
113.24


2057
 
11-3-1999
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2058
 
11-3-1999
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2068
 
11-15-1999
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2069
 
11-15-1999
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


2070
 
11-29-1999
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


2072
 
11-29-1999
 
52.006, 52.999


2074
 
12-6-1999
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2075
 
12-6-1999
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2078
 
12-20-1999
 
92.04


2079
 
12-20-1999
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


2080
 
12-20-1999
 
52.090


2083
 
1-18-2000
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2084
 
1-18-2000
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2087
 
1-31-2000
 
52.022


2088
 
2-7-2000
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


2089
 
2-7-2000
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


2092
 
4-3-2000
 
34.20


2099
 
5-15-2000
 
32.20


3000
 
5-30-2000
 
113.06


3006
 
7-17-2000
 
51.087


3007
 
7-17-2000
 
52.020—52.022


3012
 
8-21-2000
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


3022
 
10-16-2000
 
30.02, 31.017, 31.043, 31.066


3023
 
10-16-2000
 
30.02, 31.017, 31.043, 31.066


3026
 
10-16-2000
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3035
 
12-18-2000
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


3037
 
1-2-2001
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3039
 
1-2-2001
 
35.055—35.072


3041
 
1-16-2001
 
72.19, 72.40, 72.42


3043
 
2-5-2001
 
151.01, 151.02, 151.15, 151.30, 151.31, 151.45—151.48, 151.60, 151.99


3044
 
2-20-2001
 
71.001, 71.999


3045
 
2-20-2001
 
35.007


3050
 
4-30-2001
 
95.15—95.20


3052
 
5-21-2001
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3058
 
7-2-2001
 
36.01


3063
 
7-16-2001
 
52.009


3079
 
10-29-2001
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3081
 
11-5-2001
 
153.01—153.11


3087
 
12-17-2001
 
Ch. 78, Schd. III


3088
 
12-17-2001
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


3093
 
2-19-2002
 
35.100—35.106, 35.999


3103
 
5-6-2002
 
134.04, 134.99


3113
 
7-1-2002
 
31.080


3123
 
9-3-2002
 
30.08


3126
 
9-3-2002
 
50.46


3148
 
12-16-2002
 
94.01


3154
 
2-3-2003
 
94.01


3155
 
2-3-2003
 
98.10


3158
 
2-18-2003
 
34.36


3178
 
6-2-2003
 
151.03


3180
 
6-16-2003
 
30.05


3184
 
6-16-2003
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3193
 
8-4-2003
 
131.08


3200
 
8-4-2003
 
92.15—92.18


-
 
9-15-2003
 
51.065


3205
 
9-15-2003
 
52.080, 52.081


3210
 
11-3-2003
 
152.01—152.10, 152.99


3220
 
12-1-2003
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3224
 
12-5-2003
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3221
 
12-15-2003
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3224
 
12-15-2003
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3230
 
1-20-2004
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


3235
 
3-15-2004
 
138.01—138.04, 138.99


3244
 
4-19-2004
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3251
 
5-3-2004
 
132.15, 132.99


3252
 
5-17-2004
 
151.03, 151.30, 151.45, 151.46


3254
 
5-17-2004
 
36.04


3272
 
8-2-2004
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VII


3281
 
9-7-2004
 
52.022, 52.080, 52.081


3286
 
10-18-2004
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3303
 
12-6-2004
 
137.05


3307
 
12-20-2004
 
153.01—153.08, 153.10


3309
 
12-20-2004
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3310
 
12-20-2004
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


3313
 
1-18-2005
 
72.15


3319
 
2-22-2005
 
153.25, 154.001—154.008, 154.020—154.027, 154.040—154.042,
154.055—154.060, 154.075—154.083, 154.095—154.097, 154.999, 155.001,
155.015—155.018, 155.030—155.042, 155.055—155.059, 155.070—155.076


3322
 
3-21-2005
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3326
 
4-4-2005
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


3329
 
4-18-2005
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3343
 
6-6-2005
 
117.01—117.06, 117.99


3345
 
6-20-2005
 
51.065


3353
 
7-5-2005
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3356
 
7-18-2005
 
51.065


3363
 
8-15-2005
 
52.080—52.083


3364
 
8-15-2005
 
52.126


3366
 
9-6-2005
 
115.20


3368
 
9-6-2005
 
30.20—30.27


3375
 
9-19-2005
 
52.038


3376
 
9-19-2005
 
52.021, 52.022, 52.037


3379
 
10-3-2005
 
33.20, 158.038


3382
 
11-7-2005
 
33.20, 158.095—158.102, 158.240— 158.243, 158.295—158.301


3385
 
11-7-2005
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3393
 
11-21-2005
 
51.121


3395
 
11-21-2005
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


3399
 
12-5-2005
 
158.001—158.016, 158.075—158.084, 158.205—158.213, 158.225—158.229,
158.999


3221
 
12-15-2005
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3415
 
2-21-2006
 
52.080—52.083


3416
 
2-21-2006
 
51.065


3417
 
2-21-2006
 
51.087


3420
 
3-6-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3431
 
4-17-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VIII


3441
 
5-1-2006
 
34.04


3442
 
5-1-2006
 
34.05


3443
 
5-1-2006
 
34.06


3449
 
6-5-2006
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3453
 
6-19-2006
 
35.072, 35.999


3455
 
6-19-2006
 
35.007


3456
 
6-19-2006
 
35.007


3347
 
6-20-2006
 
52.090


3460
 
7-3-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3461
 
7-3-2006
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3462
 
7-3-2006
 
158.038


3463
 
7-17-2006
 
158.050—158.060


3468
 
8-7-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3470
 
8-21-2006
 
153.01—153.11


3471
 
8-21-2006
 
158.115


3472
 
8-21-2006
 
52.080—52.082


3474
 
9-5-2006
 
158.180—158.194


3478
 
10-16-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3479
 
10-16-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3480
 
10-16-2006
 
110.04


3483
 
10-16-2006
 
158.037


3486
 
11-20-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3488
 
11-20-2006
 
158.038


3490
 
12-4-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3497
 
12-18-2006
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3505
 
2-20-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3506
 
2-20-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3510
 
4-16-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3513
 
5-7-2007
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3517
 
5-21-2007
 
52.090


3519
 
5-21-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3526
 
6-18-2007
 
38.05


3528
 
7-2-2007
 
119.01—119.03, 119.99


3536
 
9-4-2007
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


3537
 
9-4-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3538
 
9-17-2007
 
158.036


3539
 
10-1-2007
 
32.55—32.57, 32.59


3541
 
10-1-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II, Schd. IV


3542
 
10-15-2007
 
131.09


3548
 
10-19-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


3543
 
11-5-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


3544
 
11-5-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3549
 
11-19-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3555
 
12-17-2007
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3559
 
1-7-2008
 
114.02—114.05


3560
 
1-22-2008
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


3561
 
2-4-2008
 
158.300, 158.301


3563
 
3-3-2008
 
156.01—156.09, 156.99


3564
 
3-3-2008
 
137.42


3565
 
3-3-2008
 
94.01


3569
 
4-21-2008
 
158.038, 158.081


3573
 
4-21-2008
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3574
 
5-5-2008
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


3583
 
7-21-2008
 
158.116—158.121


3584
 
7-21-2008
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3587
 
9-15-2008
 
158.162


3588
 
9-15-2008
 
52.088


3589
 
9-15-2008
 
52.089


3591
 
10-20-2008
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3592
 
11-3-2008
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3596
 
11-17-2008
 
71.153, 71.999, Ch. 77, Schd. VIII


3598
 
12-1-2008
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3599
 
12-1-2008
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3600
 
12-1-2008
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3606
 
2-2-2009
 
95.18


3607
 
2-2-2009
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


3610
 
2-2-2009
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I, Schd. II


3625
 
5-18-2009
 
115.20


3627
 
6-15-2009
 
30.08


3629
 
6-15-2009
 
51.065


3630
 
6-15-2009
 
51.082


3632
 
7-6-2009
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3636
 
9-8-2009
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3638
 
9-21-2009
 
72.15


3639
 
10-5-2009
 
96.01—96.03


3640
 
10-19-2009
 
94.01


3641
 
10-19-2009
 
98.10


3642
 
10-19-2009
 
100.01, 100.02


3643
 
11-2-2009
 
158.016, 158.037, 158.038, 158.116


3653
 
1-4-2010
 
70.080—70.087


3654
 
1-4-2010
 
92.04


3655
 
1-4-2010
 
32.60


3656
 
2-16-2010
 
31.165—31.168


3657
 
3-1-2010
 
120.01—120.12, 120.99


3659
 
4-5-2010
 
51.065


3663
 
4-19-2010
 
118.01—118.03


3664
 
4-19-2010
 
51.088


3665
 
5-3-2010
 
158.016, 158.119


3672
 
6-21-2010
 
52.022


3673
 
6-21-2010
 
51.087


3675
 
7-6-2010
 
39.01, 39.99


3684
 
9-7-2010
 
158.165, 158.167


3690
 
10-4-2010
 
Ch. 78, Schd. III


3694
 
10-18-2010
 
53.01—53.22, 53.99


3697
 
12-20-2010
 
158.038


3709
 
4-18-2011
 
51.088, 52.022


3718
 
6-20-2011
 
158.256, 158.315—158.324, 158.335— 158.338, 158.350—158.353, 158.365—
158.367, 158.380—158.383, 158.395— 158.398, 158.410—158.417


3722
 
8-1-2011
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


3725
 
8-15-2011
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


3730
 
10-17-2011
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3741
 
12-19-2011
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3742
 
12-19-2011
 
52.040


3743
 
2-6-2012
 
70.080—70.087


3747
 
4-2-2012
 
39.15


3764
 
6-4-2012
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3775
 
9-4-2012
 
111.01—111.17, 111.99


3777
 
10-15-2012
 
35.120—35.124


3784
 
12-3-2012
 
30.01—30.08, 30.20—30.27, 31.001—31.004, 31.015—31.026,
31.040—31.051, 31.065—31.069, 31.080—31.086, 31.100, 31.101,
31.115—31.122, 31.150, 31.151, 31.165—31.168, 32.01—32.05, 32.20,
32.21, 32.55—32.60, 34.01—34.06, 34.20, 34.35, 34.36, 52.035, 52.061,
52.064, 52.106, 92.01—92.04, 92.15—92.18, 95.01, 95.02, 95.15—95.20,
95.35, 95.99, 98.12, 98.13


3786
 
12-17-2012
 
158.038, 158.039, 158.160—158.168


3797
 
5-6-2013
 
120.01—120.12, 120.99


3800
 
8-5-2013
 
132.01


3807
 
10-7-2013
 
118.03


3817
 
2-18-2014
 
90.07 , 94.01 , 158.010 , 158.016 , 158.030 , 158.036 - 158.039 , 158.116 ,
158.141 , 158.186 , 158.194


3823
 
3-17-2014
 
51.080


3824
 
3-17-2014
 
116.01 , 116.15


3825
 
3-17-2014
 
116.15


3827
 
4-21-2014
 
116.01 , 116.15


3828
 
4-21-2014
 
116.18


3832
 
6-2-2014
 
158.116


3834
 
7-21-2014
 
36.01


3846
 
11-3-2014
 
72.19


3847
 
11-3-2014
 
98.13


3848
 
11-3-2014
 
75.01—75.05, 75.15—75.21, 75.30—75.36


3853
 
12-1-2014
 
150.01—150.11


3857
 
1-20-2015
 
Ch. 155, App. A; 158.119, 158.163


3858
 
2-2-2015
 
111.02, 111.09, 111.99


3859
 
2-17-2015
 
121.01—121.06


3860
 
2-17-2015
 
116.15


3862
 
3-16-2015
 
116.18


3879
 
5-18-2015
 
94.03


3888
 
6-15-2015
 
97.32


3891
 
7-20-2015
 
32.61


3893
 
8-17-2015
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3897
 
8-17-2015
 
123.01—123.08, 123.99


3898
 
9-21-2015
 
35.085—35.090


3901
 
10-5-2015
 
158.016, 158.039


3902
 
10-5-2015
 
116.48


3907
 
11-2-2015
 
35.090


3909
 
11-16-2015
 
120.08—120.10


3911
 
12-7-2015
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


3923
 
3-7-2016
 
37.19


3931
 
5-2-2016
 
118.03


3932
 
5-16-2016
 
116.01, 116.15, 116.18


3935
 
6-6-2016
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VI


3936
 
6-6-2016
 
75.15, 75.21, 75.31, 75.34, 75.37, 75.38


3937
 
6-6-2016
 
70.001


3938
 
6-6-2016
 
32.70—32.74


3939
 
6-20-2016
 
30.05, 30.07


3940
 
6-20-2016
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3941
 
7-5-2016
 
158.037, 158.116


3942
 
7-5-2016
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3950
 
8-15-2016
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3961
 
10-3-2016
 
31.137


3962
 
10-3-2016
 
37.01—37.04, 37.15—37.19


3965
 
11-21-2016
 
113.20, 113.21, 113.23, 113.24, 113.25, 113.27, 113.29


3966
 
11-21-2016
 
35.035—35.040, 35.999


3981
 
4-17-2017
 
34.20


3982
 
4-17-2017
 
119.01, 119.04


3983
 
4-17-2017
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


3989
 
6-19-2017
 
121.04, 121.06


3990
 
7-3-2017
 
122.01—122.12


3992
 
7-17-2017
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


3997
 
7-17-2017
 
158.016, 158.116


4004
 
9-18-2017
 
52.080—52.083


4005
 
9-18-2017
 
51.080


4006
 
9-18-2017
 
98.08


4010
 
10-16-2017
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


4011
 
10-16-2017
 
35.101


4012
 
11-6-2017
 
101.01—101.06, 101.99


4016
 
12-4-2017
 
53.01—53.03, 53.23


4021
 
12-4-2017
 
158.016, 158.030, 158.036—158.038


4022
 
12-4-2017
 
32.01—32.05


4024
 
1-2-2018
 
36.01


4036
 
4-16-2018
 
36.01


4037
 
5-7-2018
 
120.01—120.12, 120.99


4038
 
5-21-2018
 
Ch. 78, Schd. III


4047
 
7-2-2018
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


4049
 
7-16-2018
 
34.20


4037
 
5-7-2018
 
120.01—120.12, 120.99


4038
 
5-21-2018
 
Ch. 78, Schd. III


4047
 
7-2-2018
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


4049
 
7-16-2018
 
34.20


4050
 
8-6-2018
 
139.01


4051
 
8-6-2018
 
132.02


4055
 
9-17-2018
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


4058
 
10-1-2018
 
31.069


4065
 
11-5-2018
 
116.01, 116.15, 116.18


4066
 
11-19-2018
 
90.01


4067
 
11-19-2018
 
95.19


4069
 
12-3-2018
 
112.20—112.25, 112.99


4070
 
12-17-2018
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


4071
 
12-17-2018
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


4072
 
12-17-2018
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


4082
 
2-19-2019
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


4083
 
2-19-2019
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


4085
 
3-4-2019
 
32.05


4089
 
4-1-2019
 
119.01—119.05, 119.99


4090
 
4-1-2019
 
53.01—53.04, 53.23


 
 
 
 
 




 


